 Story_ID: 33985 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: I am William E. Ward, W-A-R-D. Last name Ward, first name William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M; middle initial E. Nickname "Kip," K-I-P. Speaker 1: Now, what does the 'E' stand for? Speaker 2: Edward. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born June 3, 1949 in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired United States Army General Officer, having served over forty years. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. You were the first Commander of AFRICOM [United States Africa Command], right? Speaker 2: I was the Inaugural Commander of AFRICOM, yes. Speaker 1: Alright, okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is July 25, 2013. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I think. (laughter). Speaker 1: Alright, yeah. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Reston, Virginia at the Midtown Condominium. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 33986 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm-up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is peanut butter. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting. I hardly ever ask about these, but how did that come about, that your favorite food is peanut butter? Speaker 2: Universal, love it. I love peanuts. It goes with anything. It lasts. It's a great snack, a great filler. I just love peanut butter. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Now, I like all foods, really. Speaker 1: Peanut butter, that's interesting. Speaker 2: Peanut butter. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I like blue. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring, fall. Speaker 1: Alright. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I don't have many of those. I haven't been on many vacations in my life. Relaxing places, but no favorite place, no. Speaker 1: Okay. The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Improve the foxhole." Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33987 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. And then we'll try to put them together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Phyllis Cashen Ward. P-H-Y-L-L-I-S, Cashen, C-A-S-H-E-N, Ward, W-A-R-D. And my dad, Richard Isiah Ward, R-I-C-H-A-R-D--. Speaker 1: We're going to get to him in a second. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, okay. Speaker 1: But, so your mother's middle name is Cashen? I mean her-- Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Cashen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her middle name is Mary. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I've heard the name Cashen, and I've heard it spelled different ways, with an 'i-n' and an 'e-n'-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --from around this region, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she--'e-n' is her spelling, her family's, you know, her dad and what not. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know if she's related to any 'i-n' Cashens? Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of, no. No, not that I'm aware of. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth is April 26, 1932. And she was born in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Are there any stories about them? Speaker 2: Well, if I look at my mother's side, from both her mother and father--the Tidewater area of Virginia for her mother. Her father, Baltimore. I believe my great-grandfather, which would have been my mother's dad, had come to Maryland following the First World War. And he was also I believe from the Tidewater area of Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it could be a Norfolk [Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Chesapeake. Speaker 1: Chesapeake. Speaker 2: Chesapeake, right. Chesapeake, Newport News area, right--Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's quite a urban area. I was really surprised, going up there. You know, you hear about them individually, and you think of a small town. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You put them together, you've got really a nice sized-- Speaker 2: A little small--I used to call them townships. But these small little--I guess, somehow, somewhat incorporated areas that have their own little distinct character. But now as we've become more modern, they've all kind of come together. So, probably at one time they were little distinct communities. Now, not so much. But certainly, I would say 50, 60, 70 years ago, they were probably distinct communities in that region. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, can you give us your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: On my mom's side? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Her name is Marie Cashen. Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandfather? Speaker 2: On my mom's side, my granddad was Joseph Henry Cashen, Joseph H. Cashen. Speaker 1: And, now what did they do for a living? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was a minister. But he also worked at a printing and lithograph place there in Baltimore. But my grandfather was a minister in the AME church, the African Methodist Episcopal church. My grandmother was a stay-at-home mom, but she did a lot of volunteering. You know, she was a Red Cross volunteer. Some of my early memories of her are in her Red Cross uniform, driving on Tuesdays and Thursdays to do various Red Cross volunteer work. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33988 Speaker 1: So, are there any stories on your mother's [Phyllis Cashen Ward] side of the family about the, about Emancipation or Reconstruction, or any of that Nineteenth Century--. Speaker 2: Not so much. I mean, obviously my great-grandparents on my mom's side were clearly, you know, a part of that process. But most of the stories that I heard as a young boy growing up in Baltimore [Maryland] listening to my granddad [Joseph Henry Cashen], had more to do with his childhood as opposed to the early days of his grandparents, if you will. And so, most of the stories from my mom's side of the family had to do with, you know, the childhood of my grandmother [Marie Cashen] and my granddad as they were growing up, and some of the things that they were involved in. My granddad, I mentioned he was a minister [in the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) church]. But he also was a boxer. And he didn't do it very long. He was an amateur boxer. But I can recall being fascinated when I heard that my grandfather, who I knew as a minister in his clergy attire, had been a boxer. And to see, to look at him and envision him being in the boxing ring, I just always had a time wrapping my head around that notion, although he was in good shape. And we would oftentimes, you know, do foot races. He was also really quick. You know, the stories I would hear about how fast he was. And I can remember challenging him to a foot race from time to time when, you know, I was a young guy. And he was clearly--you know, at that time, you know, more mature, but still very vital and still very active. So, that was kind of neat. But nothing from times--an event--not very much, no. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, so, any other stories from that era? I mean, is there a story about why he went to Baltimore? Speaker 2: No, not--I think he was--he grew up in Baltimore, because that's where his father came and settled after the First World War. So, Baltimore was his home, South Baltimore. And he was there as a, lived in the city. And so, he was a city boy there in that town, in South Baltimore, as he grew up and graduated from Baltimore City high schools and dealt with his education. And as I said, his initial days, his early days, he was boxing. But as I said, he became a minister. And that's what he was--he was well known as a minister of a very established church in a community there in Baltimore. Speaker 1: So, you say this is South Baltimore? Speaker 2: Where he grew up. The church that he pastored for the longest time was in the northern part of the city, North Baltimore. Speaker 1: What was the name of the church? Speaker 2: Falls Road AME Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It still exists today. Not the same location, but it has retained the name from those days. Story_ID: 33989 Speaker 1: So, did your mother [Phyllis Cashen Ward] grow up in North Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: My mother grew up also--she lived in South Baltimore. And then, you know, my granddad [Joseph Henry Cashen] initially was pastoring in a place in South Baltimore, and then re-located to North, the church in North Baltimore. But the initial church was, I believe Waymon AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church down in South Baltimore, not too far from where the current stadiums are down there--M and T Stadium, with Oriole Park and Camden Yards, that part of Baltimore. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Where the Boys High School is, and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Alright. So-- Speaker 2: And then the--and then Falls Road AME Church, that community no longer exists. When the City of Baltimore re-established Baltimore Polytechnic Institute--which was at the time was a school, a high school for boys--and Western High School, which was a school for girls--that whole community on Falls Road went away. It had been a small, black community there in North Baltimore, and that community went away. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, what did your mother say about--or what do you know about her growing up? Speaker 2: Well, my mom is one of four children, all girls. And she was the, next to the youngest. And she grew up talking about, you know, having to walk to school and run home for lunch. You didn't take lunch in those days, you know. You'd get a lunch break, and would run home to lunch and then run back to school. And the whole time was wolfing down lunch to get back to school before the afternoon session bell rang. And, but a happy childhood, I believe. Again, growing up with her three sisters, all girls, and my granddad and grandma [Marie Cashen]. And as I said, you know, he being a minister, or pastor, and also working. And my grandmother taking care of them, but also doing her volunteer work. And obviously, her friend that she had there, and so far as what she did--I believe typical things that young girls would do there in the city. You know, from hopscotch to playing sidewalk games, and what not. But I wouldn't think anything out of the ordinary. But just a happy, normal childhood, obviously experiencing many things--living at that time in a segregated, you know, city. But none of that seemed to bother them. They were pretty secure and happy in what they had, and who they were. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 33990 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Phyllis Cashen Ward], where did she go to high school? Speaker 2: I believe my mother went to, I believe it was Douglass or Dunbar. And I should know. I believe it was Douglass, Douglass High School there in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she go to college? Speaker 2: My mother did not go to college. Of her siblings, her youngest sister did go. And in fact, her youngest sister, my Aunt Doris, was the first in the family to, in fact, go to college. And she was a, she's a Morgan [State University, Baltimore] graduate. I believe maybe 1955. Speaker 1: Okay. That's Aunt Doris, okay. And what does she do? Did she become a-- Speaker 2: She was a counselor, a therapist, working for the State of Maryland. Now deceased, but that was her profession. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother, now, did she work outside of the home? Speaker 2: My mom did. My mom did. My mom worked outside of the home. She did a couple of jobs that I recall, secretarial type work. I believe at one point and time, she may have been a clerk. And ultimately she wound up working for the Social Security Administration in some administration capacity. I don't recall exactly what the job was, but she retired from the Social Security Administration after, you know, my dad, you know, had--well, after the two of them, you know, had gotten married and what not. So, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that's what she retired from. Yeah, she did work outside of the home for the entire, my entire childhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33991 Speaker 1: And well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My dad is Richard Isiah Ward. R-I-C-H-A-R-D, I-S-I-A-H, W-A-R-D, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth? Speaker 2: My dad's birthday is November 7, 1924. He was born in Bedford, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: Well, my dad is from, as I said, Bedford, Virginia. His dad is from Lynchburg, Virginia. So, that same area there in the southwestern part of the state certainly had, you know, that's where their roots are. So, I'm sure that, you know, their ancestry rooted in that part of Virginia--brothers that my dad's father had, along with my dad's father--all left that area and went to various places, to include Baltimore, Chicago, New York. But on that side of my family, I knew my grandfather well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But no one else beyond my granddad, on my dad's side of the family, which are paternally. Speaker 1: Okay. What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: He was Richard I. Ward, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did your father, do you have a sense from your father and grandfather what life was like in Bedford, Virginia? Speaker 2: Farming. Farming, labor, basic manual sorts of things. My father was very good with his hands, as was my granddad. So, those were the things that they were engaged in--you know, farming, labor, odd jobs. My dad was drafted, and went into World War II as a draftee out of high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he was drafted out of high school? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or immediately after high school. Speaker 2: Upon graduating from high school, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any stories on your father's side about Emancipation, or what life was like back in Virginia before-- Speaker 2: Well, not per se, other than knowing that from my dad--and also getting to know my grandmother on my dad's side--my dad's mom before she passed, obviously, the life that they lived. And my grandmother was basically a maid, you know, a house servant. By then, she was being paid for it, obviously. But you know, I can hear, recall stories of--when I would go visit them where they lived, my grandmother's home there in Bedford--because she was still living there, the childhood place that--When I first, you know, realized who she was. You know, no running water, no electricity. Eventually electricity came, but, you know, the--no indoor plumbing, those sorts of things. And, but still for her this was great, because this was her house. And she could recall listening to her parents, and saying how they were happy that she was to have her own place, have her own land, and to have her own home. And so--but my grandmother, who was a strong woman, was independent, very much so. And so, I believe, you know, she attributed all that to, you know, her early days--her childhood and the life that she lived, you know, as a youngster, a young girl growing up there in that part of Virginia. Speaker 1: Yeah, she would have been born I would guess around the turn of the century, I'm thinking? Speaker 2: I think so. I don't know the exact date. I, it's there, but I don't have that at hand. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Mary. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 33992 Speaker 1: Did your father [Richard Isiah Ward] have a--what was his--did he have a childhood aspiration--something he wanted to be? Speaker 2: Well, as I said, you know, he--as he grew up, again, you know, he was--where he, what he was exposed to was pretty limited there [Bedford, Virginia]. He did go to high school, and he--because of where he lived and what he did--a farmer, a laborer, he became--he got very good with his hands. My dad was a, you know--very, very smart man. I couldn't--I often say if my dad had the opportunity, had the education I had, no telling what he would have been, because he had a very sharp mind. And I think once he got drafted into the [U.S.] Army, and then came out of the Army after World War II, he decided that he would use his G.I. government benefits to learn a trade, to hone his skills, and that's what he did. And that's when he went to Baltimore [Maryland]. And that's, you know, obviously where he did some basic trade craft work in his schooling. Went to brick masonry school, plumbing, electrician--And that was his idea of--If I were to say what his major goal would have been, it would have been to own his own home, to build a home. And once that was completed, not to have anyone that he owed on that home. And he was able to do that. He was able to do that, as he worked full time every day, on weekends and holidays. I guess I would call my dad just a very, very hard worker--very, very kind man. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, where did he work, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: Where did he work? Speaker 2: My dad was a, he was a maintenance supervisor of a set of apartments there in Baltimore. Story_ID: 33993 Speaker 1: Now, is there a--do you know if your dad [Richard Isiah Ward] served overseas during the war? Speaker 2: He did. He was a combat engineer in the Philippines. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In World War II. And he was a--the jobs that he did were jobs--these, he would lay these runways. I call them PSP--but these corrugated metal runways that you put down in the jungle for airfields. So, as a combat engineer, he did a lot of that. He also did a lot of construction and repair work as a combat engineer in the Philippines. But he was in the Pacific for the entire time. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright. Story_ID: 33994 Speaker 1: Alright, so, now is there a story about how your parents [Phyllis Cashen Ward and Richard Isiah Ward] met? Speaker 2: I think there is. I don't know it in detail, because neither one of them ever talked a lot about it. But then as I said, my mom was living in Baltimore [Maryland], and my dad came--you know, came back to Baltimore. I believe the essence of the story is--and I mentioned that my grandfather on my mom's side was a pastor. And where my dad's father resided there in Baltimore, was a little place called Bare Hills, which is out Falls Road. And I believe that when my dad got out of the military after the Second World War he came to Baltimore to be with his father, from the standpoint of at least I know my father's there. I can begin to get, you know, my civilian side of this thing going--trade school. And the church that they went to was the church that my granddad preached in. And so, I believe they met each other as a result of my mom being the granddaughter--being the daughter--of the preacher, and my dad going to church there in the area. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 33995 Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Phyllis Cashen Ward and Richard Isiah Ward] personalities--their dispositions, their talents, the way they look, the way they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I take after my dad the most. You know, as I said, you know, he was a, he was a very strong man with his character--treated people the right way. Like I said, one thing that I would always try to do is treat others as you would want to be treated. And he would, I would always see that in him, in the way he treated people. He would--if anyone asked for a favor--And so, there were times I knew he would be--had worked hard all day. But if someone asked him to do something, he would do his best to do that. I clearly have some of my mom's characteristics as well. But I think when it comes to, you know, how I could, you know--what I do and how I conduct myself, how I look at him for his example--what he provided to me, I think I have many of his character traits. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33996 Speaker 1: Now, what about your siblings? Can you list your siblings for us? Speaker 2: I just have one. I just have one sister, one younger sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One younger sister. She's living in Baltimore [Maryland] now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact she--my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward], she and my mom live together. My mom is not doing too well. But my mom is with my sister. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: My sister's name is Christina Ward Young. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33997 Speaker 1: When you were growing up, your household consisted of you and your sister [Christina Ward Young] and your mother [Phyllis Cashen Ward] and father [Richard Isiah Ward]? Speaker 2: Right. The household was my mom and dad, sister and myself. And--the four of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Up until the time I left after college. Speaker 1: Okay. So, no other relatives lived with you or anything? Speaker 2: No other relatives lived with us, no. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 33998 Speaker 1: Now sir, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I guess my earliest childhood memory is a house that my sister [Christina Ward Young] and mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward] and dad [Richard Isiah Ward], we lived in. And for whatever reason, I can recall my sister being in a crib. It's only about a year and a half difference in our ages--and a set of venetian blinds by her crib. I would kind of rattle the venetian blinds and get kind of fussed at for bothering her, as I rattled the venetian blinds by her crib. Now, I don't know if I, I've heard that story enough that I now have visualized it and it becomes a reality, or if in fact I really did that. But when it comes to my earliest childhood memory, that's probably it. And then they kind of go on from there--from, you know, helping my dad, you know, as he was--As I was a young guy he was building, you know, building our home--and being his manual labor, and you know, playing sports with him. My dad played baseball. And he was a pitcher, so I became a catcher, you know. Because he was throwing it, and I was catching it. I didn't have the stature, though, to go with a catcher. I was kind of a, you know, squatty guy. I was kind of lanky and what not, but I was still a catcher and my dad was a pitcher. But I think the earliest was that vision that I have of rattling these venetian blinds by my sister's crib as she was a baby, you know. So, that was probably my earliest ones that I can recall. Story_ID: 33999 Speaker 1: Now, did you live in a, is there a location when you were growing up that you consider--the neighborhood that you grew up [in Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Yeah, there is. Now, that vision wasn't in that same house, because I think we probably lived in--there were two or three different places before the house where I spent most of my formative years was completed. It took my dad [Richard Isiah Ward], I think six years to build our house. And so, we stayed in a couple different places that we lived in prior to then. But the general area was the same. The general area was the same. Speaker 1: Did it have a name? I mean, what was it? Speaker 2: It was this little--Falls Road community-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that no longer exists. As I said, because that's currently where the high school's there, you know--Poly [Baltimore Polytechnic Institute] and Western [High School], they're all on Falls Road. But then a little bit further out Falls Road in Baltimore County, is an area called Bare Hills, B-A-R-E, H-I-L-L-S which is where my dad built our home. And that's the neighborhood, if you will, where I spent, you know, most of those years up until the time I left college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that little community still exists. It doesn't look the same as it looked when I lived there, obviously. It was essentially a little enclave of homes owned predominantly by blacks in an area that was surrounded by a majority of white neighborhoods. But now it's become--you know, as the folks who lived there have moved on and what not. The homes have been sold and it is now a pretty mixed neighborhood now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A pretty integrated neighborhood now. Speaker 1: So as far as you know, is it conceived of as a development by a black entrepreneur, or-- Speaker 2: It was not. It just happened to be in a location where those who lived there were property owners. It must have been a, really, a bare hill at some point in time because it's called Bare Hills. And those who owned homes there were black. The land that was later purchased for building homes was purchased by blacks. And it remained that way for, through my time in college. Once I left college and left Baltimore, over the last forty years, you know, it's become more diverse in that regard. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34000 Speaker 1: Okay. So, Bare Hills is--so, Falls Roads is a main-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --artery through there [Baltimore County, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Still there, still the main artery, Falls Road. It's still a major artery. Again, when they built the Interstate 83, it took the pressure off of Falls Road to become that main lower south artery leading out of, you know, that part of Baltimore, into Baltimore County, into the City of Baltimore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is northwest Baltimore. Speaker 1: So, how old were you when your father [Richard Isiah Ward] built the house in Bare Hills? Speaker 2: I was, we moved into the house when I was in the, I think, fourth grade. So, I would have been ten [years old]? No, no, I wouldn't have been ten. Speaker 1: You would have been nine, in fourth grade. Speaker 2: Nine, yeah, nine. And he started building it, like it took him six years. So, I was probably three when he started, you know, building it--building the home. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were able to help him build it? Speaker 2: I was his manual labor. I carried a lot of cinder block, a lot of mortar for pouring foundations and basements, and two by fours, and hardwood floors. And I was his manual labor, right. Speaker 1: Now, that's something. Now, you're a little kid doing this. Speaker 2: I was a little kid doing that. Speaker 1: You were younger than nine. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You moved in at nine. You were like a young kid-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --helping--. So, I guess from about five or so? Speaker 2: At least five or so. I was, you know--and he would work on that house, you know, every--His regular job, every day, every evening--go up and do some work on the house. And obviously, all day Saturday. He didn't do a lot on Sunday, you know. But I was his manual labor. In fact, that's how I kind of described it. You know, my dad built the house, and I was the manual labor. You know, from "Kip, go get me this, Kip go get me that." You know, wheelbarrows of dirt, digging out basements, you know, pick and shovel. I did all of that, yeah. Speaker 1: That's interesting. It's really--well, you know, it's something to be in a city like Baltimore and to be around someone actually building a house. First of all, that's got to be great learning experience. Speaker 2: I often say that I didn't pick up a lot of what he had, though. I watched a lot. You know, and now my kids and my wife say, "Yeah, you didn't get any--." My son and daughter call their granddad, my dad, call him Pop Pop. "You didn't any of Pop Pop's talents on this type of thing, though." And I didn't, you know. I can do some of those things. But my dad, he was really good at it. And I watched and participated with him all the time, for sure, yeah. Speaker 1: That's really something, to see a house come up. I don't--I know it happens in cities, that somebody would actually do that. But you don't hear about it that often. Speaker 2: Did it by himself. You know, he would get help every now and then from friends. But he was, he and I, we were--obviously my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward] would do things from time to time, within her scope. But he did it, you know. I'd hold things and line things up while he drove the first nail. And okay, now, we'd go and drive the next nail and--yeah, that whole experience, you know, building the home. He had nothing pre-fabbed. All solid, you know, from brick home--no boards. I mean plastered walls, the whole nine yards. Hardwood floors, all that. Story_ID: 34001 Speaker 1: Now, did things go pretty much smoothly, or did he have any setbacks in building this place himself? Speaker 2: Well, there were setbacks. I mean, he could only buy things he had money to purchase at the time. So, he would have to oftentimes wait because he wouldn't, you know, do things unless he could pay for it. Again, his goal was that when it was complete, he didn't want to have anyone that he owed on the home. And so, he had to wait to, you know, for certain things. And I would say as an example, roofing material or the hardwood that he wanted to buy for the hardwood floors--until he had accumulated all that he needed for that before he went ahead and purchased it. He, the bricks--he used bricks from buildings that were being torn down in Baltimore, old bricks. And so, he was one of the first ones to use--Now it's kind of a, it's kind of classic now, to do that. But in his time, when he would go--and places were being demolished--he would go and use the bricks that were still in good shape. And those were the bricks that he used to build the home. And we would carry those bricks to the house site. And he'd pull in a little trailer that he had made, that he hooked behind the family car. And that was his construction vehicle. And he would fill that trailer up with his construction materials and pull them up to the home. And so, he would--as he took time to do those things, to accumulate those supplies, if you will, those things would happen. And now the weather, you know. I can remember some pretty tough winters. And so, we wouldn't do things if the weather was bad, especially in the early days of building the house. So, setbacks from that point of view, yes. But nothing that really inhibited, you know--continued to move ahead. Just the pace would slow down, if you will. And as either weather or having to wait to, you know, accumulate and some particular material or supply that he needed, or have someone else come in. He did the plumbing, but he wasn't a certified plumber. He did the wiring. But he wasn't a certified electrician, so he had to send for someone to come up--a licensed person to check that and to certify it. So, those sorts of things were going on, right. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, he kept his materials on a trailer that he had? Speaker 2: He hauled them on a trailer. He would get them and stack--and you know, store it there, right there on the property as he was building it. But he would-- Speaker 1: Everything was fairly secure, though? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. This part, this is in Baltimore County. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I might not have been too clear with that. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: This place, this Bare Hills is out--is just past the city limits of Baltimore, in Baltimore County, a little place called Mount Washington, which is another one of these little community areas out there. You know, Baltimore has a lot of neighborhoods. I mean, it's known for its neighborhoods--and neighborhoods with each little distinct character. Mount Washington was right there inside the city limits of Baltimore. And then you--again, along this Falls Road corridor. And so, where we were, where we lived was secure. We didn't worry about anything. In fact, back in those days, you leave your home and you didn't even lock the door. You didn't worry about things in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And nothing ever, no pilferage, nothing disappeared. So, we never worried about any of that, you know. Speaker 1: So, when you look back at it, I mean--I think very few children these days get a chance to see--or sons--get a chance to see their father build a house. Speaker 2: I think so too. It doesn't happen. I know my son didn't see me build one (laughter). And so, you know, you're right. Not a lot of it was going on in those days, either. But some of it was happening. And I talk about my dad just doing so many things for us. So, for others--you know, as others were doing things--either improving their home, and in some cases even building their home--my dad would always be a part of that. Where--that little area where we lived there on Bare Hills, my dad probably had a hand in doing something in the building of at least ten or twelve of those other houses. And the community has about twenty homes in it. And he had a hand in maybe building at least ten or twelve of them--either from brick work, some interior work, some roofing work, or something that needed to be done. My dad would be asked, and he would always say yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34002 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. And based where you grew up, and what was going on around you, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, that's a great question. You know, the Inner Harbor of Baltimore [Maryland] looks nothing like it did then, today. So, some of the sights and sounds of that Inner Harbor--you know, the bringing in of fresh fish down in the [inner?] harbor--. In fact, exactly where--not exactly, but where the Oriole Park, you know, Oriole Park at Camden Yards sits now. You know, that's clearly the smell. The McCormick Spice Factory right there on Pratt Street, in Baltimore--I can recall my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Henry Cashen]--as I said, he worked at a printing, lithograph place there in South Baltimore. So, as he was going to work, going right past it. So, that smell of those spices coming out of the McCormick Spice Factory, clearly a smell. Baltimore was a steel town back in those days, the Sparrows Point. And so, that smell of molten steel--the ore, you know, that metal smell, dung dock--those smells were there, to be sure. My dad [Richard Isiah Ward] was a hunter and a fisher, so we would go out on the Chesapeake Bay. And so the bay smell, the saltwater--those are, you know, smells that were there. I recall when the tunnel first opened there, the Baltimore Harbor Tunnel. This first, you know, conveyance, you know, under water. You drive in this tunnel under water, you know, when that opened up. Another thing that was kind of an entity with me, for us--You know, I said on Sunday it was typically that we go to church. But we would do something that we would call "riding out." And that was we'd get in the car and, you know--my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward], dad and sister [Christina Ward Young] and I. And after church, you know, ride out and just drive right through other neighborhoods and see what other folks were doing, and how they lived, and what not. And although not ever being envious of that, because I was pretty--again, you know, we were satisfied where we were. But no, there are differences here. And in fact, I used that as a theme later on as I was a commander in Hawaii, you know, when I was talking about the installation that we lived on, and I was responsible for. And I would sit in on meetings and talk about, you know, how as a young boy of this notion of riding out--what neighborhoods do you want to ride through? Neighborhoods that looked good and presented a great appearance, and what not. I said, "Well, that's what we want to create here in Hawaii in our communities. So, the people out--we want them to come riding out, and come and look at what we are and how we live, and how we are maintaining this environment." So, I kind of would go back to that experience and bring it forward as a way of conveying the atmosphere, the attitude, the aura of what we wanted our community to be, based on my "riding out" days as a child when I would ride through neighborhoods and see various things, from Christmas decorations to landscaping, and those sorts of things. So, those are some of the things that, you know, I clearly recall from my childhood. You know-- Speaker 1: That's an important thing you raised here, too, is that, you know, that going for a ride in those days in a car--I think it was the first--your father being maybe the first generation to have a car for that long a period of time where he's got, you know, his family could get in the car and you would ride around and look-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at what's going on. And that was done--we're the same age. And I remember that. People would say, "Let's go for a ride" on Sunday. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we'd get in the car. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we'd go--people don't do that anymore. Speaker 2: And that was the entertainment. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: To get in the car and go for a ride, yeah. We were typically pretty lucky, so we could stop someplace and get an ice cream cone or a snowball in the summertime, you know. And, but that was-- Speaker 1: But the ride was the entertainment. Speaker 2: The ride was entertainment, exactly right. Exactly right. Speaker 1: You know, that's something that's past--you know, that era's kind of passed by. I mean, guess people look now, but people are in a hurry. Speaker 2: Right, right. Not taking your time, taking it in. Speaker 1: Right. No-- Speaker 2: (laughter). And it was okay to do it, then, too. You didn't worry about being, you know, shot at or anything if you were riding through a neighborhood. Because it wasn't as if you were there doing something. You were just doing that, you know. And it wasn't, you weren't being looked at with any suspicion that, you know--and questioned that. And maybe it was because my dad knew where to go, too. I mean he was--but we--pretty wide circle that we cast there as we did that riding, you know. So, we did a lot of things in various parts of the city, as well as the surrounding county. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've often thought about that, too, about whether they knew where to ride, or what--you know, in light of some of the-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --subsequent difficulties that people have. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I think it was probably a little different then than it is today, to be sure. Now you can't even turn around in someone's driveway, otherwise you're a suspect. But it wasn't quite that--you know, we didn't have that cynicism. And that suspicion wasn't quite the same then. So, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 34003 Speaker 1: Well, continue with sights and sounds and smells. I don't want to, you know, interrupt you. But-- Speaker 2: No, but that was--I mean, I talked about the spices from the McCormick factory there in downtown Baltimore, just really a hallmark of Baltimore City. You know, there's the Bromo Seltzer Tower there in Baltimore. There was a Shot Tower there in Baltimore where the Civil War--you know, they would make the cannonballs and drop them down as they cooled. And that Shot Tower, that Shot Tower still stands there in the vicinity of the Inner Harbor there in Baltimore. I mentioned, you know, the industrial smell, because of the steel factory there. You know, Bethlehem Steel, a big employer back in those days in Baltimore. So, those industrial, those metal smells there. You know, I mentioned that my dad played ball. And so, we'd be out there in Udall Park, you know. The zoo, the Baltimore Zoo, I mean those are things that I can recall as a child, you know, all very distinctive. And still when I think of it, you know, it conjures up, you know, a lot of fond memories for me when I think about those types of things that I experienced. You know, driving through that tunnel, driving across the Bay Bridge for the first time, recently here in the news. But I can recall my very first time going across that Bay Bridge. And-- Speaker 1: Did someone recently fall off of it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A young lady. Speaker 2: Yeah, a lady. A truck hit her and pushed her over to the side. Very, very lucky. You know, divine power to be in on that one, because she got out of that car. It was going down--swam. Fortunately, she wasn't out in the deep part of the Bay, you know, the channel there, still fairly close to the--. But still, a forty-foot drop in the car underwater--that's something that, you know, causes a pretty significant emotional happening in your life, and that's a pretty big deal. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a young African American woman. I think her last name was Lake, I think. Speaker 2: I believe that is her last name, right. I remember seeing something last night about her, right. Speaker 1: So, did--now, well, continue. Any other sights, and sounds or smells? Speaker 2: No, I think those are some of the key ones. What I recall--you know, some of my early jobs now. You know, I was always, I did a lot of work. And so, what I recall about some smells--In fact, there's a little apartment house I used to work at as a gardener in the summer. And even to this day--it's totally changed--but I can drive past that apartment house, and I can get a whiff of when I was working there as a groundskeeper, you know, cutting grass there in the summertime. You know, the smell of, you know, fresh cut grass. You know, and I drive past that place even today and I can--you know, I'll get that, I'll get the sensation of smelling that--just cutting that grass there, doing that for, you know, four or five summers in a row. So, those things. The openness, you know, the smells from the businesses, you know, the community smells of being a, from a food--the neighborhood food that you would get in various places. You know, the crabs--you know, the Chesapeake Bay crabs, the Maryland crab. You know, that's a mainstay. And the Old Bay seafood seasoning. I think of those things. When I hear that, though, or I see it, I smell it today--you know, Baltimore comes to mind very, very quickly. Because that's all part of the fabric of having grown up there, you know. So, those things are really there, they're really engrained in me. So, yeah, it's those sorts of things. Story_ID: 34004 Speaker 1: I know the sports culture in Baltimore [Maryland] is a big thing. And-- Speaker 2: Big, huge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, huge. Speaker 1: And I know the Baltimore Colts [football team] were probably a big deal, growing up. I would guess, just because-- Speaker 2: Larry [Croew, interviewer for The HistoryMakers], don't talk about it, Man. If you want to see me, if you want to see a grown man cry, talk about the Baltimore Colts leaving Baltimore. I obviously grew up with the Baltimore Colts. But I was pretty lucky, because back in those days, Baltimore had three championship teams. I mean the Baltimore Colts, the Baltimore Orioles, and the Baltimore Bullets. And going back to the Colts--you know, I grew up with Raymond Berry, Johnny Unitas, Lenny Moore, Alan Ameche, Big Daddy Lipscomb. These were icons of football who--you know, were everyday people. But they were just huge, huge, huge, you know, figures there in Baltimore. Speaker 1: And they were characters. I mean, I think they were all characters, too. You know, Big Daddy--and Raymond Berry had one leg shorter than the other. Speaker 2: That's right. Couldn't see. That's right. You know, it's--you know, Alan Ameche wasn't fast, but just was a bruiser. Tom Matte, you know, the quarterback, couldn't throw the ball. But he somehow threw the ball. So, you're right. These were characters. And-- Speaker 1: They had a guy with a half a foot, too, that kicked the field goals, right? Speaker 2: Now that was, I believe that was, I believe he was--that he played for the old Redskins [Washington, District of Columbia]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: George, not George Micka. I know who you're talking about, though. Yeah, but you're right-- Speaker 1: Is he the one that kicked that long-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Tom--he wasn't a-- Speaker 1: Tom, okay--he wasn't a Colt? Speaker 2: Yeah, he wasn't a Colt. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry. I thought he was a Colt. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about, though. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But not in those days. And obviously, you know, with the Orioles, you know, huge--That stadium that they both played in, the Memorial Stadium, no longer there. You know, the Memorial Stadium has been, you know, demolished and now gone. But the Memorial Stadium, the home of the Baltimore Colts and the Baltimore Orioles. And then obviously, the Baltimore Civic Center, the home of the Baltimore Bullets. And those days, Brooks Robinson, third base; Dave McNally; Frank Robinson; Boog Powell--great pitchers, sluggers. Curt Blair out there at center field. So these are, you know, a great tradition, great loyalty, great allegiance to the team. These are players who knew the neighborhoods. The people in the neighborhoods knew them, the old local establishments in neighborhoods. And they were, you know, true members of the community, as well. And I would, I saw most of them play. In fact, when I was in college, you know, on the drill team at Morgan [State University, Baltimore], I would even drill during half-times at these places. So, you know, closely affiliated with these teams--and still, you know, very, very fond memories of them. All that is left now is obviously the Baltimore Orioles. They are, you know, the [Baltimore] Ravens have taken the place of the Colts to a degree, to be sure. No basketball team these days, obviously. But, yeah, a lot of--a lot of, you know, loyalty and a lot of affinity to these teams. And as I said, I was in Germany when the Colts left Baltimore. And it really, I still don't like to talk about it, you know. Speaker 1: They left in the middle of the night. Speaker 2: In the middle of the night, really. You know, just, like, took the team out. You know, I never understood it. But I know the reasons why, you know, and what the owner was doing there. But, you know, I still feel like, you know, part of the soul of the city got ripped apart when that happened, you know, when the Colts left in the middle of the night and, you know, went off to Indianapolis [Indiana]. So-- Speaker 1: It's funny how a team can galvanize a city. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At the same time the Colts were winning the championships, I think the Redskins got their first black player, Bobby Mitchell. They never had a black player before. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, there's a difference in the two cities, in the climate. I don't know, I guess. Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 34005 Speaker 1: But what about music in Baltimore [Maryland] growing up? Did you play an instrument at all, or-- Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't. I grew up--you know, I guess my years, you know, it was, I mean Motown was a big deal. You know, these little house parties and what not. And so, you know, the music was the music that we all listened to. I mean The Temptations, the Four Tops, you know, the Miracles, the Supremes, Marvelettes, you know. All those were certainly popular, popular groups that were there. And in fact, as I, you know, went on to a military career--and all of that stayed with me. You know, my buddies, they'd said, "Here comes Kip. He's going to be singing some Temptations here." I said, "Yeah, that's right, Buddy." You know, I don't sing, but that doesn't stop me from singing (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, Baltimore was a doo wop town. People really liked-- Speaker 2: A lot of doo wop. You know, some of the little clubs there--you know, that were downtown, Pennsylvania Avenue. Again, all that's gone. The Royal Theatre, the Royal Theater in Baltimore, kind of like the Howard Theater in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. So, those acts would come through, in the pier. And they'd be on their circuit--you know, Baltimore, Washington and on up into Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And then to New York to the Apollo. But clearly, that was a major, major part of the social fabric of the African American community in those days, to be sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34006 Speaker 1: Now, what about school? Now, what was your first school? This would have been in the old neighborhood [Baltimore County, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Yeah. My first school that I attended was a little two room school in Old Falls Road, in this little community. I went to the first grade in that school, no kindergarten at that time. You know, school had first grade through third grade, being taught by one teacher in one room. And fourth through sixth grade taught by another teacher in the other room in the school. And this was--I started school in 1954, just prior to the 1954 decision, Brown v. Board of Education [where the U.S. Supreme court ruled segregation in schools as unconstitutional]. And so, my first school was that segregated school on Falls Road there in Baltimore. It sits exactly where City sits now on the, you know, the west side of Falls Road, right there. And I can recall that school--you know, walking down the street going to that little school and spending my first, you know, first year there. Story_ID: 34007 Speaker 1: And then by the next year, Baltimore City [Maryland] schools integrated. So, in 19--I believe probably 1955, when I started. So my second grade, I went to a school called Medfield Heights Elementary School, which was not far from the next little community up from where we lived there, on Falls Road. And I went to that school for, I think, three or four years until we moved to-- Speaker 2: So, this is--I'm sorry, but this is an integrated school, then? Speaker 1: This is an integrated school. Speaker 2: So would, what would be the percentage of black students? Was it very high? Speaker 1: Probably the percentage of black students may be 10, 12 percent. Small numbers, small numbers. There were two communities that fed that school there. One was the little small community that I lived in on Falls Road. And then there's another community, roughly a mile and a half away where African Americans also lived, and also fed that same elementary school. And so, the numbers were relatively small--maybe 10, 12 percent of the school population. Speaker 2: Your early school experience seems to dramatize 'separate but equal' was not working. Speaker 1: I guess, you know, for me it was a situation whereby--you know, I don't have specific memories of being, "Well, what's this?" I'd always been kind of, you know, I was a kind of, you know, I was good in sports. And so, I could compete. And fortunately I also had, you know, enough common sense, as well as some degree of intellect so that, you know, I didn't 'struggle struggle.' I worked hard in school, so my grades were always decent. And so I could hold my own, if you will, academically. And when it came to doing things to demonstrate, you know, a physical ability, I could do that as well. And so for me personally, I didn't experience, you know, trauma. I mean, I experienced, you know, name-calling, to be sure. But I had been taught--you know, again, I watched my dad [Richard Isiah Ward] and my grandfather, and what he did. Again, I always had a lot of pride in who I was, regardless of what was being said. And I think that came from my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward] and my dad. Then my grandparents [Marie and Joseph henry Cashen] as well, who we lived very close to, on my mother's side. And I would see my paternal grandfather [Richard I. Ward, Sr], as well. So, I knew him. So, and I knew who those men were. I can recall my granddad, my father's father--I mean also having achieved, from my perspective--I mean I would see him. He would dress neatly. And so I, there was always a sense of pride that I saw with him, and that transcended into me as well. And so the fact that things were being said didn't necessarily bother me, because I knew who I was, and I knew differently from that. So, along with that degree of self confidence that I had--that even though things were said from time to time, that you know, what might otherwise have--"Wow, what's this, how can I cope with this? It didn't have that effect on me--didn't have that affect on me. Speaker 2: Now, was the teaching staff integrated, too, when they integrated the schools? Speaker 1: No, no. I don't recall--certainly none of my teachers were African American. They were all ladies, but nothing at all about any treatment from them, from the standpoint of making me feel as if, you know, I didn't belong. And so, I recall two of them very well: Mrs. Ewall who was my third grade teacher, and Mrs. Farbar who was my fourth grade teacher, both very encouraging. And so, nothing that I recall. And I think another factor is even my parents were involved. I mean, PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings, my mom and dad were there. So it was a sense, a case of--my parents were involved in that sense as well, in that place, in that school. And my teachers knew that my parents were, you know, cared about my performance--what I was doing, and how I was doing. So, there was some mutual support that came from those sorts of dynamics. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 34008 Speaker 1: Did you gravitate towards any particular subject matter in grade school? Speaker 2: I didn't gravitate toward any particular one. I shied away from one. I mean, I was not good at math. I subsequently became better at math, but in those early days I didn't. I liked reading. And so, you know, I read. I read, and I did decent, you know, work in sciences. I liked biology. I liked to experiment with stuff that we were doing. And I came to be better at math. But I think the reading, I enjoyed that. I was always--I liked to read, and still do, to a degree. Speaker 1: Now what were you--were you reading--Did you enjoy reading outside of school? And reading, getting books from the library, or that kind of thing? Speaker 2: I did, I did. I don't recall what they were now. But I can recall being in the library quite a bit, you know, reading things. I read sports things, little stories about little boys and little girls playing sports, and what not. I read those sorts of things. But yeah, that was I think where I was most comfortable, you know, as it came to my schoolwork. I was a pretty good speller, yeah. And I had kind of a knack and ear for listening to words, which, you know, I think helped me out later on as I, you know, traveled around the world listening to different dialects. Picking things up was easier for me. And so, I think that was the result of having spent some time, you know, reading and listening to words. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's see. So, okay, so you were at Medfield Heights [Elementary School] until you all moved, I guess, right? Speaker 2: I was at, that's right. I was at Medfield-- Speaker 1: Medfield now. Speaker 2: Medfield Heights Elementary, until we moved. And then I went to Rogers Forge Elementary School near Towson, Maryland, which was out in Baltimore County [Maryland]. And that was the school that fed into the community where I lived. Speaker 1: Rogers Ford? Speaker 2: Rogers Forge. Speaker 1: Forge. Speaker 2: R-O-G-E-R-S, F-O-R-G-E. Rogers Forge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And really-- Speaker 1: This is about 1959, I guess? Speaker 2: This is about 1959. I think I started there, I was in sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, sixth grade. So, that would have been '61 [1961] or '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: '60 [1960]--probably '60 [1960]-- Speaker 1: '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: '60 [1960] or '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, '61 [1961]. Alright, okay. So, now was that, what was the composition of this school? Speaker 2: Same thing. It was predominantly a white school. A small percentage of blacks. I would say yeah, maybe again, you know, 10 to 12 percent--again, you know. In fact, that would be, you know, the composition for me from then until I graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I went to school in Baltimore County. Story_ID: 34009 Speaker 1: Now, there's a lot of--okay, so you were out in the county, but I know in the city there was a lot of, a lot of civil rights struggles going on in this era, '61 [1961] through, you know, the end of the sixties [1960s], I guess. Did your parents talk about what was going on? Speaker 2: Yeah. We all knew what was going on. We talked about it, right. You know, I had, you know, an aunt who was involved--I believe, my Aunt Doris, you know. And-- Speaker 1: That's the one that went to-- Speaker 2: Went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Morgan, right. Speaker 2: And we--so, I mean I knew who Martin Luther King [Jr.] was, obviously. And you know, we would hear--I'd hear about things that were going on that I was not directly, you know, involved in per se, but certainly aware of, you know--the civil rights activity that was occurring back in the early sixties, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any impression of who was the local leadership in Baltimore, in terms of the civil rights? Speaker 2: I, I mean I knew the Mitchell family. I knew of, like I say, I knew of the Mitchell family. I knew of the Murphy family. And so, those were the names that come immediately to my mind, because of their activism there in Baltimore City. But no direct, you know, personal direct knowledge, no. Speaker 1: Did you all get the 'African American' on a regular basis? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, Tuesdays and Fridays. It came out, and the paper was delivered, and we would read through it, you know. Absolutely, yeah. Speaker 1: Did any other magazines come in on a regular basis? Speaker 2: Oh, just the local papers. I mean, obviously we would see the 'Sun' papers that was there in Baltimore. And then the, I'm trying to recall when I first got exposed to 'Ebony' and 'Jet' [magazines]. But I certainly recall both of those, you know, in those days as well, that we would--You know, I'd probably do more leafing through it than reading it, you know, necessarily. But clearly, I knew it was there and I paid attention to it. The 'Afro', I read that, you know, saw that local newspaper there in Baltimore. And then obviously, the major paper, the 'Sun' papers, for whatever coverage they may have. I wasn't a regular reader of it. I probably would look at it on the weekends, more so than every day of the week. But my dad [Richard Isiah Ward] got it and read it, and so did my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34010 Speaker 1: Did, now was Rogers Forge [Elementary School, Towson, Maryland] substantially different from Medfield Heights [Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: No. No, it wasn't. I do recall an incident at Rogers Forge, though, that impacted me in a way that I never had felt at Medfield Heights. I can recall being in one class there. I think I was in the sixth grade. And we were talking about grammar and verbs. And we were describing, you know, adjectives and adverbs, and helping verbs. And I think I called something a helping verb, and it should have been called an adverb. And the teacher said something to me that kind of took me aback, with respect to--I said, "Well, so and so, this is a helping verb." And he was critical. I think he was my first male teacher, too. He said, "Well, you--" I don't know what he called me. I don't know if he called me William or Kip. But he said, "You need some help." And it was kind of, I remember it being embarrassing, you know, at the time, for him to have said it the way he said it. And that kind of stuck with me. So, you can say things to a person in a way that make your point. And you don't have to be, you know, belittling in how you say it. And that seemed to be very belittling to me. And I'll never forget that, you know, as the impact--You just don't treat people that way, no matter who they are. You don't have to do that. And that just had an impact on me. To this day I still recall, you know, why did he say it that way? And why did he, you know, say it to me like that, you know, in that forum, you know, an open forum like that? You know it was kind of, it was embarrassing and belittling. And I never forgot that. Speaker 1: Now, well, what were your grades like at this level? I mean at sixth grade, seventh grade? Speaker 2: I was a decent student. I mean I didn't--I wasn't a 4.0 [grade point average; GPA], but neither was I a 2.0. So, I was probably a solid B student, you know. Some things I did well. And I would--my best subjects were--I did well in. And, you know, things like social studies, English. Depending upon what the science was, I did well in biology. You know, math--I was always like a C plus, B minus type of a guy, until later on. Then I got--you know, once I broke the code, you know, I got pretty good in math, too, towards the end of my high school years. But, I was always a decent student. I did my homework, because my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward] and dad [Richard Isiah Ward] made me do my homework. So, that wasn't an issue. You know, the importance of education was non-negotiable, you know. And so, that was something that I would, you know, always be serious about. So, and I did decently. I liked to do other things, too, so I wasn't a bookworm by any means. You know, I would do enough to, you know, not just get by, but you know--to okay--to not be just like the middle of the pack, but a little bit above that part of it. You know, I probably could have done better if I had been a little bit more serious. But I was a youngster and I wanted to be outside playing. And plus, I was, you know, was trying to make a few pennies, too. I would, you know, I would say I worked all year round. If it was the summertime, I'd cut grass. If it was fall, I'd rake leaves. If it was the winter, I'd shovel snow. If it was the spring--I did a little bit of all that, depending on what was going on outside at the time. So, I was always, you know, doing that. And as I said, I was also helping my dad, you know. And even though we had moved into the house, we were still doing things on the house--you know, finishing basements and, you know, digging out--putting the garage in. So it was a constant, you know, constant state of upgrade, if you will. So, there were always things to be done. Story_ID: 34011 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in light of the fact that you achieved the rank of Four-Star General, were you exhibiting, or did you have--where did you exhibit leadership as a young fellow, growing up? I mean, I know you played sports. But were you in the Boy Scouts or were you in church organizations or, you know--How did you display, you know--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I was--I was a Cub Scout for two years. And then I stopped that. And I don't recall exactly why, but I did stop that. You know, in my little community where we lived, there were probably six or seven of us guys, you know. And we would always play, you know, three-on-three, or four-on-three, football, basketball. I played Little League baseball. And I think, you know, neighborhood activity where we lived--before we moved into our house once my dad [Richard Isiah Ward] finished it--You know, we would do little organized games there, organized--I call them playground sports. Did a lot of that. I think that was my biggest, I guess, set of activities--the largest set of activities I engaged in that would later on culminate into what I eventually did. The YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], you know, that's where I learned to swim, at the YMCA. You know I'd get on a bus and go downtown in Baltimore [Maryland] by myself to the YMCA on Saturdays and engage in the programs that the YMCA offered. My mom [Phyllis cashen Ward] wanted me--dad wanted me to do that. And I think that's probably the biggest thing. I did sing in a little church choir. But so did a lot of other guys. Obviously, we all did that. So, those are probably the most substantial things. There's really nothing about my childhood, quite frankly, that would automatically point to "Hey, this guy always wants to take charge and be in charge." That wasn't the case at all. I don't think that was, you know, something that was inherent in who I was, you know--anytime I'd get involved in something, I'm going to take charge, I'm in charge. (laughter) That wasn't it. You know-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, you couldn't spot you as a little general. Speaker 2: No, no. Now, I did like to, you know, I think I've always been pretty organized. I mean, and I've got a cousin who will talk about me playing with little, you know, toy soldiers and things of that sort. I can recall, I used to play with trucks a lot, you know, and what not. In fact, I think, you know, as a youngster, one of the things that I talked about mostly was, you know, I liked to drive trucks, you know. I just was fascinated with trucks. Story_ID: 34012 Speaker 1: Did you have any military heroes in those days at all? I mean, I know those were the days when you had a lot of westerns on television, a lot of war movies-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --and TV shows and-- Speaker 2: My grandmother watched a lot of westerns. To answer your first question, there were no military heroes per se that I had. I mean, I had relatives who I knew had served in the military. I knew my dad [Richard Isiah Ward] had served in the military. But I knew, I had gone by--I would be with him, and he would from time to time see some of his buddies that he served in the military with, in World War II that also lived there in Baltimore. So, I knew about the military, for sure. But he didn't--it wasn't something he was pushing--that he said, you know, "Hey, you know, you need to be a soldier." And there was no person or persons that I knew that--you know, I had uncles who had served in the military. And I knew they had World War II and the Korean War. So, but beyond that there was no, you know, specific or particular individual that, "Yep, I want to be just like this person, because I know he's a senior non-commissioned officer, or he's an officer, and I want to be just like that." That didn't, that wasn't the case, no. That wasn't the case. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And did you really, when you look back at it, did you get very many opportunities at Medfield Heights or Rogers Forge to, you know, do the things as a student that would be leadership oriented? Speaker 2: Nothing outside of the norm. You know, being on a team--because I did sports, I did that. But being on a team and being a team captain per se, or directing some particular activity or play, or let's do it this way in order to score this point or to make this goal--But nothing, you know, that would stand out I think in any particular way that would indicate that this would be a destiny for me, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I don't know when that would have happened, you know. Even my days at--when I got to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and got in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], you know, the early days, you know--it wasn't something that was, you know, "Hey, this is what I'm going to do, this is what I'm going to be, this is where I'm going to go." You know, I think had that been the case, I may have even thought about, you know, going someplace else. But it wasn't a part of that, you know, that dynamic for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34013 Speaker 1: So, now did you go to junior high school, or-- Speaker 2: I went to a place called Dunbarton, D-U-N-B-A-R-T-O-N, Dunbarton Junior High. And it was right there, you know, in the same, the feeder school from Rogers Forge there in Towson, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this would have been like 1963? Speaker 2: This would have been sixty-- Speaker 1: '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay, '62 [1962]. Okay. Speaker 2: It might have been '61 [1961]. Because I can recall in '63 [1963], I was in the ninth grade. That was when [President John F.] Kennedy was assassinated. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I was in the ninth grade then, so, in '63. [1963]. So, this would have been '61 [1961], I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I started at Dunbarton. Speaker 1: So, now, you would have been, what? Speaker 2: I guess-- Speaker 1: 11 or 12 [years old]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, if junior high school is eleven-- Speaker 2: Seven through nine for me. Seventh grade-- Speaker 1: Seventh through ninth-- Speaker 2: --through ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that would have been '62 [1962], you're right. '62 [1962] through '63 [1963] or '64 [1964], I guess. Yeah, through the ninth grade, in '64 [1964], okay. So, you say this is the time when John F. Kennedy was assassinated. Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, I think from those years, the things that I recall most--the two big events. One, the Beatles came to America. And the other--and again, where I went to school, you know, that was a big deal in that community. And not necessarily for me, but yeah, but these folks were just going crazy about the Beatles. And then the Kennedy assassination. And then later on, obviously, you know, other things began to happen as well. And I can recall that, I recall the March on Washington during that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the summer before. Speaker 2: Summer before. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Summer of '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Summer of '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Now did anybody in your family go? Speaker 2: My wife [Joyce Lewis] was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Joyce was there. Joyce was there. She was living in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] at the time. Not living there, but her sister was living in D.C. and she would come up and spend summers with her sister in D.C. And so, she and her sister and her sister's husband went down to the March on Washington. I did not go, no. Speaker 1: Did you know your wife? Speaker 2: No, I didn't know my wife then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, we met in Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In college. Speaker 1: Alright, okay. So, Dunbarton Junior High School-- Speaker 2: Dunbarton Junior High School. Speaker 1: Alright. So, it was basically the same mix as Rogers Forge [Elementary School, Towson, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Basically, the same mix as Rogers Forge, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The same people I knew at Rogers Forge joined me at Dunbarton, and a few additional ones. But basically the same mix, predominantly white school. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, the Beatles come to America in sixty-- Speaker 2: The Beatles came to America some time during that time when I was at Dunbarton, right. Speaker 1: In '64 [1964], I think. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're at Dunbarton through the-- Speaker 2: Ninth grade. Speaker 1: Through the ninth grade. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so, so you say you started to pick up on math at a certain point in high school? Was it-- Speaker 2: Right, probably towards, probably my tenth grade year, when I started high school. When I got--it just kind of clicked for me. And what was difficult didn't become difficult any longer, and I could get--I started getting those As and Bs in the math, as well as, you know, other topics. So, yeah. Story_ID: 34014 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in light of the fact that you became a political science major at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], were you interested in what was going on politically in the country at this stage? Did you start focusing on it a little bit? Speaker 2: To some degree, yes. But not to a degree where, you know, being in politics was important to me. As I, you know, went to high school--and I went to Towson Senior High School--But at that point and time, the politics of what was going on, I mean I was aware of what was happening around. You know, I think--you know, the biggest political things for me were things that were going on locally, you know, Baltimore City politics and then Maryland politics. I think the mayor may have been Tommy D'Alesandro. I can recall him very, very, well. In fact, the father of the current--you know, Nancy Pelosi [former Speaker of the House]. And that was, you know--So, I knew the local, you know, politicians. But it wasn't something that was, you know, all-consuming for me. As I said, for me, one of the, you know, major factors of what I was doing was I knew that I wanted to, you know, never cause my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward] and dad [Richard Isiah Ward] any embarrassment. And so, yeah, so being, you know, a productive member of society to whatever degree that was during those days--was important to me. You know, going to school doing, doing well--at least not doing badly in school. But doing well in school was important. And I was doing what other--you know I think what other kids were doing. And I was trying to, I was enjoying life. I mean, I was playing sports and wanted a car, you know. I spent a lot of time on that, because my dad said, "Well, if you want one, you've got to, you know, get it yourself. And I'll help you with it, but--" We bought old cars and we fixed them up, you know, keeping them running myself as opposed to--You know, it wasn't like I got out and bought, got a brand new car. You know, I went to a junkyard and found something. And I'd take it home and rebuild the engine, rebuild the brakes, do that stuff yourself. So, I was doing all that stuff myself, with his help, obviously. But, so a lot of my time was devoted to doing things like that, you know. And then in high school I was playing sports, and I was running track and playing football. So, you know, that's kind of where my, you know, where I was headed. So, I wasn't consumed or, you know, overly cognizant of, you know, other things, especially political things. You know, so, in fact the political science major piece of it at Morgan came--You know, once I got into Morgan, that became more of a factor for me. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now what did you play in football? What position? Speaker 2: I was a running back and defensive back. I was just, I was just real fast. You know, I wasn't real big, I was real fast, you know. So I was a running back and defensive back, punting--kick returner. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did you run, the 100 in the 220? Speaker 2: I ran the 100, 220. I ran the quarter, 440, which is top for relay. I kind of did it all, you know. I didn't do cross country, though. But-- Speaker 1: 440 is tough. Speaker 2: 440 is tough. It's the toughest race out there. Tough, nothing but an all out sprint the whole way. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I ran the 440. Yeah, the 100, 220, 440 was our predominant races. Speaker 1: Yeah, 440 takes a lot of heart, yeah. Story_ID: 34015 Speaker 1: So, you were busy--and you were were working, too? Speaker 2: I was working, too, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was working, too. Yeah, I worked all through high school. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you were saying you were working--I guess I forgot where you said you were working. Speaker 2: Well, those--my summer job, I was a land-- Speaker 1: Landscaping. Speaker 2: --landscaper, grounds guy. I had a job where I worked as a stock guy at Montgomery Ward's. I did janitorial work for awhile, you know. I was just doing--I was a door-to-door salesman for awhile, you know, selling pots and pans. But, yeah, I was always--you know, I was always, you know, I was always working. Story_ID: 34016 Speaker 1: In high school, now, did you get any, did you run for any class office or any of that sort of thing in high school [in Towson, Maryland]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no, I didn't. I didn't. You know, the--I guess the dynamics of the high school at the time--I mean, things were okay for us there. But we, I mean I didn't run, you know, for any office, you know. I mean we, we were, you know, part of the school there obviously, and no issues. But I'm trying to think if any of my really, really close friends ran for any office. And I don't recall any who did, no. No, I don't recall any who did, you know. And again, the high school is fed now by probably two or three enclaves of African Americans in Towson Senior High, which is the high school I went to, Towson Senior High, from '64 [1964] to '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: So, was the population about the same as it was at Dunbarton [Junior High School]? Speaker 2: About the same, yeah. You know, 10, 12, 15 percent, you know, African American. And that was it. Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom and all of that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I did all of that. I went to the prom and, you know, did everything, you know--games and proms and sports. But never any political--none of the school offices, none of the class offices. Speaker 1: Was there still kind of a social separation between white students and black students at Towson? Speaker 2: Yes and no. I mean, clearly we had, I had some really, some good white friends. I say good--I mean, I don't, I'm not in touch with any of them today. But even at, in junior high school, I mean I had white friends. So, yeah, it was there, but you know, there were individual relationships that did exist. And they weren't just with me. I mean there were, you know, several of those. I can recall--these guys like--I'll call the names, you know--Tommy Cox, Larry Sobato. These are guys that, you know, that I was friends with. It was, you know, typically during school days, during the school time--very little--because we didn't live in the same neighborhood. I rode a bus to school. We didn't live close together, you know. So, until I started driving, later on in my junior and senior years in high school--But so, that was kind of, you know, the dynamics. But while there in school, you know--and again, some of it came from the--playing on the sports, you know, on teams--sports teams and what not. But there was, you know, some of that that went on. In junior high school there was one friend that I had who didn't live too far from where I lived. My dad [Richard Isiah Ward] had built me a go-cart when I was small. And I was talking about my go-cart. And Jamie heard me and said, "You got a go-cart?" I said, "Yeah, my dad bought a go-cart." So, he would come to my house and we would ride my little go-cart that my dad had built--a little lawnmower engine on the back of it and steel frame rails, and welded them together--and the wheels--and a go-cart. You know, he built, you know--right. So-- Story_ID: 34017 Speaker 1: Okay, so, what kind of counseling did you get about college? I mean-- Speaker 2: None. Absolutely, none. You know, that was--and again, you don't know what you don't know. But I often reflect on the fact that, you know--had my high school counselors been a bit more concerned, involved, you know, would I have gone to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]? I don't know. And I clearly enjoyed my Morgan experience. But candidly, you know, Morgan was the option for me. It wasn't as if, you know, "Kip, how about the Naval Academy, or West Point [Unites States Military Academy] or even University of Maryland?" You know, at that time, Towson [University] didn't exist as, the way it is today. But it was just, you know--the only, the option was Morgan. And again, I don't decry that all, because it was a wonderful experience for me. But counseling was very--it was a non-player, a non-factor in one applying to Morgan, you know, seeking any sort of grant or aid. It just didn't exist at all. Speaker 1: They didn't help you? Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all. Speaker 1: So, was it your aunt who really kind of helped you get into Morgan? Speaker 2: And also, my parents [Phyllis Cashen Ward and Richard Isiah Ward]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My parents, yeah. My mother was, you know, determined that I would go to college. And my dad wanted me to go to college. And so, and Morgan was the option for them as well. I mean it was, you know, you're going to go to Morgan. So-- Speaker 1: You were taking college prep level courses, right, in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. My academic load in high school was clearly an academic load that I was prepared to go into college, without any issues or any problems at all, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 34018 Speaker 1: Okay. So, Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]--had you been on the campus prior to enrolling? Speaker 2: I had, I had. I had visited the campus. Sometime over the course of the previous year, I'd gone by the campus. I knew where Morgan was, obviously living there, being there in Baltimore. And as I said, my aunt had gone to Morgan and had been a graduate, so I knew that my aunt had gone to Morgan. You know, and that was--So, but, again, it wasn't--You know, Coppin [State University], also in Baltimore, was a teacher's college. Speaker 1: Coppin State, yeah. Speaker 2: Coppin State. And Maryland State was a teacher's college, even Towson [University] at the time. Now, Towson University was Towson State Teacher's College. So Morgan was, you know, a college that didn't have those, that kind of characterization, so you see. And that was where we, you know-- Speaker 1: You're getting into actually quite a few predominantly black-- Speaker 2: Oh, small-- Speaker 1: Small black colleges. Speaker 2: Right. All there in Baltimore, all there in Maryland. Speaker 1: So, you got Bowie [State University], too. Speaker 2: And you had Bowie, right. Speaker 1: Bowie State. Speaker 2: Right, Bowie State. Right, exactly right. Speaker 1: So, Morgan State being the biggest of these-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Of all these. Speaker 2: And I knew about Raymond Chester, you know, at Morgan at the time. And I had heard about Willie Lanier. So, Morgan was very competitive in many regards. And it was certainly, certainly-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the black--small black colleges-- Speaker 2: Small black colleges, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: --were the schools that produced the most athletes, I think. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Leroy Kelly and-- Speaker 2: Right. And it had a--you know, academically, it had a good, the program was sound. As I say, my aunt was there. So, we knew that--you know, we probably could have looked in different places, but we didn't. And again, there was no one, you know, saying, "Have you thought about this, as well?" So, without that type of--I wouldn't call it a push--but that exposure--you just don't think about those things. You know, as I said, I didn't have a counselor, or someone who had gone to, you know, someplace else and said, "Hey, have you thought about this? You know, there's Johns Hopkins [University] right there in Baltimore." So, I knew about Johns Hopkins. But it wasn't a place that, you know--well, you know, it just didn't come up to the--you know, on the table as a, as a place that, you know, I'd go to. And again, it just-- Story_ID: 34019 Speaker 1: I didn't ask this question. But was there anything significant or special about graduating from Towson [Senior] High School [Towson, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Other than being happy to do it. I mean, I recall it being a big day for us. You know, graduating from Towson High School was a big deal. You know, I think my parents [Phyllis Cashen Ward and Richard Isiah Ward] made it a big deal. So, I think it was a big deal for me because of a lot of their enthusiasm, and what not. And I think it was probably a really big deal for them, because they knew that it was the path to college. And even though we didn't know exactly where, it was the path. So, graduating from high school was a big step. And so, there's nothing at all--I mean nothing else that says graduating from Towson--as opposed to graduating from someplace else--just graduating from high school was a big deal. And we felt that Towson--well, not that we feel--We knew that Towson--because of what it was a school, and its reputation--it was, you know, hey, if you graduate from Towson Senior High School--big deal, congratulations. So, yeah. That was, it was kind of--you know, it had an impact in that regard for, you know, for the whole family, for all of us, quite frankly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And everyone else had been, you know, my--But there were other schools, also. I mean my oldest cousin on my mom's side of the family had graduated from Forest Park High School there in Baltimore [Maryland]--but another, you know, high school with a solid reputation. You know, they were turning out students that, you know, that knew how to read and write and could spell and--you know, could count one, two, three, and do that--things--okay. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34020 Speaker 1: What career aspirations did you carry over at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] with you? Speaker 2: Well, when I first got to Morgan, I really didn't know. I went there because of the academic program that I had in Towson. I entered a track at Morgan that was a pretty--I guess it was an academic track that said, hey, this is what we want you to do. So, it was during the days when you, you know, you didn't--you had choices. But based on my academic standing which is pretty decent, they said, "Hey, this is the track that you need to be in." And so, the regiment of classes--from the sciences to foreign language, to social studies, to the math and sciences, was pretty--pretty set. "You're not going to come here in your first year and just, you know, screw off. There's an academic track that you're going to be in, based on your performance in high school, that's going to enable you to do other things as well, and beyond." And so, when I got there, I didn't, I didn't even have to declare a major. Because what we were, the track that we were in was a track that would prepare you for whatever major you decided to take. And so, it was a pretty defined track for me, based on having performed pretty well, you know, in high school. And so, so I took a science, a math, foreign language, social science--I think those were probably the four core things, but it wasn't--And then obviously we all, we all had to take, you know, during those years, swimming. Every student, you know, took swimming. So there was, so there was kind of a defined track for you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was probably something that was very good, because you didn't kind of mess around. You didn't start off taking something that did you no good two years from now. Everything that you did could be used to do whatever you wanted to do later on. So, that was kind of where we were. So, that first year I really didn't have a great sense, you know--I did begin thinking about law school during that timeframe, though. And so I started thinking, well, being a lawyer, would be something that I had on my mind. So that was there as a potential vocation for me, you know, going to law school, being a lawyer. And I don't know where it came from, because I had no lawyers in my family. Speaker 1: This is 1967, right? Speaker 2: This is 1967. Speaker 1: Now, this is the year that Thurgood Marshall was selected for the Supreme Court. Speaker 2: Exactly right. Speaker 1: I don't know if that had anything-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, but I was aware of that. I was aware of that. And I had--knew who Thurgood Marshall was, and had, knew that he had been selected to the Supreme Court. So, in terms of being a lawyer--again, you know--and somehow I knew that hey, you know, lawyers made money. Or at least they, you know, they didn't starve, you know. They lived in big houses, whatever the case may be, and what not. And I remember my "riding out" days and seeing a place where people lived, and said, "That's a lawyer right there." And so, somehow that was in, you know, that whole milieu of what my thoughts were at the time. And so, but again, I hadn't declared a particular major. Because, again, my academic program was one of these very solid, really full-rounded programs--that whatever you did, you know, you would be prepared for it, because you would take a regimen of classes that would prepare you for any these tracks that you might want to later on pursue. Story_ID: 34021 Speaker 1: Who, who were some of the teachers and mentors that you encountered in your early days at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they're a couple of them that really stand out. My French teacher that I need to remember--Maxwell. No, Maxwell was my social sciences teacher. Maxwell was my social sciences teacher. And I'll have to recall the French teacher's name. But my social sciences-- Speaker 1: It wasn't McIntyre, was it? Speaker 2: McIntyre! Speaker 1: Sandye Jean McIntyre [also a HistoryMaker]? Speaker 2: Sandye Jean McIntyre. That's exactly who it was. Speaker 1: We interviewed him. That's why, you know--He made such an impression on me that-- Speaker 2: That's exactly who it was, Sandye McIntyre. Speaker 1: Yeah. He's in charge of the project where you send people overseas and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Sandye Jean McIntyre. Speaker 2: Sandye McIntyre, exactly who it was. Exactly who it was. So Maxwell and Sandye McIntyre, my freshman year, were the two that impacted me, both from one: their approach to us as students, the attention that they paid to us as students, you know. Excellence is the watchword here, the standard. You know, I can recall, you know, both of them just--you know--. And I guess the difference was--Now, I mentioned in the sixth grade this experience where this teacher, you know, said, "You need a helper." Well, I could--those two professors never, I never got that feeling from them. But I knew that they set high standards. And the way they came about it--and I tell a lot of students today that go to places like Morgan. There's a nurturing that occurred that didn't belittle--held me to high standards--and made you want to perform, as opposed to being critical of you. And that's one aspect of my experience at Morgan that I think may not have occurred had I gone someplace else. And I think that that--and I believe to this day, that still is a factor in how our traditionally--our historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs]--from the standpoint of what they provide to minority students--that may not be provided at some other institutions. It's not a hand-holding, it's not a babysitting, but it's a--and nurturing is the word that I'll use--that holds you responsible but doesn't, you're not belittled or made to feel less in the process. In fact, you're made to feel like this is your responsibility, and you want to own up to it. And that's a different sort of a feeling. And I got that from Maxwell and McIntyre my freshman year at Morgan. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was the Fulbright scholarships-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --that McIntyre-- Speaker 2: I didn't get one. But McIntyre had a big, he was my French teacher. And in fact, ironically both--my-Joyce [Lewis; Ward's wife]--we were in that same academic track. I mean, she, Joyce is a lot smarter than me. She came there from a totally different background, but we were both in that same track. So, we were in the same-- Speaker 1: That's your wife? Speaker 2: That's my wife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. We met, you know, our freshman year. We didn't start dating until later on. But we were in the same, we were in classes, you know, that same--because of that track. So, yeah, Maxwell and Sandy McIntyre. You know them well. Story_ID: 34022 Speaker 1: So, it was probably sometime after then that the political science piece became, "Okay, so I want to do this." And again, part of it was, yeah, I knew Thurgood Marshall had just been selected to the Supreme Court as well, during that timeframe. But again, being a lawyer and okay, being a lawyer--political science--That's what I'll do. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: But the notion that I'd go to law school after graduation [from Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Alright. This would have been like, you know, Thurgood Marshall's elevation and a discussion about the impact that black lawyers around the country, you know, in the Civil Rights Movement, especially. I think that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --kind of helped. And who were some of the lawyers--did you know any of the local lawyers in Baltimore? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Or know about them? Speaker 1: I didn't, I didn't. You know had no, really reason to. And nothing was going on in my life that, you know, caused me to, you know--or any of my family members that--. We knew lawyers, so you know. And I guess these are people that--I think Perry Mason was on TV during the time. My grandmother watched westerns and Perry Mason. This is my mom's [Phyllis Cashen Ward] mother [Marie Ward]. I mean, she was a western-'Gunsmoke' and 'Bonanza' and 'Perry Mason' were her shows. So, I mean, what I knew about lawyers other than knowing that Thurgood Marshall was, was watching Perry Mason. That was it. (laughter) Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34023 Speaker 1: So when you go into your second year [at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], this is '68 [1968]. Well, this is the first year, your freshman year, I guess? Is that--Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, right, the second part of the year--freshman year, in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Right, spring of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Now, did you live on campus at Morgan? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Speaker 1: Oh, you commuted? Speaker 2: I commuted. Yeah, I commuted, I commuted. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: I drove every day, back and forth, yeah. Speaker 1: Were you on campus when Dr. King was assassinated? Speaker 2: I was away from campus, as a matter of fact. You know, during those years, if you attended a land grant university--college or university--ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] was mandatory for all male students. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, as a freshman and sophomore, every male student in those days had to take ROTC. So, and as it turned out, when Dr. King was assassinated, I happened to be away for a weekend drill down on Fort Meade [Maryland] when all that happened. So, in a sense I was. I was coming back from Fort Meade from having been down with the ROTC department, the Reserve Officers' Training Corp Military Science Department at Morgan, on a weekend drill program at Fort Meade the weekend that he was, when he was assassinated. So that was kind of, you know, the awakening that I had to that, coming back. And you know, hearing about it--and then seeing, as we were coming back into the city from Fort Meade which is a military post right outside of Baltimore [Maryland], here between Baltimore and Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], Fort Meade, Maryland. Speaker 1: How was, what was the reaction out at Fort Meade? It's interesting to note these reactions around the country that people witnessed, that were not necessarily going on in the black community. But what was the reaction out there? Speaker 2: We were probably, we didn't--we had been out in the field, out in the woods. And so, when we left the woods, that little (unclear) area, on buses and we were coming back into the city. So, what I'm seeing is, you know, what's going on in the city of Baltimore, you know--burning, things on fire, folks out in the street. That's what I see. Didn't see--it wasn't on, you know, the populated part of Fort Meade itself--to see what was happening on Fort Meade. So, I get exposed to it as I'm coming back into the city. Speaker 1: So, the riots in Baltimore? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the burning? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34024 Speaker 1: In your second year, your sophomore year [at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], you actually--now did you work around the campus in the summers? Speaker 2: No. I was working at Montgomery Ward [retail store] part of this time. I think I was still doing some, well, other jobs that I was doing. I may have been working at--I had several, you know, these part-time jobs. You know, working as a, you know, working in a stockroom, you know-4 [o'clock] to 9 or 5 to 10 in the evenings, certain days. Other days, if I was, had drill--but I was doing that. So, I was doing that time of thing while I was, throughout my time at Morgan. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, who was in the political science department that you remember at Morgan? Speaker 2: There were three professors that I recall that were very important. One was Robert Gill. Gill, Walker, and Adair were my three primary political science professors that were, you know--Gill was the chairman of the political science department. Walker was one of the senior professors there. And then Adair was a younger professor there who at the time--we as students related to him, because Gill and Walker were really the old guys. And Adair was the young guy that was kind of with us. Obviously, I came to realize the great impact that both Gill and Walker had on me, though, because of who they were and their stature, and what they taught us. And then Adair for just his overall relationships, and what he exposed us to as well. But those three men--Gill, Walker and Adair, were three of my professors who really solidified my political science framework foundation, if you will, while I was at Morgan. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34025 Speaker 1: Now were you involved in, was there a political organization on campus [at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]? I mean, in terms of organizing black students, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the Black Student Union and all that was going on. But you know, during this time, you know, I mentioned that ROTC [Reserve officers' Training Corps] was mandatory for two years. But the draft was still going on. And so even though it ran for two years, obviously, you know, it was a four-year program. So, what I elected to do--Vietnam and so forth--this was 19--, that was 1969. Vietnam was still going on. And so I'm saying to myself--in order to finish school which is a priority--I wanted to finish college--I've got to finish school. And so one way of not getting, not being drafted, was to stay in the ROTC. So, I stayed in the ROTC. I said, that's okay, so I'll stay in the ROTC, knowing that if I stay in, I'll probably incur some military obligation. And I applied for a ROTC scholarship as well, for my last two years at Morgan. And I received it. And so, when I did that, that entailed a four year commitment of active duty upon graduation from me. But during this time, I'm more and more active in the ROTC department. And so my focus, if you will, in addition to my work was--it was in those ROTC activity and programs. And so, I became a member of the Pershing Rifles [military fraternal organization for college-level students]. I talked about, you know, being on the drill team, going down to the sporting events, drilling at half time for the [Baltimore] Bullets [basketball team], doing those things. And so my, if I was to call it, extracurricular activity--and I was aware of all the student union programs and all those things going on--but I wasn't, that didn't, I just didn't, you know, gravitate to those things. I was focused on this ROTC piece. Because that's, I knew that if I--when I graduate, now I'm going, I'm coming into the [U.S.] Army for four years. Because I still had this law school thing in the back of my mind. But I knew I had a four year commitment because of my scholarship that I received from Morgan, from the Army, for the ROTC program. So, my focus was on being the best cadet I could be, being as well prepared as I could be, so when I entered active duty I would be a successful lieutenant. And so, the things that I was doing were things that were in that line of emphasis and focus. You know, my junior year at Morgan which was my third year in the ROTC, I was a political science major. But also, I was the commander of my drill team there at Morgan. And so, we traveled around doing drill exhibitions at various schools. And then my senior year at Morgan, I was the commander of the ROTC brigade. I was the brigade commander, after having gone through a summer camp the year prior at [Fort] Indiantown Gap [Pennsylvania]. So my focus now has--I'm, because I know that I'm leaving Morgan. And sometime shortly after graduation, I know I'm going on active duty as a lieutenant. So, that's where my focus was during that--and obviously, graduating. So, still doing what I needed to do from my school work point of view to make sure that my grades--So, my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward] and dad [Richard Isiah Ward] said, "You've got four years." So, it wasn't going to be four and a half or five. You know, graduating in four years was the goal. So, I was serious about that as well. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34026 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of blacks in the military, I think Benjamin Quarles [African American historian] was on campus [at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], and actually wrote a history-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --of black participation in the military. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you take any courses from Quarles? Speaker 2: I did not. I did have some electives by Dr. Quarles during that time. He wasn't an active professor, but he would come in and do a lot of lecturing. So, I did take lecture from him. And he would come in. And so, I did listen to Dr. Quarles, you know. I wouldn't say quite frequently, but on, you know several occasions. And I had a chance to listen to him talk about, you know, the black experience in America across a range of demographic activities and entity sets, from the science into the military. And so, yeah, I did. I did, I did, I did. Speaker 1: I know he was engaged in a dialog about, I think he kind of bristled at some of the younger historians and political scientists in those days. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And which raises the question, the Vietnam War itself-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --was a--and the position of black folks in the military was being criticized, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I know there was a discussion at Morgan about this. So, how did you feel about the Vietnam War in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's very interesting because, you're right. I mean the Vietnam War--Obviously there was what Dr. [Martin Luther] King had said about the Vietnam War. The, you know, the attitude of many of the black faculty there at Morgan about the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and what not--. Two things: firstly, you know, the fact was it was a reality of America. I mean, and so I knew that it was going on. And secondly, for me I had made a decision that I wanted to finish college. And I knew in order to finish college I needed to not get drafted. And not to get drafted meant I needed to stay in the ROTC. Now, that meant I was going to come into the [U.S.] Army right after college. Well, that was okay with me, because my goal was to graduate from college. After, you know, a period of time here it began to hit me that, well, if you want to complain about something, then be a part of it to do what you do. You have a chance of impacting in a way that otherwise you may not be able to impact. And so, it kind of fed in with my notion of, okay, if I'm going to come into the military, I'm going to come in as an officer and have authority, have some responsibility, a leadership position. And all of that was going on my mind as a way of making a contribution that would make a difference in the lives of those soldiers who I might be blessed to lead. So that became for me, very, very important. Speaker 1: Were you privy to discussions by some of the brothers coming back from Vietnam about what it was like, over there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, because there were several of them on campus. I mean, I had cousins who had been to Vietnam. I mean in fact, two cousins who served in Vietnam. And so, I would listen to them. But I also had members of the faculty there in the ROTC department who were obviously, you know, Vietnam veterans. So, I listened to all of them, and I would talk about it. But I also, you know, I'm forming my own thoughts about this. And by 1970 and '71 [1971], you know, Vietnam--I mean there was a, there's an end mark that's being put out there. I mean in fact, I didn't go to Vietnam because I was commissioned as an infantryman. And in that year we stopped sending infantry troops to Vietnam. Now, a couple of my, you know, classmates that were either military intelligence guys or administrators, they went. But because I was an infantryman, they weren't, they were no longer sending infantrymen to Vietnam. So, I didn't go to Vietnam. But in the '69 [1969], '70 [1970] timeframe, the talks were going on. But again, for me, it was kind of--I wouldn't say irrelevant. But the point was, this is where I am. If it happens, then I want to go in this status as opposed to not. And so, and then I had a professor of military science who was a colonel who was really a fantastic officer, Clarence Hurt, who would talk to me a whole lot about, you know, what it meant to serve, and the opportunities of serving and what that might provide to you. And so between Colonel Hurt and then a, then two others--a Captain Nicholas Lagatuga, and a Master Sergeant Brodus Madison, talking to me about service, that really had an impact. And as I said, you know, my dad [Richard Isiah Ward] is a World War II veteran. Even though he didn't talk about his World War II experiences a lot, I mean, I knew he had served. And so for me it was just, I know, I could reconcile all of that. And I did, and I did. And the decision that I made was to, okay, I'm going to, you know, come in the military. I'm going to do my four years, and then I'm going to leave and still go to law school. It was the plan that I had when I graduated from Morgan and came on active duty. Story_ID: 34027 Speaker 1: Now before you graduated [from Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], were you married already, or did you-- Speaker 2: Well, because I knew that I was coming right on active duty [in the U.S. Army], my wife [Joyce Lewis] and I got married the last holiday before we graduated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we got married in April of '71 [1971] and we graduated in June of '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I knew I would be--at that--by then I knew that I was going to receive a regular Army commission and go right on active duty. I even had my unit, my assignment. I knew I was going to go to the 82nd Airborne Division and start jumping out of airplanes. And so, we graduated on the 6th of June. I was commissioned on the 6th of June, and I reported in the 82nd Airborne Division on the 8th of June of 1971. So we had gotten, we had gotten married just before graduation. So, I knew all that was going to happen right, immediately thereafter. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34028 Speaker 1: Did you have to write some sort of capstone paper for your senior year at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Yeah, you asked me what it was. I have no idea. I did, I did write a capstone paper in political science. Wow. I know what my paper was when I did my master's degree--. Speaker 1: Well, we just--well, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't recall what it was. Speaker 1: Alright. You had to do something. And the other significant thing--now, you, I heard that you received your commission from [Daniel] "Chappie" James. Speaker 2: He was my commissioning officer, yeah--right, right. He was a Brigadier General, Chappie James. Again, I mentioned that, you know, Colonel [Clarence] Hurt was my professor of military science. He was an infantry colonel, African American, and he was probably the first military officer that I met that I said, "Wow, this guy is impressive." And he, as a part of his program, wanted us to know as cadets, as newly commissioned officers that, you know, there were great opportunities in the military. And at the time, I think Chappie James was, may have been the only black general officer on active duty, in any service at the time. Speaker 1: You may be right, I think-- Speaker 2: At that time. He was a Brigadier General. Speaker 1: Was B.O. [Benjamin Oliver] Davis, Jr.-- Speaker 2: I think B.O. was off active duty at the time. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: He had been, obviously, he had been--I don't believe B.O. was on active duty at the time. I believe he was retired. He was off active duty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, and to be very candid with you, I mean, I didn't realize, you know the magnitude of it. I knew that this was important, and what not. But the magnitude of, you know--I came to understand that much better. I guess that's the one thing about living your life, you know. You really don't know how significant something might be until after it's gone, after it's past. But Chappie James was our commissioned speaker, and he came to Morgan. And he and Joyce [Lewis, Ward's wife], you know, pinned my Second Lieutenant bars on me. Speaker 1: Yeah, I first saw him on the Phil Donahue Show right after he was commissioned. I think he was a general. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: I mean it was that important. You know, you say, "Who is--?" You know, I didn't know anything about him either, until I saw him on Phil Donahue. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So, General Chappie James was there and-- Speaker 2: Right. And I've now, I've since come to know his son as well, now. I know Danny, Jr. well. So, he--but, yeah. Story_ID: 34029 Speaker 1: Okay, so, your first commission, you were in the paratroopers, right? Speaker 2: Right, the 82nd Airborne [U.S. Army]. Speaker 1: 82nd Airborne. This is in-- Speaker 2: 1971. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: June of 1971. Speaker 1: This is down at Fort Bragg [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Fort Bragg. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was--what was that like? Speaker 2: Well, it was kind of, kind of a very unique experience. I mean, again, you know, one of the things that I felt as if--was going for me--I felt prepared for whatever was going to be coming my way. And you know, what wasn't, you know--. I didn't have a cocky attitude, but I had a confident attitude. And so when I--you know, a friend of mine and I both drove from Morgan, driving down. And the thing that was really so--Now, this was the thing that really--As we're driving down [interstate] 95--get off at 95, might have been even still 301 in those days. I don't know how--95, you can see all the way down the eastern seaboard. I know it was kind of back and forth. We look up on this billboard, and there's a sign that says, "Welcome, you are in the heart of Klan country. Join the United Klan of America." This was on a billboard with this big guy in a [Ku Klux] Klan robe on a horse reared back. And so, the two of us--we look at each other and said, "Wow, here we are." And then we drive on through Fayetteville [North Carolina], on to Fort Bragg. And then we sign into the unit and begin our duties as brand new lieutenants. For me, the first thing that I was asked to do was a report of survey. This is when you have government property that somehow is not accounted for, and you do a survey to determine its accountability, or hold someone responsible for it, for losing it. And the report of survey that I did was on riot control gear that the 82nd Airborne Division had taken when it had gone to Washington [District of Columbia] for riot control purposes earlier. And so, I do this report of survey, and find out what a report of survey officer does and what he is responsible for doing to determine status of equipment and make final, make a determination, on is someone liable or responsible or not. So, I did that. But more importantly, I also--I began to, you know--got assigned to a platoon to lead soldiers, a platoon sergeant--squad leaders and platoon members that I'm now responsible for as their platoon leader for their training and their leading, as we serve in the military. So, it was for me a, I mean it was a wonderful experience. And having done some things in my junior and senior year at Morgan in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program, and having been trained well by those three individuals I mentioned before-[Clarence] Hurt, [Captain Nicholas] Lagatuga, [Master Sergeant Brodus] Madison, and some of the other professors there--I felt as if, okay, I'm ready to do this. I'm ready to be a platoon leader. I'm ready to learn from these NCOs [non-commissioned officers] and also I'm ready to lead this platoon. Now, saying that, the backdrop is still Vietnam. The backdrop is still an [U.S.] Army that has expanded, and now it's beginning to contract after Vietnam, with a draftee force. You know, a lot of soldiers when they've been drafted, didn't want to be there. So, there were discipline issues and disciplinary problems. All that was going on as a part of this whole experience, part of this dynamic, but I saw myself beginning to thrive in that environment. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34030 Speaker 1: Another gentleman we were interviewing not long ago was talking about the discipline problems of veterans returning from Vietnam [War]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The guys who had been exposed to drugs and all kind of problems. Were those a lot of the problems that were there? Speaker 2: We had problems like that. As an example, lieutenants were duty officers, staff duty officers, and did overnight duty. And part of the duty, part of the requirement, was if soldiers got in trouble downtown, you went downtown and got them out of jail. A lot of that was going on--a lot of it, drug related. Again, these are soldiers who were--many were Vietnam veterans, returnees, that were involved in drugs. And so, there were those things going on, even in units such as the 82nd Airborne Division, which supposedly is a unit that prepared to go anywhere on a very short notice, as might be required. And so, this was going on throughout our military, in the United States as well as overseas. You know, race issues were going on in the barracks, you know--soldiers living in the barracks, and what not. So, what you were doing as a leader to deal with that--to relate to your people, to associate with them, to try to diffuse situations--that was all part of the dynamic in addition to, you know, your military duties and being professional there. So, you're dealing with all those things that were going on, which were part of the society as well. So, yeah, those were disciplinary issues, discipline problems, that we faced that we had to deal with as leaders--as lieutenants, as chain of command across the board. And, you know, I can recall as a, you know, as a pay officer you always have, you know, you have a guard. That's all you carry, a loaded weapon. And it never happened to me, but you know, stories, you know, of other lieutenants who were pay officers--And back in those days, you know, you would--soldiers on payday lined up, and you paid them cash. And so, you're carrying around this money and coming from the payroll office and, you know, the threat of being robbed was there. You know, it never happened to me, but I've heard of cases where, you know, pay officers were in fact being robbed. So this was, you know, the atmosphere that we were, that we were living in at the time. And then, just the discipline issues that were going on, many drug related. You know, as a result of, you know, the society, service in Vietnam, and coming back, you know, with the drug problems that some of them had. Speaker 1: And there were lots of nightmare kind of stories that were being heard and written about that time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Vietnam vets coming back. Speaker 2: It was a, that's why--you know, as I watched the military over the years, you know, going from that military where, you know, draftees--many of who didn't want to serve; many who were, you know, either sped through promotions and weren't prepared for the responsibility; not trained well and not prepared for it; and attendant problems. That was a part of what was being experienced by all us, yeah. Story_ID: 34031 Speaker 1: So, in your early days, the [U.S.] Army had decided to re-group, right? And to, that's when TRADOC [U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command] was established, and other-- Speaker 2: A lot of reorganization, establishing a forces command. Training and Doctrine Command happened in the '73 [1973], '74 [1974] timeframe. You're exactly right. In fact, in 1973, I was a lieutenant, obviously, still in the 82nd Airborne Division, and Forces Command was established. My brigade commander in the 82nd Airborne Division was Roscoe Robinson. He was a colonel at the time. He was my brigade commander. And every major unit in Forces Command fielded a platoon, an honor platoon, to go to Atlanta, Georgia to participate in this activation ceremony for Forces Command. During the time, the 2nd Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division, was called the Duty Brigade. That means if something came up for some commitment, you know, that duty came to the 2nd Brigade to do. And so, I just happened to be in the 2nd Brigade at the time. And Colonel Roscoe Robinson, who was the first African American Four-Star in the [U.S.] Army, was my brigade commander. And I can recall me having been selected to be the platoon leader for this honor platoon. So, soldiers from all across the division--it would be a composite platoon, so that every part of the division would be represented. And I'm the leader platoon leader, going down to Atlanta with this composite platoon. So, before I leave, I go into the brigade commander's office. And I'm probably shaking in my knees. This is the colonel, this is the brigade commander. And I'm, you know, 1st Lieutenant. And I'd met, you know, Colonel Robinson and what not, and he knew who I was. And but I couldn't--but really it wasn't the type of duty that anyone wanted, because we knew this was going to be a problem. All of these soldiers--none of them yours, you don't know them. And nothing but a recipe for maybe some problems occurring, and you're holding the bag. And I go into this office with Colonel Robinson--And proud to be going on this activation ceremony. And he says, "Kip, it's important that you be there." And I'm looking at the colonel, and I don't understand a bit about what he's saying. You know, why is it important for me to be there? All I can see is the potential headaches that I'm about to encounter here, trying to, you know, shepherd these thirty-eight to forty-two soldiers down here to this ceremony and, you know, not knowing what kind of trouble they're going to get into, and I'm going to be responsible for it all. His point was, you know, on that parade deal, there needs to be some representation of our diversity that's on that field. Now, this is on the back of me having joined the 82nd Airborne Division--for the longest time the only black in my battalion, certainly the only black officer. And even then--you know--not great numbers. And so being there--And he says, he said to me, "You need to go. I want you to be the platoon leader representing the 82nd Airborne Division." And I said, obviously, "Yes, sir." And I saluted and walked out of the office and gathered my platoon. And off to Atlanta we go, as the honor platoon for the 82nd Airborne Division for the Forces Command activation ceremony. And it wasn't until some years later when then General Robinson was about to retire. And he was talking to me about that again. And we were somewhere--I was probably a Major by now, and we were someplace. He says, "Kip, you probably didn't like it very much when I sent you down to Fort McPherson, did you?" I said, "Well, sir, you know, not that I didn't like it. If you told me to do it--." He said, "It was important that you go, because we needed to--." He didn't tell me--He told me this later on. "You needed to be there on that parade field, because people who look like you also are represented in that Army. And you needed to be there." And so, you know, he did that--not so much for me. He did that to demonstrate the fact that, hey, you know, we as African Americans are also a part of this military, and in positions of leadership. And he took an opportunity to make that point by sending me there as the platoon leader representing the 82nd Airborne Division. And so that change was, to me, kind of reflective of when you're in a position to make a difference, you ought to make a difference. Speaker 1: Okay. A question: I can--what did you tell your platoon when they were on their way? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean it was all about, you know, going down there. We've got to go down there. We're going to be disciplined. And this is--I mean, from all the divisions, I think there may have been two or three other black soldiers in the platoon. And it was, you know, from the--mine was the Infantry Brigade--so infantrymen, artillerymen, logisticians, intelligence forces--just a composite, representing all the various military occupational specialties out of the division in this composite platoon. So my words, they were simple. "Hey, we're going to go down there. We're going to represent and we're not going to embarrass the division. We're soldiers. We're going to go down there and do our job, you know--take our instructions and be where we need to be. We're supposed to be on time. We're going to be strack (ph)--looking good--crisp sharp uniforms, marching professionally, and what not." So just, you know, those standard military type things as a platoon leader, you know. Irrespective of what I look like, I was their platoon leader. So, my words to them at that time were words about being a good soldier. And that was the focus and that was the emphasis. And they responded and had, you know--had no issues, no problems at all down there, you know. But, you know, I was there as the platoon leader out in front of that formation. Speaker 1: Alright, okay. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34032 Speaker 1: Now, you go to Korea. Now, when did you go to Korea? Speaker 2: I went to Korea in 1974. I went to Korea in November of 1974. In 1974 in November--I thought I was going to leave Fort Bragg [North Carolina] and go to the infantry advanced course in Fort Benning [Georgia]. Because typically you go to a unit and you're there for, you know, three or four years. And then you go to your career course, that we called it in those days. We were going back to Fort Benning, to the infantry officer's advanced course. Well, at the time in Korea--this was 1974. And so, again, you know, discipline issues still going on, race issues were going on. And General Emerson was the Division Commander. And again, I didn't know any of this at the time, Larry. I find out subsequently, you know, some years later. But General Emerson said, "All I have coming to Korea are brand new lieutenants right out of school, or captains who are a bit more senior. I don't have any of these senior lieutenants who can relate to these soldiers, that has some experience." And so, he sends a note back to his friend at Fort Bragg. Says, "I need some of you lieutenants who are about, who are senior lieutenants. And instead of those guys going to the advanced course, I need them to come to Korea to help level my ranks of leadership at that level to help deal with some of these problems I'm having here in Korea with respect to discipline, race relations, etc. etc. etc. etc." Speaker 1: Now, do you have an analysis on why there was so much--well, the [U.S.] Army had a history of racial conflict. But it also had a history of getting, of being ahead of the country-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in terms of racial issues. Bit I remember at that time there were like riots on aircraft carriers, and all kinds of things. Speaker 2: Germany, I mean everywhere. It was, it was, I mean it was still, was still this racial identity thing going on, and separations going on. And blacks, Hispanics, the whites--cliques going on. You know, they were dapping. You couldn't get to the dining facility, you know. Guys--you know, a couple of, you know, African American soldiers standing in front of the dining hall doors and going through a five minute dap session. And guys trying to get into the mess hall can't get in there, you know. Speaker 1: That's the greeting, right? Speaker 2: The greeting, yeah, right. They go, you know, they're going through their ritual. And so a guy, you know, a white guy or a Hispanic trying to get into the mess hall, can't get pass them. And so they say, "Move out the way." And one word leads to another, and then all of a sudden you're in this brawl. And how did it happen? You don't know. And that's going on everywhere. I mean it's going on in Germany, in Europe. It's going on here in the [United] States. It's going on in Korea. And so, but as a result of that, you know, the division commander says, "I need some experienced lieutenants." He didn't say, you know, African Americans. I just need experienced lieutenants. These guys are about to leave Fort Bragg to go to Fort Benning or Fort Sill [Oklahoma], or Fort Knox [Kentucky] for their career course. Instead of going there, send them to Korea for a year. So I've got some senior lieutenants with an experience in between the brand new lieutenant right out of West Point [United States Military Academy] or ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], or the more senior captain that's not relating as well to these guys. And so, there were about sixteen of us that were, who thought we were going to go to our advanced course. Instead, we wound up going to Korea. That was in November of 1974, to be assigned to troop units. And that's where we were assigned. So I left Fort Bragg and went to the 2nd Infantry Division in Korea, 1st Battalion, 17th Infantry, there on the de-militarized zone to work as a platoon, initially as a platoon leader. Story_ID: 34033 Speaker 1: So, what were you able to do [in Korea]? Or, were you able to do anything special to quell some of the-- Speaker 2: Well, I think that two things were going on. First of all, you know, I could relate. I mean I could relate to those, they were my age group. And I knew what being a soldier was. Look, I'd been a soldier for the last three and a half years at Fort Bragg, North Carolina. And I had that experience. And I had some end skills that I, you know, that had done some things to help me, that I paid attention to. So, I knew how to work with soldiers. And I think those are the things that the division commander wanted--some experience, and at the same time to be able to relate to these soldiers. And for me, candidly--I mean, I certainly, I could relate to the black soldiers. You know, I could relate to the white soldiers. I was a soldier that knew how to soldier. And I could relate to the Hispanics, because I spoke Spanish. And I can recall going into the dining facility and these groups are there. And I hear a group of Hispanic soldiers talking. And they said something, and I answered them in Spanish. And they looked at me, you know. And so the word got around real quick. "Hey, the lieutenant speaks Spanish." And so, and what I found--it's like in most cases, if you relate to people on a personal level and you develop a relationship--I'm not talking about being a buddy or being a friend--But you relate to them as a human being--That goes so far. So, first of all--and that's what I began to do. And that's what many of us began to do, not everyone did it. But certainly, I did--and a few of us. Because we knew that first of all, they're soldiers. And so, there are standards. But they're also human beings. They're people. And you relate to them as soldiers and as people. And they can see through that. I mean, they know if it's genuine or not. We had something that we called combat sports over in Korea in those days--combat football, combat basketball, combat soccer. Officers, non-commissioned officers, you know, junior enlisteds. Everybody played on the same field, equal levels. Combat basketball--you'd be inside of the gym. And I mean, it's combat--guys getting slammed into the walls--you know, body blows or what not, you know, are being thrown. And you could tell pretty quickly, you know, what folks in the chain of command--because one of the rules that the division commander had--company commanders are all there. Everybody's playing. That was his way of trying to build cohesion. But it was a way that--if someone wasn't in too good a favor, you know, the opposite team would say, "Take him out, take him out." I mean, I saw some things going on that--whew, this is really, this is--And so you could tell very rapidly which officers were not in favor, for whatever reason. And certainly I didn't know what some reasons were. And you kind of get singled out. And guys were getting slammed into the walls and broken--you know, broken shoulders, broken legs, you know, because of this combat sport that we're in. And then there were others who were like, "That's my lieutenant, that's my captain. Don't mess with him." But it came as a result of having developed some level of respect. And it wasn't--as I said, it wasn't being a buddy, but being--the fact that there was a level of respect that was established between, you know, members of that team at various leadership echelons that would indicate that, you know, we're going to take care of each other. And so--and the more that that happened, you know, the more these things began to subside, that were building--that were leading to dissent and, you know, those sorts of acts of indiscipline inside of these formations. And so, you want to build cohesion; you want to go to spree (ph). But you want to be healthy. And you do that by training hard--by soldiers knowing that you've trained them so that they can protect themselves, they've got confidence in you. And at the same time that they know that you've got respect for them, for what they do. And so, when you are with them and you do that, and you develop that--you know, that respect, it matters. Now, I can recall as a, you know, there in Korea as a Captain, Company Commander. You know, a soldier would come in and would do something. And my 1st Sergeant--a great, great non-commissioned officer--would tell me, he'd say, "You know, you're a captain, you know. All these guys--"especially if I'd just dealt with a problem the day before or the--he's heard about it. "You know all of these guys or, you know, this soldier here is not the soldier that you dealt with yesterday, you know. Understand him before you make whatever decision you're going to make. I'm not telling you what decision to take, but understand the situation before you make a decision." And so I kind of took and said, yeah, you know. Even though I might feel a certain way, I mean, I owe it to every individual to treat them as an individual when it came to matters of their welfare. And that's something that certainly carried through throughout my career. And so, and once you establish that type of relationship and your people know it--again, it's not that you're their buddy, but that they know you're fair. And if--and when that happens you get, you know, cohesion, and you get trust, and you get more effective unit activity going on. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were in Korea how long? Speaker 2: About-- Speaker 1: '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: '74 [1974] to '76 [1976]--November of '74 [1974] to April or May of '76 [1976]--a little over a year and a half. Speaker 1: Alright. Story_ID: 34034 Speaker 1: So, in '76 [1976] you become Commander of the 5th Battalion, is that-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. In '76 [1976], I'm leaving--in '76 [1976], I leave and go back to Fort Benning [Georgia] to my advanced course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That I didn't do initially. And then to, and from there I went to graduate school out of the advanced course. Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay, so the advanced course. This, you're a captain at this point? Speaker 2: I'm a captain at this point. Speaker 1: Alright. So when you finished the advanced course, are you promoted to Major? Speaker 2: No, I'm still a captain. Speaker 1: Still a captain okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I was a pretty new captain then. This is 1976. I just was promoted to captain in '74 [1974] or '75 [1975]. But I was a pretty new captain. So, I was a captain for, I was a captain until well, like '82 [1982]. So, I'm a captain until--I'm a captain the entire time that I'm teaching in the department of social sciences at West Point [Unites States Military Academy]. I'm teaching political science. I was a captain all that time. So when I left the advanced course in '76 [1976], I think, November or December of '76 [1976], I spent the next two years in graduate school at Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a captain. And then I went to West Point in '79 [1979] to teach in the department of social sciences as an Assistant Professor until '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34035 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about--now, what did you learn in the advance [infantry] course? And what did you, what was your focus at Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, State College, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Well, the advanced course was designed to prepare you for company command. But because I left Fort Bragg [North Carolina] and went to Korea, I wound up going into company command while I was Korea. And so, therefore, what I had been waiting to learn about commanding in the advance course, I did on the job as a commander in Korea. And the good news is because of my experiences in the 82nd Airborne Division, as well as the time that I spent in Korea prior to taking command of my company, I was pretty well prepared to command. And I had a successful command. And the reason I stayed longer than the typical twelve-month tour was because I was in command. And I'd been asked to stay around for a little bit additional time in order to continue with the command of my company. And so, when I got to the advanced course, quite frankly, the things that they were talking about were things I'd already done. So, as opposed to learning a lot, I was being called upon to talk a lot about the experiences of a company commander, because the majority of the class were about to enter that particular experience set. And so, I became in a sense one of the assistant professors talking about my experience as company commander for these others who were about to go forth and do that. And then they were learning other things, you know, staff officer procedures. But a lot of it at that time was geared towards company command. And so for me the advanced course was a--I did a lot of recapping of what I had just finished doing, you know, as a commander, a company commander in Korea and live mission. We had a mission there in the demilitarized zone. It was a real world mission. This is 1974, 1975. And there were tensions between the two countries. In fact, not long after I left my command, was when the major was killed, the axe incident in Korea. So, there were some real tensions in the border there. So, my experiences were real. And I could tell that and share those experiences with the students there at the, in the advanced course, the career course, who were about to either go into company command--And hopefully, those experiences would help them. So for me, you know, the Korea course was kind of a, you know, recap for me, as opposed to something to prepare me for the next stages. Story_ID: 34036 Speaker 1: What is this incident in Korea you mentioned? Speaker 2: There was a major who was part of the Joint Security Group there at Panmunjom [abandoned village on the de facto border between North and South Korea]. One of these trees there in the demilitarized zone [DMZ], that we call it "No Man's Land," but right there in DMZ--this major had gone out there as a part of a group. And the North Koreans came along and challenged his presence, challenged his being there, and pulled out axes and what not. And he got killed as a result of this altercation between North Korea, South Korea and this American, who was a part of the Joint Security Agency which is the UN [United Nations] mission there monitoring the demilitarized zone. Speaker 1: They killed him with axes? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in, that was in April or May of 1976. And I had just departed when that happened. Story_ID: 34037 Speaker 1: And so, I go to the advanced [infantry] course. And because I've already commanded my company, which would have been the next logical step, my offerings for the next job were kind of different. And so, some things I was being offered--I'd go to recruiting, commander recruiting work, or go back and be an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] professor or instructor. But I had a major who was my battalion executive officer in Korea, who was a West Point [United States Military Academy] graduate--a white officer. But you mentioned about mentors--And he got to know me, and he saw me as I was commanding my company there in Korea. He says, "Kip, you'd be a great candidate for being a professor at West Point." Well, again, I mean it had never entered my mind to go to West Point and teach. Now, ironically, I had been to West Point as a cadet at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], because there was an exchange program. And because, again, because of who my professor of military science [Clarence Hunt] was--you know, he had arranged for this program where a couple of us had gone up to West Point and spent a week at West Point as an exchange student. So, I had been to West Point, you know, as a youngster and living with the cadets. So, I knew about West Point, obviously at that time. And, but a part of going to West Point meant a two-year graduate program. Because in order to be a professor at West Point, you needed a graduate degree. And the department I was going to teach in said, "You know, there are certain schools that-We don't care where you go, as long as it's one of these schools, because you know, they have programs that are, you know, that we consider valuable for teaching here at West Point." And the various--and they had, you know, a handful of schools that they want you to get a graduate degree from. Well I'd been away for a long time. I'd been out of the country, so I wanted to get not too far from Baltimore. So, Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, State College, Pennsylvania] was one of the schools on their list of schools that you go to, to get a graduate degree in order to come here and teach at West Point. So, but you had to apply for yourself and do all the GREs [Graduate Record Examination] and what not. And again, as I said, you know I had gotten pretty--my grades were decent, so I wasn't, there was no issue. So, I applied at Penn State for admittance in their political science department as a graduate student, and was accepted. And that's where I went and I studied--because I'd been a political science major undergraduate, and I just stayed in that realm. And I was going to teach political science at West Point. You know--political science, international relations, public policy--were the courses that I was going to teach. And so, I got a degree in political science because that prepared me to go to West Point and teach those courses over the next three and a half years. Story_ID: 34038 Speaker 1: Now, who was your advisor at Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, State College, Pennsylvania], and what did you write about? Speaker 2: Oh, gee, the advisor. The advisor was, my advisor was the chair of the department. And he was, oh gee, Dr.--I want to say Par--P-A-R-M-E-I--I don't recall. I have to go dig up a paper and get it back to you. I don't remember his name. Speaker 1: Now, I don't know if he's the most significant person at Penn State in terms of your--But-- Speaker 2: No. Because I guess for me, I was at a different--most of the undergraduate students were either right, coming right out of college. I was in a little bit unique--I mean, you know, I was a serving [U.S.] Army officer, had been to Korea, some experience under my belt. And so I didn't gel in--I was doing speaking in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] department to the cadets. You know, I kind of got pulled into that. I was kind of the leader of our Army/student detachment at Penn State because there were other students going to graduate school there, and we kind of formed a little group. And I was the, kind of the leader of that group. And so for me, it wasn't as if I was going to a faculty advisor to help me get through this thing. I pretty much was doing that on my own. I mean I was focused, I was disciplined, I knew what I wanted to do. You know, my wife [Joyce Lewis]--and I had two small children who were there. So, I was kind of, you know, pretty much understanding of what I needed to do, and I was going to do it. I took a lot of coursework, because I was going to school full-time. And even though I didn't need it, I was taking it. What else am I going to do? So, I was taking all of this coursework. And so, I spent a lot of time with other graduate students, frankly, helping them do things with respect to their programs. A lot of them that were into the international relations field were talking to me about, you know, Korea and the Cold War and the Kennan nuclear deterrent issues, and all that business, and our--the triad of nuclear defense. So, I did a lot of advising, if you will, to others, as opposed to me seeking advice from a particular faculty member, because I also wanted to be a bit broader, you know--political science, international relations--but again, thinking about well, maybe law school now. What about public policy? So, I wanted to do--so I did a paper about, you know, public policy and how public policy is made. And I needed to determine a theme. And so, as it turned out, there had been mass transit initiatives in Atlanta [Georgia] as well as in San Francisco [California]. And one was about to come to Baltimore [Maryland]. And I don't know how I heard about it, but I just happened to pick up on, you know, this issue of mass transit coming to Baltimore. And Baltimore put in its--you know, D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] already had its subway system. Baltimore was trying to get one established, a mass transit system. And so, I elected to do my public policy paper, which became my master's thesis, on the implication of mass transit in Baltimore and all the political ramifications associated with it, and what happens--the effect on neighborhoods, the impact of a particular policy on whether or not the entire city benefits from it, or only certain segments of the city benefit from it, and who has paid the most for it. So, that was the essence of my paper as it pertained to public policy. And still something I'm, you know, pretty proud of. It's all, you know, water sogged now, and what not. But that was my paper that I did, the 'Impact of Mass Transit on Public Policy in the City of Baltimore.' Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34039 Speaker 1: So, in '79 [1979], you went to West Point [United States Military Academy] to teach. What was the climate at West Point when you were there? Speaker 2: Women had just been accepted. So, the first class of women were still in residence at West Point. They'd been there at that point and time a couple or three years. There had been a scandal there, I believe a cheating scandal, that some cadets got caught up in, that was going on there. But for me personally, it was a wonderful experience, it was a positive climate. I was in the department, the department of social sciences, that was really progressive. Again, you know, they sought me as opposed to me seeking them out, which kind of talks to their thoughts on having a diverse faculty there at the--there in the department. When I got there, there was a, certainly a receptivity to my being a part of the faculty that was welcomed, and I appreciated it. They were clearly, there was, it was a community of folk there that I could, you know, bond with in addition to those members of the faculty that I bonded with. The social sciences department is pretty renowned for its leadership in our military. It's, you know, the folks who come to the department have been folks that have achieved well in the military. And so, I was happy to be there. It was a good environment for me personally as well as professionally. And being around the cadets was also rewarding. Again, it goes back to, you know, being a leader and being in the position--as I said, you know, being able to mentor a group of young men and women who will be part of the future leadership of our military and our Army, to me was a privilege. And so I was there, I enjoyed it. But I also enjoyed the opportunity it afforded me to get to know my family again--to allow my wife [Joyce Lewis], you know, to explore some of her professional options that she hadn't been able to do before; to do some things with my children that I hadn't been able to do before. You know, being--coaching at a little league team, being with them. And so, all those things are really positive for me, being there at West Point, in addition to being among a group of professors there in the department that were really bright guys, great ideas--some that I agreed with, others that I didn't agree with. But always good debate, good respectful dialog, that made us all feel as if our being there was making a difference. And so I enjoyed the assignment, as I said, for personal reasons and also for professional reasons. And I met some really, really, wonderful, wonderful people--both other faculty members, but also some cadets that to this day I'm still in contact with--that I'm still very, very happy that I see them. In fact, you know, I stayed around so long before I retired that, you know, some of my cadets I promoted to General Officer. And some of my cadets, I even did their retirement ceremony while I was still on active duty. So, that's how long--I mean, the Brooks brothers--Leo [Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] graduated in '79 [1979] and Vincent [Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] in '80 [1980]. I was their professor when they were both cadets. And so, so that was just a really, really pleasant experience for me. And I still have some great friends to this day from those times at West Point, in addition, as I said, to some of those cadets who are now leaders in our [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think in those days, too--I mean, it must have been great to have the Brooks brothers--the leadership that they showed at West Point, you know. I think it was the first time a black cadet had ever been a top, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's was Vince Brooks was-- Speaker 2: When Vince was--exactly, exactly right, right. And then, and as I said, you know, at the time it was also because that first class of females graduated in '80 [1980]. And so, several of those--in fact, now the senior black female on active duty, Major General, she was my one of my cadets at West Point that I taught. At her ceremony she recalled, you know, Captain Ward being her political science professor, you know. So-- Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Nadia West. Speaker 1: Nadia West. Speaker 2: Nadia West, yeah. She's an Army doc. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you left West Point when? Speaker 2: I left West Point in '82 [1982]. Story_ID: 34040 Speaker 1: '82 [1982], '82 [1982], and went to Command General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth [Kansas]. Speaker 2: Okay. So, after school at Fort--. Now-- Speaker 1: That was at Fort Leavenworth. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Alright. So, how long were you there in Kansas? Speaker 1: In Kansas? For a year--August '82 [1982] to August '83 [1983]. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, this is, from what I understand, this is preparing you to become a Major? Speaker 1: I got promoted to Major. And this is preparing you for senior staff positions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Senior staff. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's preparing you to serve on a general staff as a senior staff officer. And that's--you know, at that time it was, it would be intermediate schooling that was, again, a selective process. Not everyone went, but it prepared you to serve on a general staff. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, so this is when, when this training is over, you go to the 5th Battalion of the-- Speaker 1: No, not just yet. When that training's over, I go to, I go to Germany. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I go to Germany. And this is really a unique story here, quite frankly, Larry [Crowe; interviewer, The HistoryMakers]. Because I get--I'm an infantryman. You know, I was a commissioned infantrymen. And I just finished telling you, you know, I came back from my infantry assignment in Korea. I go down to Fort Benning [Georgia] to the career course, then I go to graduate school at Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University] for two years. Then at West Point [United States Military Academy], teaching for three and a half years. So, for almost six years I'm not in the infantry--between my advanced course, my graduate school, and my teaching at West Point. So, I'm ready to go back to the infantry as an infantry major, to be battalion operations officer, a battalion executive officer, because I want to be a battalion commander. And in order to be an infantry battalion commander, you've got to--typically you have to have done one of those two things, or both of those things, in order to prepare yourself to be a battalion commander. Well, at Fort Leavenworth, when the assignments come out, there's no infantry assignment for Ward. And I'm, "Well, why not? And I'm an infantryman? I need to go to an infantry assignment." "Well, we don't think you--we have over--you're still pretty junior. The priority is going to be to all these other guys who are more senior than you, to go to the infantry assignments." I'm livid. I'm livid. Because why is it happening to me, and not this guy? Why Ward, and not this guy over here? "Well, you know--" I said, "I know." And so I mean, I'm just--In fact, there's a story told by one of my good buddies from my class, who sees me stand up and almost get physical with this guy who's telling me this. Because I know what the underlying reasons really are. But as it turned out, I did not get an infantry assignment. And they wanted to send me to some other assignment that was really, would have been taking me out of the infantry forever. And I just refused to let that happen. And I said, "Well, what can I do to at least get in the environment where I can get my old infantry assignment, even if you don't give it to me?" And so, the job I wound up doing was a job to go to an artillery outfit in Germany, the 210th Artillery Brigade, to be the Brigade S4, or logistician. Now, that was nowhere in my background, being a logistician. But in order to get to the environment, I'll do that. And so, they did send me to a little school down in Fort Meade [Maryland] first. And I went to Germany for--in 1983--and I joined a fuel artillery outfit there, and eventually got back to an infantry outfit, the 1st Battalion 7th Infantry as the Battalion XO, which is what I needed to have in order to at least have a shot at being a battalion commander of infantry. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you went to 210th Field Artillery. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then, and you served there for-- Speaker 1: Almost two years. Speaker 2: Almost two years. Speaker 1: And then from there to Shoffenberg [ph.]. And I wound up being the--first, as a Community Executive Officer and then as a Battalion Executive Officer in the 1st Battalion, 7th Infantry, which was a recognized battalion there in Germany. Speaker 2: Okay, so that's in '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: '85 [1985] to '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right, those two assignments. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: Then in '87 [1987], I come back to the [United] States after four years in Germany now. I come back to the States for an assignment in the Pentagon. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: On the [U.S.] Army staff. And I stay in that assignment for about fourteen months, because I got selected for battalion command. And that's when I go to Alaska in 1988 as the Commander of the 5th Battalion 9th Infantry in Fairbanks, Alaska. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Speaker 1: Kind of a circuitous route there, because those things aren't typical types of jobs to land where I landed. But that was what I did in order to be able to do it, in order to have an opportunity to command an infantry battalion. And then when it happened, as I said, I came back to the States in the summer of '87' [1987], you know, the family and I. And thinking we would be here for about a three year tour at the Pentagon, it wound up being about a 14 or 15 month tour before I was activated for Battalion Command and went to the 5th Battalion, 9th Infantry. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 34041 Speaker 1: Alright, so, this is in Alaska. Speaker 2: That's in Alaska, Fort Wainwright, [Fairbanks] Alaska. Speaker 1: Right, right. Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So in '88 [1988], okay so, any stories from that command? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That's a great place. I mean, this is Alaska. This is real Alaska. I mean it's cold. And this is a place, if you're not doing what you're supposed to do--without being shot at, you can die. I mean, the cold is unforgiving. So, taking care of your troops--but I was up there and I had a great, great command tour, three winters. I was given command of a battalion that had some substantial issues--morale issues, some leadership. The division commander told me, he said, "Kip, the battalion needs some--needs a leader that cares about them, that will take care of them, in ways that they know it." That was right down my lane. Because as I mentioned to you before, my time in Korea--how knowing people and taking care of them is what it's about it, you know, from their training to them knowing that you care for them. And so, when I got there and I got command of that battalion--bringing it back from a level where it was to where it became--was really, was an honor and a privilege and absolutely an assignment that I absolutely loved, being that battalion's commander. Probably the only time when you can know every soldier in your battalion--their family situations; where they're from, you know, their parents--I mean, you can get to know every soldier, and I did. You know, commands beyond their formation could begin to get a little too big to have that level of understanding and knowledge. But you know every soldier. And so being there, being out, you know, in minus 40 degrees and doing PT with your soldiers--and they know that the old man is taking care of them--taking them to a training rotation at one of the training centers, and everybody is just miserable. But coming away from it, having done something and done it well in an environment that's tough, where you get critiqued for what you didn't do more than you get praise for what you did do--that's what it's about. Learning, so that when you do it for war--and for real in a war, you bring your soldiers back alive. So, some tremendous training experiences--even to go out in that vast openness or that state, that post, and train in ways that really brought the most out of every soldier, and let them know that they could do anything in support of their teammates. So it's really, really, a tremendous training experience, a wonderful environment, good cohesiveness; families that took care of each other. Because, again, as I said, you know, the environmental extremes made it such that, you know, you had to take care of your teammates, your buddies. And people cared about each other. A really, really good experience, a good training environment. Speaker 1: I could see how that could be a challenge, you know, in a dreary environment where it gets dark for months, right. It's cold, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You know, staying motivated. That's when you know that--you know, the motivation comes from something else other than, it comes from within. And that's what you bring. And it's truly that type of a training environment that lets you know that you can do anything anywhere. And that's, I think, one of the great values of an assignment like that. You know, when a soldier survived and thrived in that type of an environment, they can thrive anywhere because of what it takes to do well in that environment. And so, yeah, dark a lot for part of the year, but then there's other parts of the year when there's plenty of sunshine and, you know, it's nice and-- Speaker 1: The sun never goes down. Speaker 2: Right. (laughter) Right. Speaker 1: So, you were there from '88 [1988] until-- Speaker 2: '91 [1991]. Story_ID: 34042 Speaker 1: '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: '91 [1991], now we're into the Gulf War, basically, or thereafter. Speaker 2: Well, right. I was in Alaska [Fort Wainwright, Fairbanks] during the Gulf War. In fact, I was watching my buddies and their battalions in the Gulf War on TV, and I'm in Alaska, you know. And I'm saying to myself, "Wow, this is really something." But that's where I was, and that's where they were. So, but yeah that was--yeah, some of my good friends were in the Gulf War. But I was commanding my battalion in Alaska, and we weren't deployed. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, when you get back, the Gulf War was basically over, right? Speaker 2: The Gulf War is over. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Were you assigned to the Pentagon? Speaker 2: No. I was selected for colonel. And at the same time I was selected for colonel, you know, I was selected for the War College. And then commiserate with that, I also was selected for brigade command. So, when I left Alaska, I went to Carlisle Barracks to attend the U.S. Army War College at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania. And that was in 1991, June of 1991. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was there for a year. And that's when--as I said, I went to Carlisle knowing that I had been selected for a brigade command. And so when I graduated from the War College at Carlisle Barracks, I went to Fort Drum, New York to command the 2nd Brigade, 10th Mountain Division in June of '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And that presented itself with a very unique opportunity in two regards. Because during that brigade command time, I deployed my brigade first to Florida to participate in Hurricane Andrew relief operations when Hurricane Andrew devastated South Florida. The first time that we'd seen that level of devastation on our homeland, and it really opened many eyes to what a national disaster can do. And so we were there during Hurricane Andrew disaster relief operations in the summer of 1992 through early fall of 1992. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: Helping our own citizens here at home. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34043 Speaker 1: Okay, 1992, Hurricane Andrew relief. What--now this is--had you been trained for something like this, disaster relief? Speaker 2: No. It's--some things were basic there. But we [2nd Brigade, 10th Mountain Division from Fort Drum, New York] wound up doing was applying some of the same principles that we would use if we were to go into some major urban area to settle things there, I'm saying the various sections, and we use that same principle by the operations officer in the brigade. We developed this system whereby we could cordon, section a city, knowing what area had been cleared, where power had been restored or not, overlaying a grid system over the top of the, you know, the city. And that way, having full situational awareness of the entire recovery effort for where additional engineers were needed, where additional power was required, where there were people that required additional assistance in the form of water or whatever humanitarian supplies that they may need. And so, we used some of the same principles that we would use in a combat scenario, but just applied that to this scenario, to understand--to have an awareness of where we needed to apply resources and when, in what order of priority, and it worked. And we were able to do that working with, you know, the state, federal and local agencies and activities in a way that helped bring some degree of relief to those people that had been devastated by that, you know, natural disaster. So, it made us feel good to be helping our own people right here at home. But to see that environment, that landscape, just is really something that is eye-opening and really tremendously--I guess you just didn't expect to experience something like that here at home. You know, it was something I would expect to see in a war zone as opposed to seeing here at home. But that's the power of those natural disasters. And the way you dealt with it, and the way--So, you treated people humanely, understanding them, not over-reacting to their situation insofar as what they were going through, because clearly they had been devastated. And then being in a way--not a burden on the system, but actually contributing to the relief of what was going on in the area in ways that made a difference to the people there. And we were there for--as I said, I think it was July, late July, through about early October of 1992. Speaker 1: So, would you say the [U.S.] Army is uniquely suited to moving materials and to, you know, expediting, you know, delivery of services in a crisis situation like that? Speaker 2: We can certainly be a great value added to what already exists. Sometimes it takes us awhile to get there and get ourselves set up and established, where people who are already there can have some of that same capability. But we can clearly augment and add to it. And the big thing is we can sustain it over a long period of time. And so, the startup people, initially those folks who are close by, can make it happen. But we can be there for the long haul, and then bring some additional order, clarity, and some really backup and support, augmentation support, to an effort in some focused ways that others can't do for sure. Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay, so now you were with the Mountain Division? This is the Mountain Division. Speaker 2: This is the 2nd Brigade, the 10th Mountain Division. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 34044 Speaker 1: 2nd brigade, 10th Mountain Division. And then ironically we finished that [helping with Hurricane Andrew relief efforts], and as we come back to Fort Drum [New York] thinking that we're going to prepare for our training center rotation, is when we start getting the word that we might be heading to Somalia. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right. And this was later on that same year. Speaker 2: Okay, later on in '92 [1992]. Now, the U.S., from what I understand maintains a base in Djibouti [Somalia], right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, is that where you were on your way? Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. This was before Djibouti. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is December of 1992. We had no, per se, military presence in the continent of Africa. Remember, Djibouti came after 9/11, so Djibouti came almost a decade later. So this is in 1992, and we went from Fort Drum, New York to the departure airfield in New York, into Somalia, into Somalia. Speaker 2: So, then did you have to establish a base in Somalia? Speaker 1: We did, we did, we did. We established a base. You know, some of the--you know, we went different places in the country. Some of the elements went to Kismayo, which is a city in the southern part of Somalia. Some of the elements, you know, it was a combined--my brigade was the Ground Army Brigade. There was a Ground Marine Brigade as well, that went in. The Marines were in various places on the ground, and we were in Kismayo [Somalia]. My brigade had a battalion in Kismayo. Another battalion was in a place called [Baidoa?] [Somalia], which is northwest of Mogadishu [Somalia]. The division headquarters was in Mogadishu itself. And so, we were in a distributed way in that country, in various places operating in independent elements, as small as squad sized elements up to battalion sized elements. Speaker 2: Okay. Now the background is that the U.S. was there as part of the U.N. [United Nations]? Speaker 1: Yeah, part of the U.N. mission to help bring relief to the starving Somali people, as a result of the anarchy in Somalia, right. And we were there to bring relief supplies and help safeguard the relief process being conducted by the aid workers, the non-governmental organizations that were there bringing relief and aid to the people of Somalia. Speaker 2: So, not only did they have a famine, but they had like a crisis in political-- Speaker 1: No government, anarchy. Right, exactly right, right, right. So the famine--you know, starvation, and then the political crisis. You know, a breakdown in the whole governmental structure and process. And no services were being delivered or provided, you know. People starving, as I said. No health care delivery, and the structure basically in chaos when it comes to services being provided to the people. So, no governing bodies--basically, anarchy there in the country. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, you were in Somalia how long? What were some of the things that happened there? Speaker 1: Well, why we were there--we got there in December of '92 [1992]. Again, as I said, the initial--And we had to immediately establish our presence in a way that helped to do what we were sent there to do. And that is bring relief to the Somalian people. So guarding warehouses, protecting convoys, bringing relief supplies to folks who have been displaced in various places throughout the country. And we had to do that in a pretty hostile environment. Again, where you had these warring factions that were vying for primacy in these various territories and regions. And so to go from one place to another place, you had to pass through these various warring factions, each claiming to have rights to passage, from charting terrorists--So, all those things we certainly didn't stand for. And so, we would dismantle those things and not honor any of those extra governmental activities--those activities that were purely private and done by these bands, these thugs, these gangs, these clans who were taking whatever law there was in their own hands, as being opposed to be a part of any legitimate system. So, that was the environment that we were operating in. So we had to establish, you know, secure a base for ourselves. And we did that in various places from abandoned airfields to abandoned buildings that we would take over and then use for lodging, for our own supplies, for our own bases--but also from those points--then go out to secure areas to bring relief, to administer support to the relief agencies that were bringing supplies, food and medical relief to the people of Somalia. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 34045 Speaker 1: You were there [Somalia] in '93 [1993] when the, during the Battle of Mogadishu. Speaker 2: I was not, I was not. By the time the Battle of Mogadishu occurred, I had deployed, had redeployed my brigade. And I did have one of my battalions that was still there. And I'd just been back to visit that battalion not long before the Battle of Mogadishu occurred. So, I was familiar with what had gone on, you know, the situation as it was evolving, from the early days when we--We certainly experienced hostility, you know, in a combat way, where--you know, as we were being--we were constantly being challenged by armed gunmen, these gangs and groups. And these technical vehicles, vehicles that had--technical vehicles. They'd take a Toyota truck, mount a 50 caliber machinegun on it, and use it as a gun truck. And we were certainly experiencing that throughout my tenure there. That, these were some of those armed factions that were in competition with one another, but also in competition with us, if what we did impacted their ability to control their part of the countryside that they had made claim to. So, that was going on during our entire time. But then in '93 [1993], as you know, the taking of sides that occurred--And the total reaction to that--when the Mogadishu fighting occurred and the attack on the United Nations [UN] forces, as well as on the Special Operations Forces, and the shooting down of helicopters and all that business occurred-- Speaker 1: Black Hawk Down-- Speaker 2: Exactly, right. Speaker 1: --which a movie was made. Speaker 2: A movie was made about it, yeah. I had members of my battalion that were involved in going in and trying to rescue the elements of that unit that was still down there recovering, you know, our servicemen that had been downed in that incident. So, I had members of my battalion that were a part of the residual American forces that were still there engaged in all that, along with the other United Nations forces that were there on the ground at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you weren't in Mogadishu for the battle, but do you have a synopsis of what happened, you know? This is kind of an historic incident there. Speaker 2: Yeah, it essentially boils down to a situation whereby you have a tactical scenario where U.S. forces were attempting to go in and lay a base on top of these Somali factions. Now, laying that base could have been for any number of reasons that I won't go into great detail. But it could have been for to secure some personnel, to secure some facility, to extract some information from personnel. But in that mission, in that mission, the local armed factions had amassed enough ammunition--and ammunition of sufficient variety, that they were able to shoot at these helicopters. And in shooting at these helicopters, caused them--they hit--and again, if you shoot enough stuff up there, something's going to hit. And it wasn't that they were all that expert--but they had enough stuff, there was enough lead and explosives in the air, that it impacted these helicopters. And that, obviously, brought them down. And because of--the mission was being conducted in a somewhat--as small a footprint as they could do it, there wasn't enough support on the ground that if something did happen, it could react immediately to help out. And so, you had this period of time whereby it took time for the reinforcements to get in to help out. And by that time these servicemen had lost their lives as they attempted to fight off the attacking armed factions. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is the area that it took place in is controlled by Mohamed [Farrah] Aidid [Somali military leader]. Speaker 2: Aidid, right. Aidid's area, right. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Mohamed Aidid. Story_ID: 34046 Speaker 1: And I was told by a Somalian once who said, he said--I asked him about it. And he said that he, he felt that the U.S. did not understand that Mohamed [Farrah] Aidid [Somali military leader] was related to everybody in that region. Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that's really important about whatever we do or wherever we go, you know--understanding the on the ground situation, the culture--exactly right. And I think that's a lesson that I clearly knew from my time there. Initially, as I went around dealing with various people, they were all related. You know, these clans have ties. And even though they're distinct clans, there are some--there's some line of connection that exists that you need to understand all those lines. And there are three or four major tribes and clans, but there are these sub-clans and tribes that are prevalent. And understanding that mosaic is an art form in and of itself. And in fact, a part of what we did when I started up the U.S Africa Command [AFRICON] was to put inside of that organizational construct, a structure and organization that would help us understand the fabric of these societies and cultures on the continent of Africa, because they're so complex. And our normal way of thinking about them is different. It's not about any boundary line. It's a very intricate, complex set of ties that exist--cultural ties, historical ties, that we must always work to try to understand as good as, as well as we can. And that was one of the big factors that I took into account as we set up our command, to give us better opportunity to understand that. Never knowing it fully, but certainly working everyday to try to understand it as well as we could. Speaker 1: I was told by this gentleman that he could, and he wasn't uncommon. He could go back thirty generations, mentally. He could name thirty generations back. He said even though Aidid--they did not like him, he was related to them, so he felt that they should defend him. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Which is interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It's the notion of, you know, who is against me absent someone else being there? And if you're not, then they'd be fighting each other. But as soon as you have an injection of something from the outside, then all of a sudden then there's tie that is here against this outsider. And you have to understand those. And so, had it not been us--Just like what happened with Al Shabaab [Somali militant group]--when there was no outside forces, they were fighting each other. But as soon as there's another person that comes in, another entity that comes in, then that entity becomes a common enemy of who once before were in fact, enemies among themselves. Exactly. Speaker 1: Anyway, so you were there, what, until--you were in Somalia how long? Speaker 2: I was in Somalia from December of '92 [1992] to May of '93 [1993]. And then went back in August of '93 [1993] for a visit the end of August. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34047 Speaker 1: Where did you go after May of '93 [1993]? Speaker 2: Well, my brigade [2nd brigade, 10th Mountain Division] had redeployed, so I just went back to Fort Drum [New York]. Another unit had replaced me. There had been, there was another unit there [Somalia] that was doing what I had been doing, subsequent to it, until they all came out following that incident in the fall of '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, did you stay at Fort Drum until '96 [1996]? Speaker 2: No, I stayed at Fort Drum until '94 [1994]. And I came out of my command in June of '94 [1994] and left and went to the Pentagon, to the [U.S.] Army Staff as the Executive Officer to the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army in '94 [1994]. And then I stayed there for a little over two years--one year as the Executive Officer to the Vice Chief of Staff to the Army. I got promoted to Brigadier General and I spent a year on the Joint Staff as a Deputy Director for Operations in the National Command Center. And then left there in '96 [1996] to go back to Fort Bragg [North Carolina] in the 82nd Airborne Division as the Assistant Division Commander of the 82nd Airborne Division. And that was in '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you went to Fort Bragg. Now, did you enjoy being at the Pentagon? Speaker 2: Oh, the Pentagon was a very rewarding forum, because it helped me--you know, it was my second time. The first time I was there, I was a major. I was a Staff Officer on the Army staff, a very limited perspective. But the second time I was there, I had a broad perspective, working for the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army as his Executive Officer. So, I saw everything that had to do with the running of the Army. Story_ID: 34048 Speaker 1: And then following that, we went down to the Joint Staff, where I was able to see everything that had to do with the operational aspects of our Joint Force there in the J3, as the Deputy Director for Operations in the Command Center. So, when it came to the activities of our military, globally, I was able to see all of those, all services. Again, it was a joint assignment, across the board. And that was really, really rewarding. In fact, that was the beginning of my--other than what I'd done in Somalia in a joint way with some coalitions. Because in my brigade I had several countries working for me. I had Ethiopians, Italians, Canadians--all part of my combat structure in Somalia. But here on the Joint Staff, for the first time I'm in a joint assignment able to see what each service brings to our joint force--Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Army, Coast Guard. And so, that was my exposure to that during my time there on the Joint Staff as the Deputy Director of Operations. Speaker 2: Now was Colin Powell-- Speaker 1: The chairman of the Joint--? Speaker 2: Yeah, the chairman of the Joint-- Speaker 1: He was not during that time. He had already, he, General [John] Shalikashvili was the Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff during that particular tour. You know, I went back again later on during 9/11, and obviously, certainly a different chairman then. But it was, General Shalikashvili was the Chairman during that particular tour. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 34049 Speaker 1: And being made Brigadier General in '96 [1996]. Now this, this is a big deal. I mean it's a big deal, I think, and we shouldn't gloss over it. What kind of a ceremony is it, and did your parents [Phyllis Cashen Ward and Richard Isiah Ward] get a chance to come in? Speaker 2: My dad did not. My dad was too ill to make it. My mom was there, and obviously all the rest of my family. But the ceremony was a pretty special one. It was conducted by the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army, who was my boss. And done there in the Pentagon. A host of friends who I've known my entire life--family. And I think as I was delivering my comments--Once I'd been promoted, you know, I was evoking my dad. Because a lot, you know, certainly who I am and who I was on that day for sure, was reflective of who he was as a man and what I'd learned from him. And so I really was, you know, evoking all that. He was too ill at the time to be there, though. But I clearly made sure everyone knew that, you know, he clearly was a part of my life that was responsible for me having achieved what I had achieved. And basically, because of what he taught me about how to treat people. Because of--not what he said to me, but what I saw him do, and how I saw him treat people. And then clearly, you know, you acknowledge--you know, your family. And my wife [Joyce Lewis] and kids, you know, my mom's sister and aunts, uncles and cousins, and also friends. But the important--you know, the teammates that I served with over those years--the non-commissioned officers [NCOs], the soldiers, all those folks who have been a part of my experiences in my various units, and what they had done to help the teams that I've been a part of, to be successful. And by acknowledging all of that, it was a big part of it. So, yeah, it's a big deal. It's a big deal, a huge step. One that--you know, when I look back on my days at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], even my days as a lieutenant in the 82nd [Airborne Division], you're never thinking that you would achieve that, because clearly I didn't. I know there are some who say, yeah, I just did all these things. But, just never me. I mean, things happen over time and you get selected for a school, and you do it well. And you're able to command a formation. And that happens because you have some great teammates. So, yes, giving thanks for all that. You know, and certainly you're being thankful to the Almighty for all the care that he's provided as you go through all the stages. I talked about being in these various assignments, in Korea. You know, being so cold in Korea as a young captain walking those ridges, checking on my people--I think I'm going to die, I'm so cold. You can't feel your feet, your hands, your ears. Just absolutely, just chilling, chilling cold. You know, being in Germany there before the Cold War hit, you know, there in that mechanized brigade--Knowing that if something happens and the war goes off, your first line is to move, is to march east to stop the invaders that are coming from the east. And you're there, you know, training and preparing for that. You know, in Somalia, as a brigade commander--you know, doing what I did there--knowing that anytime you go out on this mission, you send your soldiers out, you know, they may not come back. You go out, and you're just as vulnerable as they are. And so, when you look at those experiences and you say to yourself, well, why is it that you get through it? Well, you train for it. You have teammates that you count on, that you can depend on, those old stories that you've heard about so much, you know. Why do you do this? You do this for your buddy to your left and to your right. And that is the same true echelon. It doesn't matter how senior you are, or how junior you are. I can recall being in Somalia on one occasion there. And I had a, you know, my driver and my vehicle and, you know a security guard had a machine gun. And we're both under this Humvee, you know, being shot at. And he looks at me, and I look at him. And I said, "I sure hope that machine gun you got got bullets in it." He said, "Sir, this got bullets, and I hope that rifle you got has bullets." "I got bullets, too." He said, "Well, we're both in this thing together." So, that, when you get in those types of situations, it doesn't matter what rank you are, you're still a human being first and foremost. And so, you apply that to all that you do. First and foremost, you start off with human beings. So when I got that, you know, that star--And I'll always remember, I had received a gift from a good friend. And he kind of described to me the points of that star, what each of them meant. And I kind of took that--I said, that's right. This star doesn't belong to Kip Ward. This star belongs to everyone who's been responsible for what Kip Ward is. And each point belongs to one of them. And I talk about my family, my teammates, my God--those things that have contributed to me receiving the star. And then the final one was mine. When you look at it, you know, this star belongs to the combination of all these people--all these events that have gone on in your career to enable you to have achieved this particular milestone. And so, and that's the way I thought about every one of them, you know. Every one--I say these aren't mine. These belong to those who I've been fortunate enough to serve with, and have been fortunate enough and blessed enough so that, you know, the things that I have done have contributed to making the team better. And in doing the best that I could do, to cause what they have done, to make them better as well. And that's what it's about for me. And so, that first ceremony, that first promotion that I had as a brigadier general, that's--those were the things that were, you know, flooding through my mind at that point in time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34050 Speaker 1: So after your appointment as brigadier general, you went to Fort Bragg [North Carolina], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Went to Fort Bragg and was the Assistant Division Commander for Support. I did that for--during that time longer than most, you know. I was there for about 20, 21 months, doing that job. And typically, you do that job anywhere from 10 or 11 or 12 months, and you get rotated out. But I stayed there for almost, almost 22 months. And I had a great time doing a wonderful job. I was doing a lot of jumping. I'd jump in two or three times a week with the various elements of the division, separate companies--the brigades on mass tactical jumps, on training deployments, jumping with the various elements. Had a really, really good time. I did a lot of jumping. I did a lot of jumping. A lot of parachute landing falls during that time. But it was a great, great, great job. And learned a lot, worked with a lot of folks. Some great teammates during that time, that are all doing really, really well these days as well, that I served with during that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34051 Speaker 1: Well, what was your next deployment? Speaker 2: My next assignment--I left there and went to Egypt. I went to Egypt as the Chief of the Office of Military Cooperation, there in Cairo. So, my wife [Joyce Lewis] and I left Fort Bragg [North Carolina] and went to Cairo, Egypt. Again, an assignment that--You ask, "Well, why do you get these sorts of assignments?" I had no idea. I'd never done security assistance work before. But again, the notion that, you know, you go where the [U.S.] Army needs you, kind of happened to me. And so I left Fort Bragg-- Speaker 1: So, what year is this, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: This is 1998. Speaker 1: '98, [1998], okay. Speaker 2: This is '98 [1998]. I was at Fort Bragg '96 [1996] to '98 [1998], early '98 [1998]. And I go to Cairo as a brand new Major General to run the Office of Military Cooperation, part of [U.S.] Central Command, CENTCOM. And my responsibility was to the Security Assistance Program there in Egypt. Pretty unique assignment, because I had an opportunity to work with the foreign government, but also to work with an embassy, a country team--ambassadors, other members of our government, inter-agency members--to see what they also do, to get a greater appreciation for their role as we look at, you know, our relationships around the world and the role that these embassies and these country teams play in our national security, but also our--and helping us accomplish our national interests globally. And so that embassy in Cairo--a great ambassador, a great country team--again, all the agencies of our government represented in various forms--the treasury, commerce, the various three letter agencies, all there. So, getting to know them in a very good way, to see what they do. Again, it's the team. And to know that you know, you're only a part of it. When it comes to achieving our national interests, there's this entire team working together that makes a difference. So, the embassy atmosphere provides a microcosm, if you will, of how it happens on a much grander scale. And I was able to see later on coming back to Washington [District of Columbia] working at the Pentagon when I was dealing with inter-agency and the National Capital Region--But I had experienced that first working in that embassy there in Cairo, because I was running our Defense Cooperation Program with our Egyptian partners. Story_ID: 34052 Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're next deployed to Hawaii. And this is in '99 [1999]? Speaker 2: This is '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is '99 [1999]. I get called by the Chief of Staff of the [U.S.] Army to tell me that he's selected me to go command the 25th Infantry Division in Hawaii, the Tropic Lightning, a renowned historic division from its work in Vietnam--the Tropic Lightning Division. And I was ecstatic, you know. Again, commanding a division--that was one of those things--at the time, there were only ten of them. And to be selected to be one of our nation's ten division commanders was truly a high honor that I deeply appreciated, and very happy to do. And so we left Cairo [Egypt] and headed to Oahu [Hawaii], to Schofield Barracks, to command the 25th Infantry Division. And I had a wonderful, wonderful, division command. I was also the U.S. Army Hawaii Commander, which meant I was also responsible for all the installation and infrastructure work to care for our people, our families, there in Hawaii. And so, it was really a rewarding, rewarding assignment. You know, a mission in the Pacific with the 25th Division, training with our partners throughout the Pacific--Asia, Australia, Korea, Japan--but all that. But in addition, caring for our families and their well being, that critical part of readiness. I had been a Community Executive Officer as a major back in 1985 in Germany. And at the time I got that assignment, I said, "Wow, what have I done to make folks so mad at me to give me this job?" But it turned out to be such a rewarding job because I learned about the installation business; the power projection platform business; the taking care of families business--the things that caused a unit to be ready, and all its associated components--and how important that is to the readiness of a soldier, the readiness of the force. So, having taken that experience as a Community Executive Officer and learning about the engineering director, housing, medical exchange, civilian personnel--all those things that are important to the well being of a soldier and his or her family and their care--then all being brought together as a U.S. Hawaii Commander--where as the Commander--I'm responsible for all this, both sides of it, and how they meld together. And that was such a rewarding time, because I was able to lead two organizations--the division side and the installation side, toward common purposes for readiness of the force and the well being of soldiers and their families. And I think that's a great combination. I'm sorry that we went away a bit from that model, because I think it took some of the things that the commander had in his or her hands away from them, as they were able to look at the command and its people in a more comprehensive way. But for me, it was a wonderful, wonderful time. We had a very successful--we call a war fighter exercise, which is a command post exercise, where the division got put through a pretty substantial battalion brigade combat training program, a battle combat training program that tested its ability to conduct a combat operation in a simulated fashion. But at least testing the system--we did that to a very high, high degree. Story_ID: 34053 Speaker 1: And I think kind of as a result of that, the Chief of Staff [of the U.S. Army] said, "I think you'd better--I need you to do this job--I got another job for you." And he asked me to come back to the Pentagon in 2000 to serve on the Joint Staff again. And that's what I did, following my time as Division Commander in Hawaii. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what did you do at the Pentagon? You served on the Joint Chiefs of-- Speaker 1: I came back to the Pentagon in 2000, November of 2000, as the Vice Director for Operations on the Joint Staff. That was the, I was the number two person of the J3, the Deputy, the Vice Director of Operations on the Joint Staff. And the J3 is the directorate that is responsible for the operational work that's done by our global force, our Global Joint Force. So things being done globally by the Air Force, Navy, Army, Marine Corps--those orders and instructions emanate from the J3. And it was also during that time obviously that the 9/11 attack occurred. And I was there in the Pentagon during 9/11. I didn't leave the building for four days, as we were reacting to and recovering from--and then posturing ourselves to respond--and then responding to that act of terror that had been levied upon the United States of America. Speaker 2: Okay. So, this was a time of--what I heard in the press, anyway--that it was a time when the government was criticized for not communicating with, you know, with itself, you know. Speaker 1: Well, some of the things that occurred during that time or prior to it, was how we shared intelligence--how our various intelligence agencies talked to one another--so that we all had some common picture of what was going on, some kind of understanding. You know, some of that criticism clearly was warranted, because we could always do things better. And clearly, once that occurred, you know, things were put in place to in fact do better information sharing, so that we would not have the gaps in the intelligence picture that we had, in not realizing what was going on there. And so, clearly in-roads were made. But during that time, our focus was not the--our focus was to one: understand what's going on; prevent to the best we could something like that from happening again. Because we didn't know what was going to be happening. You know, we had airplanes flying all over the world, on the way into the United States, not knowing if there were others of these activities about to occur or not. So, bringing down our airspace. We were involved very heavily with the Federal Aviation Administration, our air defense sector, understanding where planes were. We were issuing orders out of the Pentagon to land planes and bring planes down, to put up systems to help safeguard municipal areas. So, all of that was going on. That was our prime, that was our focus then insofar as what we were trying to do to further protect, you know, the American people and our American infrastructure. So, we did that. And again, that was a 24-hour day job in addition to obviously recovering from the attack on the Pentagon itself, as well. And again, during this time, as I said, you know, I didn't leave the building for four days, because my job was to be a part and parcel of the group that was issuing these orders, making these movements, to help bring a degree of protection to our nation and its people from another attack occurring. And so, that's our focus--that was our focus. Subsequently to that--obviously over time, you know, addition coordination began to--had occurred. Okay, what happened? Assessing those things and putting things in place to hopefully prevent the re-occurrence of another event such as that. And that process goes on today. You know, continually, continue to make it better. Story_ID: 34054 Speaker 1: You asked me one of my favorite sayings. It's "improve the foxhole." You always can work to make something better. That came about, quite candidly, as a young lieutenant when I was in Fort Bragg [North Carolina]. We would go out to the field on these exercises, and, you know, during those times you'd dig a foxhole. And everyone knew what a foxhole is. You dig a foxhole, and you get down inside of it. And it would protect you. I recall one occasion my platoon sergeant and I were in our foxhole, in our little command foxhole there in the platoon. And after the exercise was over, I got a call from the company commander who said, "Lt. Ward, the fuel problem is over. You can go in now." So, I kind of, you know, took off my helmet. They had a steel pot in those days. And my platoon sergeant, "What are you doing, Lieutenant?" I said, "Well, the fuel problem is over, I'm--" You know, something to that effect--"I'm chilling." He said, "As long as we're in this foxhole, we always work to improve it, because we never know when this foxhole will be called upon to save our life." So that kind of put, engraved something in me. It doesn't matter how good you think things may be; you always work to make it better. And you never stop doing that as long as you're occupying it. So from then on, wherever I've been, that's been my foxhole. As a Company Commander, as a Battalion Commander, as a Brigade Commander, as a Division Commander, as a NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] Commander, as a Combatant Commander--that position was my foxhole. And as long as I was occupying it, I would always work to improve it, to make it better. And that kind of came to me many years ago. And I've kind of used that over the years. So, you run across many people, and they say, "What about Kip Ward?" And, you know, they'll talk about the foxhole, because I kind of used it as my metaphor for always working to make where you are better. And it applies in any environment in any scenario. And so, there during those times and after 9/11 while I stayed on the Joint Staff until I left to go back to Europe, we were certainly in the processes, trying to make things better inside our government so that there was better communications. It was better and more common and clear understanding of the environment. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you. How close were you in the Pentagon in proximity to the actual physical attack with, you know-- Speaker 1: I was on the opposite side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Where our offices were, was on the opposite side from the plane came in. We could--obviously we knew it occurred and didn't know what was going on. But that was on the opposite side of the Pentagon. Speaker 2: Okay. Did the physical attack disrupt the, I guess, power and that sort of thing in the Pentagon? Speaker 1: It did not. It did not. We operated continuously. I immediately went down to the command center where I'd worked a few years back as one of the deputy directors. So, I knew that territory well. And I went, relocated there and began doing things to understand where our forces were deployed around the world, and moving forces where we needed to move them in order to further protect, you know, America and its citizens. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 34055 Speaker 1: Now, so you, what happened next? Well, what happened next? What was your, what's your next deployment? Speaker 2: Well, I left the Pentagon and I got promoted to Lieutenant General. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I got an assignment as the Commander of the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] Force in Bosnia. So, I left the Pentagon in 2002 and went to Sarajevo [Bosnia] to command the stabilization force in Bosnia. It was a 26-nation force there in Bosnia following, you know, obviously the atrocities that occurred there in Bosnia between the warring factions there in the former Yugoslav Republic. Speaker 1: So, this would be 2002? Speaker 2: It was 2002. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, 2002. So this is, this is another world hot spot. And so, what were some of the challenges in trying to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Bosnia was really unique because of it's--you know, the fighting had stopped, the act of shooting. Certain incidents were occurring, but the fighting had stopped. But you were into this big reconciliation period, you know, three factions--the Bosniacs, the Serbs and the Croats. These were the--the Muslims who lived here, the Orthodox Christians and the Catholics, who were there--each having a role in the government, each trying to recover from the devastation of the fighting that occurred. You know, everyone recalls the Srebrenica situation where the Muslims had been massacred there, and obviously the resulting indictments against Karadzic and Mladic, as war criminals, for their role in that whole event. So, challenges were one: trying to reestablish this country, working with the United Nations, working with the European Union and its High Commissioner who was there. So, the European commissioner, High Commissioner, who was there was my partner. He was working the political, societal, pieces of it. I was working the security pieces of it. And it all needed to work together for stability to occur in Bosnia. And so, my part was to complement him as well as I could with helping to reassure the security umbrella of this whole episode, this whole dynamic. I worked with the militaries of the various factions, bringing them together. I worked also though, with the politicians, because I knew they were an important element of this component. And also in development. So, really my exposure to--how the importance was of--you know development. That's why today when I'm asked to speak about Smart Power and its relevance--so important. You know, security, stability, this does not come at the end of a rifle or in a bomb. It comes because people have a sense that their development, their economic situation, at least is progressing ahead. So, the importance of that was certainly something that I was aware of. I'd gotten my first glimpse of that working in Egypt when I worked at the embassy, working with my aid partners who were there as a part of that mission, knowing how important they were also. And so, in Bosnia, that was the dynamic that we experienced, you know, working with those three peoples, trying to help reestablish--rebuild a country that had been torn apart, you know, with ethnic violence, ethic hatred, deep rooted--where people that lived together before and now are fighting each other. How do you reconcile, how do you come back together in a way that makes sense? And we worked very hard at that, to some degree of success, that we were able to turn that mission over from a NATO mission to a European Union mission during my tenure there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34056 Speaker 1: Then in 2005 you were selected to, as a Deputy Commanding General and Chief of Staff in the U.S. Army in Europe, right? Speaker 2: Well, right. But when I left Bosnia, I got a, I was re-assigned as the Deputy Commanding General of the United States Army in Europe. And I go back, I leave Bosnia and go to Heidelberg [Germany] to be the Deputy Commanding General of our Army there in Europe. But while in that position, I get a call from Washington [District of Columbia]. I was in my car, and the phone rings, the cell phone. And it said, "This is the Secretary." So, I said, "Secretary? I'm the Secretary. I don't know what secretary--." Well, it was Secretary of State [Condoleezza] Rice. And she says "Kip, I've been authorized to ask you to consider a mission for the country." And I'm, I had--just out of the blue. I mean, absolutely no prelude to this at all. "And we'd like you to go to Israel and be the Security Coordinator between the United States--between the Israelis and the Palestinian authority. And we'd like you to go there in about two weeks." I said, "Whoa." But, so I--well, as a soldier, you say in this case, "Yes Maam." And so, that assignment for me--I was temporarily removed from the Department of Defense, re-assigned to the Department of State--in a technical way, because my boss became Secretary of State Rice--as a U.S. Security Coordinator for the Israelis and the Palestinian Authority. I go--I come to Washington and get some orientations. I go meet with the President, National Security Advisor, and the Secretary of State, and pulled some broad instructions. And then told to build a team and go to Israel and begin doing this work as the U.S. Security Coordinator. And this was in February of 2005. And that became a most interesting period. Again--because once again, you're doing something--not directly prepared for it, but when you look at your range of things that you've done over your career--precisely having led you to this point. So from Somalia to Bosnia, now I'm going to Israel. My time in Egypt working with the Egyptians in that part of the world all played into my readiness and preparedness to go do this job as the U.S. Security Coordinator there in Israel--working out of Jerusalem, Tel Aviv [Israel], and traveling the entire West Bank, and to include going into Gaza. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, were you successful? Was your mission successful? Speaker 2: Well, we still have conflict. We were able to move some things forward. One thing that I was asked to do by the Secretary was--you know, this was when the Israelis disengaged from Gaza, they left Gaza. And one thing that I was told, we knew that the disengagement from Gaza would result in the death of Israeli citizens and the death of Palestinians because there was a lot of fighting going on, and we knew there would be no prospect for peace. So, if anything, this disengagement must happen and the words were "not under fire." So, we were able to work very successfully with the Israelis and the Palestinians, so that when the Israelis disengaged and left Gaza, it did not occur under fire. And it did pave the way--and at least allowed for peace if it were to occur at all. And so, yes, we were successful in that regard. And we were able to establish in some cases, re-establish some relationship of trust between Israelis and Palestinians. And that process is a process that continues today, quite frankly, that we were able to begin during that time. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 34057 Speaker 1: So, the next big assignment is Africa, right? Speaker 2: Well, the next big assignment was a promotion to--and one of the reasons why I was taken out of--because I got promoted to four stars, to be the Deputy Commander at EUCOM [United States European Command] in May of 2006. And so, that was the next big assignment, to be selected as the Deputy Commander of EUCOM. And, you know, the Commander of EUCOM is also the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] Commander, the Supreme High Commander of Europe. So, it's the Deputy Commander who runs the day to day business of EUCOM and its four components--its Army component, its air component, its naval component, and its Marine Corps component. And so, that was my next assignment that I did. But while doing that assignment, AFRICOM [United States Africa Command] was envisioned, created and stood up. And I was selected to be AFRICOM's inaugural commander. And that occurred in October of 2007. Story_ID: 34058 Speaker 1: So, AFRICOM [United States Africa Command] was new, right? It had not. I mean it had not existed- Speaker 2: Prior to the creation of AFRICOM, the Department of Defense [DOD] responsibilities in Africa was being done by three separate commands--a U.S. European command, a U.S. Pacific command and U.S. Central command. And so, you had three different commands conducting activities within the continent of Africa and its island nations. At the time, there were fifty-three nations. There are fifty-four today. But fifty-three nations, the largest still today, insofar as nations that are concerned. And so, it was a disjointed effort. It wasn't a cohesive effort. And to the Africans, it said, well, there's really no--every other geographic region had its own command. Africa didn't. And so, as you note--and many had said years before, that this is something that should have happened a long time ago with respect to the importance of the continent and our global commons--from its demographics, its resources, its population, the market potential, where it is in history--had it not been addressed through the focus lens of a single--your geographic command was something that many thought was a long overdue step. And so, when the decision was made to create a separate geographic command for Africa to address some of these inconsistencies, to provide a degree of attention to it that it rightly deserves, then that decision was taken. And it obviously occurred while we're in the middle of a war in Iraq, and to a degree, in Afghanistan as well. So, it wasn't resourced in ways that many of us wanted to be resourced. But having it stood up was still better than not. And we continue to move ahead and continue to build on it in ways that make it more and more resource ready, as it moves ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34059 Speaker 1: So what was the purpose of AFRICOM [United States Africa Command] to go over to Africa? Speaker 2: The goal was to help provide for our national security interests in that region, in that part of the world. You know, simply put, you know, how AFRICOM is to work with the partners in Africa to help provide for the heads and security of America. And we do that in differing ways. For Africa, it was working with our partners, both on the continent and also with our inter-agency partners. Because again, remember, I'd been in Egypt, I'd worked in this embassy. I saw other parts of our government working in these foreign countries, and said "Wow, they make a difference as well. It's not just the military that makes a difference in helping to bring stability." And so, AFRICOM had as its part of this construct, how do you work in a more cohesive way with other inter-agency partners so that we don't do their work, but we contribute in more effective ways to what they do by doing what we do in a more comprehensive and effective way. So, we worked with, and still do, with the security forces of the African nations, helping them improve their own professionalism so that they'd end up able to provide for their own security, as opposed to having some other force or other nation there doing it for them. It's a long-term endeavor, takes time, doesn't happen overnight. You know, sustained security engagement. You know, building relationships, building partnerships, building trust--so that, you know, you get a behavior and attitude and way of conducting themselves that is professional, that is designed to take care of the people and not themselves, overcoming some of the historical attitudes about what militaries are--forgers on their people as opposed to protectors. And that comes through training relationships, through associations, through exchanges, through getting to know them--sustained engagement. So AFRICOM, through its exercises, through its partnering programs with other militaries--to working with the inter-agency government partners that we have; work with the country teams, the embassies, so that our programs support those goals; working with the regional organizations; the African Union; the sub-regional organizations on the continent, so that we understand what they're doing. So now, our efforts complement. My term was we want to add value, but mentally do no harm to work being done by others, to help build stability. So, that's why AFRICOM was formed. And doing it in a way through a single lens as opposed to three separate lenses that existed before--that caused some disjointedness, that caused some lack of clarity in our work because it was being done by three separate commands. AFRICOM brought cohesion to that whole effort of the Department of Defense and its activities on the continent of Africa, but also its island nations. And the good news is that foundation that was laid was a solid foundation. It was done the right way. It's still talked about today as being done the right way. I'm so proud of that. It wasn't just me, but it was a team that made it happen because of an approach that we took that said it's about this team working together in an effective way in pursuit of our own national interests. And at the same time, helped to promote the interests of our partners. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what other nations had an interest in Africa, and had military presence in Africa at the time? Speaker 2: Well, some of the historical colonial powers clearly were there. You know, France. And you read about what France did most recently in Mali. Speaker 1: Mali-- Speaker 2: So, France certainly had a presence there, historically. Others of European powers--Portugal, Spain, Germany--not a military presence, but the military participating in their activities. You know, the Chinese, the Brazilians, Pakistanis, the Indians--all there. And you mentioned Djibouti [Somalia]. Djibouti, after 9/11, Djibouti became a location for an American footprint once we brought it from the Gulf onto shore with a Joint Force headquarters there in Djibouti. That remains today. There's a part of that Djibouti footprint dealing with pirates off the coast of Somalia. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Japan, as an example, has brought in some assets to help deal with piracy. So, nations have joined together in addressing, you know, problems affecting the global commons in a way to make a difference there. Africa had been very, very, I guess, direct in saying it doesn't want foreign forces on it's, permanently, on its soil. And again, the colonial attitudes and the colonial foot imprint that it has left, has been a factor in making that so. And so, you don't see large formations of--And this part of this unstaying of AFRICOM initially was the thought that that's what it was--we're going to come and recolonize the continent. And until we were able to go around and dispel those attitudes and feelings, because they just didn't see it happening--that was part of the push-back against AFRICOM in its initial stages. But we were, all that's been reversed. And so today, other than what I've just described, coming in for exercise and participating, you don't see other nations with standing armies or large footprints on the continent. Again, France still does in smaller numbers in a few places. And that's about, that's really about it in any permanent way, any permanent way. Story_ID: 34060 Speaker 1: So, what I heard you saying before is that the other nations have an interest in Africa and have military presence there as advisors or whatever, you know, but-- Speaker 2: Civil affairs, engineers. Speaker 1: So, U.S. presence. Now, the only place with boots on the ground was Djibouti [Somalia], right? 1,800 men there? Speaker 2: From a semi-permanent stance, right. At any time, there may be as many as four or five thousand U.S. [United States] service members somewhere around the continent doing an exercise, doing some small unit exchange--three or four soldiers, sailors, doing something; some engineers doing something. So, that occurs continuously. But they go in for, it's limited durations, working and doing an exercise or some civic action project program, and then they're out. All because the nation where they are has requested it, and is in support of it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I know when you first were appointed, I believe in the early stages, you spoke before the TransAfrica forum. And there was some pushback from them about the U.S. having a presence in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Africa, as AFRICOM [United States Africa Command]. They thought it was probably a bad idea to have more-- Speaker 2: Right. See, and that's all a reflection of these vestiges of colonialism. You're here, you come in, you dominate, you put some battalions and ships and soldiers--and all of a sudden, you're taking over. That was never the intent, but that's how it was conjured up and that's how it was. It seemed the intent to be, that the U.S. would come in with a large footprint. So, even the notion of an AFRICOM headquarters there produced that notion. And again, we spent time to dispel that. Because you're right, in some of the early days of the command, and words that were being said by members of the Department of Defense [DOD], led to those conclusions. They were erroneous, they were wrong. And as soon as I was confirmed by the Senate after having been, you know, selected and nominated by the president, I was able to begin speaking about that. Because prior to then you can't talk about it, you know, because you can't presume that I would have been the selectee. But once I had been confirmed by the Senate and then shortly thereafter took command, some of my early, early interactions, and some of my early activities in addition to building a command, was going around trying to reverse some of these conjured up notions of what the command was, both to our African friends on the continent, but also to our inter-agency partners. Now this inter-agency notion had them believing that we wanted to take over their work, which was them just a big, a non-starter. So, from the Africans' point of view, we were coming back to re-colonize the continent. From an inter-agency partner's point of view, we were coming to do their job. Neither the case. And so a lot of my earlier engagements, and indeed things I reinforced throughout my tenure during engagements, was the fact that those notions that were conceived or perceived early on, just were not the case. And more and more as they began to see--hey those guys aren't here recolonizing, nor here with big garrisons of forces. Maybe what Ward said is in fact the case. And they're here to partner with us, to support us, to be a factor in helping us to improve our own professionalism. And that's what the case was. For our inter-agency partners, you know, commerce, treasury, agriculture, homeland security--our work was to reinforce their efforts, not to do their work, but because of what we did, to be supportive of what they were doing in promoting American interest on the continent of Africa. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you can understand the trepidation, though, that people feel. "Here comes America, oh, oh." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There's--historically, America has-- Speaker 2: But the good news is America had never colonized Africa. And we have been on the wrong side of some things, but we've never colonized it. And for those reasons, and while this trepidation was there, there was no experience of that there. So, you couldn't go back and say "See this, see this, see this." We had never colonized Africa. And so because of that, we were able to at least have an in-road to be able to begin explaining this. And then once we explained it--then following actions reflected what we were saying--those fears and anxieties about what we were doing began to ease, and they began to understand more of what we were about. And now the question is, you know, not don't come here. The question now is, well, can you come with more? Because when we go to a place on the continent of Africa, two conditions were in existence. One, it's supporting our national policy. We weren't going there because Kip Ward said let's go there, it was because they support our national policy. And two, our country team, the ambassador of each country--our ambassador in the African Union was in support of what we were doing, because they saw it as complementing the overall effort of America there as well. Now the obvious, the only distinction, would be where the president directs, because of some national emergency, to take action. Then we would obviously do what we were directed to do, in those sorts of regard. But when it came to our engagement, our activity set, was because the African partner wanted us there. And we didn't go where we weren't invited. And it was with the concurrent support and agreement of the country team and their inter-agency partners. Story_ID: 34061 Speaker 1: Ironically, I was reading some criticism about your presence as Commander of Africa, I mean as the head person in Africa, as being scary for some because you're an African-American. And here you are, you know, being seen as a person--you're sincere. You do what you say you're going to do. You clearly believe that a mission is, that it's positive and can articulate that. But then there's this distrust of U.S. foreign policy. And also, they see you maybe as a Trojan horse. And that was expressed by some African leaders and some African watches in the United States. How do you feel about that? Speaker 2: Yeah. I could not control, I saw some of those reactions. You know, all I could do was set about doing what I did, and through my actions, disprove all that nonsense. And we did. And in some cases, it doesn't matter what you do, there'll always be those who will posit those sorts of things, you know. I didn't, I would respond to the question whenever it would come up. I'd say, "Well, it's not the case. And you see by what I'm doing and how I'm acting here and what I'm saying, that it's just not true." And for every individual that may have said that, there were ten that were saying, "Hey, that's not the case. You know, Ward is here with-he--" I would hear, quite frankly, a lot of the opposite. And that is, you know, I came there, and I understood what they were saying. First of all, I listened to them, and I would pay attention. And it goes back to something I learned from my dad. You know, we're individuals. You treat people with respect and dignity. And so I would go there and I'd listen to them. I respected the leaders, as opposed to talking down to the leaders, which some of them had expressed that to me. So, there were many who said to me, "You're the first American who's come here and you've treated us at a level of dignity that we appreciate." So, that was also being said about my being there, and how I conducted myself as I interacted with the leaders of the continent. And I did do that, you know. I went there very much with the notion that, you know, I want to learn from you. I want to understand your situation from your point of view. I talked about the foxhole. That's another little story. You know, improving the foxhole. Another one of my things is getting outside of your foxhole and seeing what you're doing from the point of view of someone else. And the better you understand that, the more effective you can be at what you do. And so, I would want to understand from those who were partnering, how they viewed what we were doing or not. And if it was something that we were doing that was askew from their perspective, then how do we change it to make it align with your perspective and your goals? Then we'd go back the next time, and having done it just as they would have suggested. "Umm, this guy is listening to us, he is paying attention to us. He is respectful of what we have to say about this situation. After all, this is our continent." And so for those snips that were taken, there were many more "Thanks for listening, thanks for being a real partner," as opposed to giving it lip service. Speaker 1: Another ironic thing I thought, in reading those articles, is that you seem to be saying the same thing as TransAfrica--that, you know--TransAfrica said more guns and bullets are not needed here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you're basically saying the same thing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Africans don't want that. Speaker 2: Right, right. I kind of, I would go to places--"Well, you're a general. You're talking about agriculture production." Well, you know--again, I've been in environments whereby I know that if it happens at the end of the bullet, when you take the gun away, then it's going to come right back again. But it happened because the people wanted it to happen and feel secure, and that's the true stability that will occur. And so, yeah, I mean I can do whatever I need to do I need to do it, but I know that long-term, long standing, application of stability comes because the environment is stable. And that stability doesn't come from a bullet. It comes because there is a, I call it a horizon of hope that the people have. And I've written about that. As a result of my experience in Bosnia--establishing this horizon of hope that causes them to say, "Hey, this is better because we made it this way. And we don't want someone else coming from the outside to disturb that and disrupt it." So, they become the biggest guarantors of stability, not some outside force, not the force of guns. Because they have a horizon of hope that they want to maintain. It doesn't take a lot, it just takes something. You know, what I've seen over the course of my career of serving--it doesn't matter if it was Bosnia, Palestine, Somalia, or the continent of Africa and its fifty-four nations--you talk to most men and women, their aspirations and dreams are the same as yours and mine are. And that is a life for them and their children and their grandchildren, and they're stable and they're just safe. And that is universal, that's universal. So, you take that common humanity and you--to call what you do to be reflective in things that help achieve that stability for people. And they will do yeoman's work in helping to create those conditions. But you've got to create that. And that's a job of governments to do it; it's the job of those who are concerned friends to do it in those sorts of ways; and it's the job of the people themselves to do it. So, my approach has been that. You know, I've been shot at. It ain't fun. And so, how do I do what I do, in whatever position I've been given, to not promote violence, but to use security and a feeling of security, that it enables other things to occur--development and governance that is taking care of its people. Those are the true guarantors of stability. Story_ID: 34062 Speaker 1: Now, you're almost at the--well, your mission is largely almost like an ambassador in many ways. Even though we have ambassadors in some of these countries, you were somewhat of an ambassador. What are some of the stories that you have about how you were able to actually bring some stability to a place and maybe help it develop. Speaker 2: I'll give you an example. If we are working in a particular country on the continent of Africa. And in order to do an exercise that will--okay, you take a region, and I'll say East Africa. And you want to do some common exercise to help with their ability to respond to some natural disaster, and how they might work together. So, you bring four or five nations together. And I'll say, okay, in this case we'll say Burundi, Ghana--correction, Burundi, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda, in an exercise. You know you've made a difference when as these nations come together to do this exercise in one location, to determine how they can better support each other during some natural disaster, you know, be it a flood--where they've got to garner resources from different places. They need airlift to make that happen. They join the security forces to bring these resources together. When, as these convoys move between these countries, they're met at the border by the security force of the country that they've just now entered. They then travel together to the next border, met by the security forces in that country. And then they get to a location in the fourth country, and conduct an exercise together. And you see that happening. You see bonds of friendship developing. That reduces tension among borders. It shows the people, importantly, the people, of those countries that our security forces are cooperating. So, their fear is diminished because they see that. And then--oh, by the way, as we move to a training location where it needs to be conducted, there's not a road that we can use that's sufficient to get us in there. And so, the engineers say, "General, we've got to build a road in order to deploy these forces into this training area." And I say, "Okay, have we consulted with the local authorities?" "What do you mean, General?" "Well, you know, we've got to build a road. Unless we build a road in a location whereby so that once we leave the training mission, it benefits the people in this area. So, instead of building it in this northeast route, let's build it in this northwest route. We'll get to the same place, but by going northwest, we touch these three villages that now have some mobility, enhanced mobility, back to a major city. And when they see that happening, they say, "Ah, these guys aren't just here taking, they're here helping. They're providing something that when they're gone, we can still benefit from. So, those are two examples of how working with partners in an equal way--and then doing things from the way that says when we leave it, we're going to leave it better than we found it. We're adding value, not doing harm. It makes a difference in helping to achieve this horizon of hope, helping to make this notion that these guys are here to help us, as opposed to not. And those are the things that create an enhanced level of stability. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what country did you have the best relationship with over there, or what group of countries? Speaker 2: Oh, I couldn't name a single one. I had great relationships in many of the countries--from Tanzania to Ethiopia to Uganda to Kenya to Senegal to Tunisia, Morocco, Namibia, Botswana, Burundi, Comoros, Seychelles--these are Pacific Island nations. You know, many, many countries. We had-- Speaker 1: Nobody stood out as being a little bit easier to work with, or better, or more receptive? Speaker 2: Well, not really. Many of them did. I mean it was, we would go to many places, and there was a level of cooperation and receptivity. Those that I named were clearly those that I recall, you know, very, very well. I mean I mentioned Uganda, Rwanda. And we--again, it wasn't about being, being or having a favorite. It was about doing things that caused these nations to--the African Union had the umbrella organization for the continent. So, we wanted to work with the regional organizations as well, because these nations have to work together. So, we didn't want to just pick a nation. We wanted to promote regional cooperation as well. That was one of the issues that affected, you know, the command going to a particular place. Because for as many--well, I'd say, you know, the ones that you heard say, "We don't want you here", there are some that said, "Bring your headquarters here." But then it would create animosity elsewhere. So, we wanted to create regional harmony. And so, we worked to do that. And so, it wasn't about being favored or not favored, but we had great relationships with many of the nations on the continent. And I mentioned those, from Kenya to-- Speaker 1: So, did you, like, work say with ECOWAS [Economic Community Of West African States] and--what's the other one in West Africa? Speaker 2: ECOWAS, the East African Community, EAC. We did, we worked with all of them. The one in the north wasn't well-developed. So, and obviously we couldn't force things. So, but so where there was a structure that existed, we would do our best to work with them to help them achieve their goals for stability and peace by doing what we did in complementary ways. So, as we did things--"This is what we were about to do. Does it make sense to you?" "If not, where does it not make sense." Or, "If you did it this way, then it might be better for us." And if all those things were in keeping with what we wanted to do, then absolutely that's what we did. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 34063 Speaker 1: So, AFRICOM [U.S. Africa Command] operated out of Stuttgart, Germany. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. At the MacDill Air Force Base. Speaker 2: No, no, no. At Kelley Barracks. Speaker 1: Kelley, okay. Speaker 2: Kelley Barracks in Stuttgart, Germany. Speaker 1: Yeah. And wasn't there an office at MacDill in Florida, too? Speaker 2: Well, we had an office, but we also had an office in England. So yeah, we had several offices. But yeah, there was one at MacDill because we wanted to work with CENTCOM [United States Central Command]. But we had one in England working with EUCOM [United States European Command], so yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were with AFRICOM until--how long? Speaker 2: Well, for three and a half years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Three and a half years, three and a half years. Speaker 1: Alright. So, is there a highlight of your service in Africa? Speaker 2: I think the highlight for me would be, quite candidly, going back to the Department of the State towards the end of my command tenure and having the ambassadors from the continent of Africa, our U.S. ambassadors, as well as the State Department of Bureaus, tell me that I was a fantastic partner for them, with them, in what we did; and having a legion of teammates who continually reach out to me to say, "Thank you sir, for your leadership while you were in command"; and then getting notes periodically from ambassadors who are there now who say to me, "Kip, what you did still makes a difference here on this continent." So, when I look back at my various visits for my--my visit with Muammar Gaddafi [of Libya], obviously way before his demise--to my visits with the various heads of state, Prime Minister Meles [Zenawi] in Ethiopia; [Abdelaziz] Bouteflika in Algeria; [John Atta] Mills; President [John] Kufour in Ghana. And those luminaries who I think were tremendous leaders in their countries insofar as stabilizing, bringing stability, and moving ahead. You know, those are all very significant events for me. And then you know, being on the ground doing a training event and watching my soldiers with some soldiers from one of the partner nations, and seeing the backslapping that goes on because these are truly friends who have come together for the cause of peace. Seeing those events have been really, really tremendous for me. And I guess one other that I'm really proud of is to have visited with family. We've had soldiers in Africa and the people think, "Well, we've got a footprint." In all our embassies there are U.S. service members--sailors, soldiers, airmen, Marines--and in many places, with their families. And before AFRICOM, they were treated in some hodge-podge ways. You know, almost like second class citizens. And what we did to try to coalesce that in ways that--you know, a pregnant spouse of a [U.S.] Navy service member in one country getting different type of treatment than the pregnant spouse of an Air Force service member in another country, when they're all U.S. citizens-- and different rules for when they can go back to the States or not, and what we did to coalesce that--so they're all being treated the same, at a high level. Making those things happen. We were able to do that. And that's, those are the sorts of things that I'm proud of. And again, it's being able to use the position that I was blessed to have, not for Kip Ward, but to have caused my teammates to use the ordinary term, "to be as good as they can be, to be all that they could be." And that's what we were able to do. And when I hear those folks talk about those sorts of things, those are all highlights that I still have. And so, you know, that tour in and of itself was a highlight. It was a distinct honor and pleasure to have been the inaugural commander of the Africa Command--to establish it in a way that's respected, and in fact, it's almost as if it had been around forever, because of how it's, what it does these days. But I've often been told it wouldn't have happened if it hadn't gotten started the way you were able to--and your team, to get it done, especially given the push-back that it received at the outset. Speaker 1: I remember seeing an AFRICOM Facebook page, you know, and tapping into that now--a lot of stories were forthcoming as to what was going on. And it was almost like a Peace Corps, almost over there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And looking at their stories of them coming back. But I don't think it still has that kind of social media presence as it had when you started it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you, you stepped down from Commander of AFRICOM in, was it 2009 or--? Speaker 2: 2011. Speaker 1: 2011, okay, alright. Story_ID: 34064 Speaker 1: Alright so, and since that time [stepping down as the inaugural commander of the U.S. Africa Command (AFRICOM)] you received many honors. You were honored with Black Engineer of the Year. I know, even, even if, even though--I don't--you've never been an engineer, have you? (laughter) Speaker 2: I've been a general, so I guess it all counts. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Well--talking about, you know, I guess I was an engineer. There was a time in Bosnia, and I was visiting with a gentleman, pretty elderly gentleman, and he was trying to get some water. And he was saying to me how, you know, to get water up to his little property, he said he had to always wait until somebody came by with a car to help him bring water up this long, this big hill here. And he was just, you know, so dependent on that. And so I turned to my NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] engineer and said, "You know, what can we do to kind of help him out a little bit?" And as it turned out, there was a little pump house down at the bottom of his property. And for lack, for want of a little belt and a drive gear, you know, he could pump his own water up there. And so, and the guy said, "This is probably a thirty-minute--to get this taken care of--a belt and a little drive gear. Then I'll need some fuel." And so, we did that. And I went back probably three weeks later and he was getting water, and he was happy. And he just shook my hand, and what not. "Ah, thank you." And so, so I guess I did a little bit of engineering, with that piece of it. Another example, I was in Africa visiting one of the USAID programs, and there was a little farming co-op. They were trying to raise pineapples to export quality, so they could go to Europe. They couldn't get their little irrigation system set. Well, I had an engineer sergeant that was with me. And I said--we'd just been talking about his work with some irrigation systems. And so, I said, "Well, the next time I come here I'm going to bring my sergeant with me, and he might be able to help out a little bit." Then we go back and the sergeant goes with me. And he goes there and spends two days establishing an irrigation pattern that now is feeding--I don't know how many hectares, but it just increased production tenfold, this pineapple field. And he was able to connect these other co-op members to it, so that they too were increasing their yield and the quality of their pineapple. So, that was some engineering going on in that piece of it, you know. But the Black Engineer Award of the Year was their leadership award that I received. But I appreciate you mentioning that. But yeah, there was a little bit of engineering in the background, too. (laughter) Speaker 1: Alright. Story_ID: 34065 Speaker 1: So, your retirement came with some bitter sweet--you know, you received a lot of accolades, people really liked the work you were doing, but at the same time the Inspector General was saying that you were improperly spending money as a Four-Star General. Speaker 2: Well, that just wasn't true. What occurred was I--a paper trail that would go into the file that would say what I did, didn't occur. And it was a lack of a paper trail that they were critical of. And how it was portrayed was a different thing than actual actions that occurred. Everything that I did was always known in advance-relied on others to insure that the paper trail to support that was there--the decisions that I was authorized to make and made on behalf of and in good ways--and that didn't happen. And for those reasons, it led to what it led to--a false representation that, unfortunate, but those who were with me who know me, know that that wasn't the case. And you know, there's still some hope that, you know, it will be seen to be what it was, and that will be turned around again. So, I'm, my service was noble, it was honorable, and I've no hesitation in any of that, in what I did. And as I said, it was a great forty year career that I'm very, very proud of, and I'm very, very happy that I was able to do what I did, not for Kip Ward, but for teammates and for our nation. And I did that I think in a fine way. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this had to be a tough period of time, because that delayed your retirement, you know, in a prolonged investigation, which they asked you to pay back some $85,000 and reduced your stars from, I think, four to two. Is that correct? Speaker 2: No, I retired. Reduced by one, retired as a Lieutenant General. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Reduced by one, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. This had to be a tough period of time. Speaker 2: It was trying, sure it was. It was, it was. It was disappointing, but again, you know, I'm a man of faith. And my faith was never shaken. And so it's, you know, it's you know, it wasn't the first time that I've been treated in ways that wasn't fair, and probably won't be the last. And so, those don't define me. So, and I don't, I look forward, and I'm moving ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34066 Speaker 1: Now, so what are you doing now, or what did you plan to do at that point in 2011? And are you doing it today? Speaker 2: I am. I'm working, doing some things. I'm speaking, some consulting. And being a grandfather, which is all enjoyable. And catching up on being a son for my mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward] now these days. So, I'm doing pretty much what I intended to do. After serving forty years as a soldier, you know, you have a lot of things that you didn't do because you were serving your country that you now can do for yourself. And so, that's what I'm doing now. And so, like I said, some consulting work, as companies are doing some things on the continent helping them to better understand the dynamic from my point of view that they find helpful. And so, those are things that I--I maintain my interest in the continent. I maintain my, you know, interest in America, in our security, and how now in the global economy the connection between America and Africa in the global commons. And so, things that I can do to help promote those positive connections, are things that I continue to do. Story_ID: 34067 Speaker 1: When you look back to everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you wish you could do over again, or do differently? Speaker 2: Really, no. I'm beginning--as I did things over my career that came up, not because I had any grand plan, but because of how circumstances evolved, it led me to the next event. And all those events were positive. I mean, to have done things in a way that led to the ability to be a Combatant Commander serving as a Four-Star General, I don't know how I could have written that any differently. Again, the experiences I had at the time--why is this happening to me, being a Community XO--but very pivotal in my ability to command my outfit in Hawaii in a pretty effective way because I had those experiences. You know, going to Egypt, being there and as well, and pivotal and being able to--So, I wouldn't go back and re-trace those. I'm been very blessed. You know, my wife [Joyce Lewis] of forty-two years is still with me, and I love her, and I'm so appreciative of her. I've got great kids who are doing well in their own right. So, you know, I still, I lost my dad [Richard Isiah Ward] a bit ago. My mom [Phyllis Cashen Ward] is still with us. So, I'm doing my best now to be supportive to her and my sister. But no, I think, you know, the life that the good Lord blessed me with is the life that I'm very thankful for and appreciative of. And it's one for me that has been richly rewarding insofar as the ability I've had to touch others in positive ways. And as is often said, had that acknowledged by those who know you best. And that's what I'm very, very thankful for. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34068 Speaker 1: In terms of your family, I know your wife's [Joyce Lewis] accompanied you on many of your assignments. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And well, tell us about your family and your children. Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's, I have a son and a daughter. You know, both married. One granddaughter, and you know, cousins, a sister, nieces, nephews, my wife's family. Both my wife's parents are, we lost both of them. But she has brothers and sisters. So, a host of friends from these years, this career, that we still have. And it's been a blessed life, and one that I'm, I'm still looking forward to more to come as well. You know, well, you know how old I am, because we're the same age here, you know. So, I'm looking forward to this side of the ledger as well, in some really, really good ways. So, I'm happy for where I've been and for what I've done. Again, you know, I couldn't have written it any differently. I've enjoyed my--I also get asked, "Well, what's been your best assignment?" "What place have you liked the best?" Well, we enjoyed Alaska, we enjoyed Hawaii, we enjoyed, you know, Egypt, living there. I mean our time in Europe was fantastic. You know, great communities here in America, Fort Bragg [North Carolina], Fort Drum [New York], great friends there. So, this has been a richly rewarding experience. And I don't if I would, you know--I couldn't have developed a script that would have been different than that. The one that I've been blessed to have is the one that I've been very, very thankful for. Story_ID: 34069 Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I think for me it's, I think what many of us see today. I mean, our young men. Back early this month, I was in Texas with Steve Harvey, as he did his mentoring program for boys there on his ranch. And he asked me if I would come there and be a part of that, and I did. And as I interacted with those young men, boys, you know--tinges of hope, but so much more that they need. And I think for me, as for so many, having a society that is somehow allowing these young men in particular, these young African American boys, to have a greater chance of being dead or in jail than getting education, we've got to turn that around. Somehow, we've got to fix that because that's not helpful for anyone, to include them obviously, but it's not helpful for our nation. And one thing that I've come to know is that when you let any part of your talent pool wither and you can't take advantage of it, then your society isn't what it could be. And we are missing out on a substantial part of our talent pool in this group of young men who somehow we've got to cause to be in a position to be contributors to stability as opposed to not. And that's the job of all of us to do that. And we've got to pay attention to it because otherwise we're going to all be in some, I think, some situations that we'd rather not be in as time moves on. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34070 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done up until now, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think if I were to consider anything to be my legacy, it would be a notion that if Kip, if Kip Ward was on your team, he worked every day to help you to be a more valued member of the team. As I would often say in my troops, "For me, it's about doing the best that I can to make you better in what you do." And that's what--it's always been to take care of someone else. And again, that goes back to what I learned from my dad--goes back to being respectful--and the fact that as a human being, that's what it is. And the kind of Golden Rule is operative--you treat others as you want to be treated. And I've tried my best to always live that. And those who know me, I believe would universally say that. He lived as he would want others to live, in ways that he treated them as he would want to be treated. And I think if that's what's said about me when it's all said and done, it doesn't matter where you or who you are, be it our African partners in Europe, in Asia, you know--And I guess, probably, he's a person that you like being around. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34071 Speaker 1: Now, I apologize. I should have asked this sooner, but there's a story from Korea you wanted to tell. Speaker 2: It wasn't a big deal. I mean, you know, every time that you're in charge, things happen. Things don't always go the way you want them to go. And you know, these things happen. We were on a night operation in Korea. And during those times we had these separate platoons and sections attached to us. Well, in the old days, they had these Red Eyes. These are old air defense missiles. And these guys would always come to you from someplace else--link up for the exercise, for the mission and then they go back to their parent outfit. And they would typically be off by themselves. Well, one night we got a call to displace, get up and move my company from one location to another. And once we got to the new location, I turned to my Executive Officer, and I said, "Where are the Red Eyes?" "Where's the Red Eye section." And he looked at me, looked at the first sergeant--And we had left the Red Eye section back at the old site, which is about four hours away. And the last thing I wanted to have happen--and these are the days in Korea. Again, as I said, things were not, still aren't good there. But, you know, people were getting killed. And I said, I can see the headlines now. You know, "Red Eyes section killed in the DMZ [de-militarized zone] of Korea." And so, I mean between my Company XO and I getting back, getting those guys up and getting them re-secured was--that--I never forgot that issue of accountability. Because there was a case where, you know, I had not done all that I could have done to ensure that I'd accounted for every member of my company. And that was a lesson that I never forgot, accounting for all your people. The good news is they were fine. They were still back there, you know, doing what they were doing, sitting back--Well, we heard things leaving but we thought--but it really--So, okay, you check and you double check and you don't ever, you know, take it for granted that someone else is doing that for you, insofar as the accountability of your people. And so that one that stuck with me for a long time. I didn't tell anybody about that for a long time other than, you know, my XO, the first sergeant, who knew it. That was obviously an embarrassing thing to have happened, but a valuable lesson. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34072 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't discussed before I ask my last question that we need to talk about? Speaker 2: Probably, but I don't know what it is right now. I'm still, you know--this has been comprehensive, but I can't think of anything. I didn't write down a bunch of notes that I'm going to say I'm going to make sure I hit these points and hit those points. So, I think I'm okay. I've touched on a couple of things and you've heard me talk about, you know--my various axioms around the foxhole. That's been a very valuable piece for me, this notion of a horizon of hope and how you create that, and how important that is. I'm going to be writing about that further, as well. Those are the important things. And then, you know, respect for others, doing unto others as you want them to do unto you--some guiding principles of mine; being good teammates, you know, taking care of your teammates, you know. I used to say that, you know, if everyone of us did all that we do to cause a teammate better, the team is elevated. And oh, by the way, as individuals, we're elevated as well. That's been my philosophy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 1: As a soldier, a good soldier; as a father and husband, a good husband; a good father; as a member of the human race who cared about humanity and who did what he did, not for self, but for others, and did it in a proud and honorable way. Speaker 2: Alright. Thank you very much for sharing with us. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 34073 Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead and tell us about this. Speaker 2: Okay. This is a childhood group from the neighborhood I grew up in on Falls Road, there in Baltimore, Maryland. This is probably about the 1954 timeframe. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: And this is a picture of Joyce [Lewis; Ward's wife] and K.J. and Kahni, our son and daughter, in Hawaii when I commanded the 25th Infantry Division in the U.S. Army, Hawaii in 2000; and this is a picture of Joyce and I with our granddaughter Kemela, and she's about eight months old; and this is a combination of photos, Joyce and K.J. and Kahni, our son and daughter, and then Joyce and I; The picture at the bottom is Joyce and I in 1984, 1985, in Germany at a military ball. Speaker 1: How do you spell your children's names? Speaker 2: Kahni is K-A-H-N-I, and K.J. is K-J, he's a William, Jr. Speaker 1: Alright, just for the person typing it. We'll pick up the caption later on. We'll choose which ones we want. On this page, or-- Speaker 2: Well, you've already got it, of Joyce and I, so you may not need that page. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You already have some of us. There's some more of those. I think, yeah, those there. Speaker 1: Do you want this one? (Unclear) at the top right? Speaker 2: Top right is my First Sergeant and I, Company Commander in Korea in 1975. Speaker 1: Okay, top left? Speaker 2: Top left is at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] as a cadet, sophomore. That would be 1969, receiving an award from the senior drill instructor, Master Sgt. Brodus Madison. Speaker 1: Center? Speaker 2: Center. Airborne cadet, airborne student, Fort Benning, Georgia, 1971. Speaker 1: Okay. Can we get others from that page? Right here. Speaker 2: Coming out of the door of the airplane at the departure ceremony at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, as an Assistant Division Commander. That would have been 1998. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's Company Commander in Korea, 1975. Speaker 1: At the desk? Speaker 2: That's at the desk. Speaker 1: That's Company Commander? Speaker 2: At the desk. Speaker 1: And on that page? Speaker 2: Top right is as a Commander of the Stabilization Force in Bosnia in 2002 doing a push-up with one of my Italian soldiers; and then there in the center with [President] Bill Clinton in Bosnia as we come back to commemorate the Srebrenica Massacre. There's probably nothing there. Those are--This is the activation of AFRICOM [United States Africa Command], AFRICOM's activation with the Command Sergeant Major of the Command, Mark Ripka, my good buddy; On the right, Secretary of Defense Gates; Chairman of the Joint Staff, Mike Mullen on the left; and the acting director of USAID there in the center with the lady, and then the guy on the flag holder; There's probably nothing there. Okay. Nothing there; nothing there. I'll put them back, don't worry about it. I'll take it up and put it back in; Nothing there; Keep going. This would be the Trumpet Award with Tom Joyner. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, he talks about me too much. (Laughter) You can keep going. Maybe we'll get Roland Martin and Steve Harvey. So maybe Speaker 1: Go back? Speaker 2: Go back one, yeah. There we, the guy on the left is Roland Martin; Ray Nagin, Mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana]; Okay, and then Tom Joyner and Joyce and I; Okay, and the next one is Steve Harvey. Go ahead, that's Tom Joyner again. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Next page, yeah. Joyce and I with Steve Harvey; Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was Beyonce. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Top left is one when I was receiving the Trumpet Award in Atlanta [Georgia]; Bill Cosby and Dwayne Wade; Top right is Bill Cosby, Joyce and I; and there is Dwayne Wade and Joyce and I; This is, right, president of Liberia, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and I. Speaker 1: That's the King of Swaziland? Speaker 2: That's the King of Swaziland. Speaker 1: This is Ghana? Speaker 2: Ghana and South Africa, yeah; Speaker 1: Let's see. Speaker 2: Sierra Leone; this is in Ghana. Speaker 1: That's (unclear)--. Speaker 2: No, that's Kufuor, President John Kufuor and our ambassador, Cynthia Bridgewater, and Joyce and I; and then on the right, the former president of Morgan, Earl Richardson [also a HistoryMaker] and his wife. Speaker 1: Okay (unclear). Speaker 2: I think most of the rest of them are kind of, maybe you can pick a couple of--these are a lot of just pictures from various trips to the continent. So, we can do one or two of those, I guess. Well, we've already got one--that's President Johnson Sirleaf again, so we already got her. So, we don't need another one of those. Speaker 1: Here's somebody else here (unclear). Speaker 2: We'll do Bono. It's him in both places, but maybe the signature one is down at the bottom, with the glasses on. He's the one, Bono--developing relationships with Bono; President, I mean Henry Kissinger, former Secretary Kissinger; those are all members of Congress there, so I don't know their names offhand, so; That's where we lived in Stuttgart [Germany]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: How many do you have? Speaker 1: Oh, we must have twelve or something. Do you feel we have enough? Speaker 2: I think so, unless something else comes across that's really--Maybe you can--I thought I had one of, well, maybe right here with--This lady here is pretty--I'm not in it, but I think it would be--This is Frances Hesselbein. She's the former president of the Girl Scouts and she's president of the Hesselbein Leadership Institute, which is the former Peter F. Drucker Leadership Institute. Speaker 1: Can you turn them up? Speaker 2: A very good friend. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Okay, I think this is another combined arms piece here. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: This right here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Will Triplett in '88 [1988]; Here we take command of a battle group; This one--right, Roscoe Robinson. But that's not a whole thing, that's just a program; Okay, what's here? This is Joyce and I with the Mayor of Stuttgart. In the center, Mayor Schuster, (unclear). Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: (Unclear) I'll go back to that. Speaker 2: This is one of my USAID guys. I came back and gave him his award there in the USAID headquarters so that they knew that he would make a valuable contribution to the team. He was my senior developmental advisor, a good guy, too. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: This is Sgt. Major and I in Tunisia, the only U.S. battlefield cemetery on the African continent; that's Command Sgt. Ripka and I in Tunisia; U.S. cemetery; High school graduation; On a panel with Cindy, Ambassador Cindy Courvill and Ambassador Jendayi Frazer at the Kennedy School of Government and Politics; This is with Mr. Bush and the Obamas; That's a group of generals, Les Lyles, Johnny Wilson, Colin Powell, Stan Reason, Barry Ellis and myself, all retired now. Speaker 1: Okay (unclear)...