 Story_ID: 192192 Speaker 1: So we're gonna begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Today's date is Tuesday, August 24th, 2004. And the interview of this location--the, the location of this interview is in Gaithersburg, Maryland. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And if you would, [HM] Mr. [W. Gregory] Wims, please for the record, please tell us your full name-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and spell it. Speaker 2: Well, I use W, then-- Speaker 1: And W stands for? Speaker 2: For William. So William Gregory, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, and then the last name is Wims, W-I-M-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And would you please share with us the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: 09/02/49 [September 2, 1949]; Bethesda, Maryland. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: President of a consulting firm called Hammer and Nails Inc. Story_ID: 192193 Speaker 1: And if you would, the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little bit better. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And if you could give me short answers to these questions-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that would be great. Would you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: Anything Italian, and believe it or not, plain old spaghetti and meatballs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Outside of that, chicken parmigiana. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Cali--anywhere in southern California. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite phrase or saying; do you have one? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay. No, that's fine-- Story_ID: 192194 Speaker 1: Now if you will, let's start out talking a little bit about your mother starting with her name and where she was born and how she grew up. Speaker 2: Okay. Rachel Almedia Wims. She was a Stewart, so Rachel Almedia Stewart. She was born-- Speaker 1: Could you spell Almedia for us? Speaker 2: A-L-M-E-D-I-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Rachel's R-A-C-H-E-L. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stewart was the name, and she was born here in Gaithersburg [Maryland] and the community that she was raised in and I was raised in is called Stewart Town. It was named after her great-grandfather and my great-great-grandfather. Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like growing up in Gaithersburg, at that time? Speaker 2: She did. It was--Gaithersburg was very rural. She was born in 1915, and her dad had a farm and they pretty much lived off of the farm. She talked about milking the cow, snapping the chickens' heads off so they would have chicken, growing corn, that type of thing. And so she grew up as sort of like a farm girl. Speaker 1: And did she ever get to Washington D.C. often since I mean, Gaithersburg is close, but-- Speaker 2: But I believe back in 1915 and then through the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], Washington D.C. was like a million miles away because of transportation. She did go to Washington D.C. though, in her senior year of high school, to help an aunt who was ill, so she got to spend about six months in the big city, as she called it. Speaker 1: And did she ever tell you any stories about what Gaithersburg was like in the 1950s, 1920s? What kind of community was it? Speaker 2: Well, coming from--she talked about the '30s [1930s], the [Great] Depression, but it didn't affect them that much because as African Americans then, you pretty much stay to yourself. You could not pretty much go to the white facilities. They lived off of the land so although things were tough, it was tough all the time, as she put it. But as you go to the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], she talked about how she earned a living to raise me and my other brothers and that is working pretty much as a domestic, cleaning houses. So she would have to sit on back of the bus, she would talk about that. She would talk about how she would always say, "Yes, ma'am," and "No, ma'am," to anyone who was primarily white in the store, waiting at the bus stop or whatever; those type of stories. And as I--I'm the youngest of, of four children that she had, and I traveled with her sometimes in the summer when she cleaned the houses. And she would tell me things were much better then, and this was now, you're talking about the '60s [1960s]. But, of course, being a young civil rights minded teenager, I would always make sure that we were given the respect that we should, but she would always tap me on the hand and say, "Boy, behave yourself," because she still remembered those days when you just couldn't do the things that we do today. Speaker 1: And how far did she have to travel to get to work? Speaker 2: We have always lived in Gaithersburg and most of the houses that she cleaned were in Bethesda [Maryland], Potomac [Maryland] area because then, as today, that's where a lot of your wealthy families lived. So it was about fifteen miles each way, but we would always take public transportation 'cause my father [Earl Wims] was working and he had to take the car to work, so we used the bus a lot. Story_ID: 192195 Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about your father, starting with-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --his name and where he was born-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and grew up. Speaker 2: Earl Alexandir, I think it's A-L-E-X-A-N-D-I-R, I think is how he spelled it; but Wims, W-I-M-S. And he grew up next door to Gaithersburg [Maryland] in Germantown [Maryland]. And oh, I should tell you my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] as well as my father's side. My mother's family, we have traced it to about 1804, but my--to be in Montgomery County [Maryland], and my dad's family, though, was 1800 right on the nose, so you have two families worth now 220-some or 200-some years of being in Montgomery County. But my dad though, his family was a little different. They worked, but they were like sharecroppers on a farm. My mother owned the land--her father owned the land, my father's father did not. And he had to stop work--I mean, he had to go to work at the age of, I think it was eight or nine, but it was in third grade. He never completed high school or elementary school. He worked all of his life. The good part of that, though, is that when he married my mother and they got--he was twenty-one and she was eight--nineteen, I think, when they got married, he had enough money where they could, in fact, have a place to live outside of the farm. I think they were renting. And he had--he was able to buy a car. And again, you have to remember, that was a big thing back in those days, I think the '30s [1930s], I think, when they got married. But my father worked all of his life and when he died, he was with one comp--well, he retired after working with one construction firm for thirty-five years, and he was a laborer all that time. And I remember as a child, again, 'cause I'm the baby of the family, going to meet my dad after work or sometimes going to work with him just to see what he does. He--as he became a senior and when--I think between sixty and sixty-five, because he worked 'till he was sixty-five, they gave him the, the easiest job and that was just being a flag person or just taking water to some of the laborers. But for about twenty-five years, he actually worked hard. He was a laborer. So that was my dad's history. Speaker 1: And did he ever share any stories with you about what life was like for him growing up-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --in Germantown? Speaker 2: I think I get my civil rights, I would say, attitude from my dad because he told me that he had a hard time of buying a Cadillac, and this was like in 1950 or so. And I remember he had worked since he was nine years old, so he saved a lot of money because he never went to school, he just worked. So they wouldn't sell it to him because he was an African American. African Americans, at that time, I think they called them--they said, "Negroes do not buy Cadillacs." So he had to fight, and I believe he went to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], it got to be a big thing. But as it turned out, he paid cash because he couldn't get a loan from a bank, because they weren't going to loan him money, but he had saved that much. And it wasn't as much as today, but still was a lot of money back then. But he worked so hard for all those years and that's what he wanted and that story I'll never forget how with his own money, he could not buy a luxury car. Story_ID: 192196 Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father [Earl Wims]? Speaker 2: He was a quiet man, as far as being in the house, but outside, he was pretty talkative. He always had a smile, and I believe I got that from him. I smile a lot when I talk. But he definitely was a hard worker. He, he could--as a matter of fact, I sort of taught him, and it was funny I was the youngest in the family when he was about fifty, to read just a little because he really never learned to read, and still when he died, he--I could--I would say he probably read at a fourth grade level. But, but my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] would help him and do all the work for him because she went all the way, as I said, to twelfth grade and graduated. So with that, he was a proud man. He didn't let people know he couldn't read and--but he was a hard worker, and--but I and my mother did a lot to help sign papers and do those things for him. But he went--he died at eighty-nine years old, so he went through life pretty much accomplishing what he wanted to accomplish without a proper education or formal education. Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: She was sort of the opposite. Now, in her case, although she liked to talk, but she was a leader in her community among African American women. She started, I guess, maybe at eighteen or nineteen in the church, and she was the president of almost everything you can think of over those years. She, as I mentioned, volunteered to help my aunt who was sick when she was, I guess, eighteen and a senior in high school. But I've seen her help many family, non-family members over the years when they were ill, sometimes actually going to the home and staying two or three nights. So she was like a local community nurse, always giving and just a loving person. Story_ID: 192197 Speaker 1: Now how far back can you trace your ancestry? You talked a little bit about your families being in Montgomery County [Maryland] since the 1800s; do you know if you came from free people, slaves or what--how far back can you trace? Speaker 2: On my father's [Earl Wims] side, and we trace it to, like I said, about 1800, they were in fact slaves working as sharecroppers or slaves, I guess, until after the Civil War. But on my mother's [Rachel Stewart Wims] side--and, by the way, there's Wims Road; there's a road named after my father's family in Germantown [Maryland] today. On my mother's side, we have found that her great-grandfather was actually a freed slave; well, he was a freedman and he was able to have this farm with twenty or so acres and, and that started the community called Stewart Town. So you have two families, one free and one not, so--but both in, in a--within a ten-mile radius of each other and I think that's how they met. But we don't know what country from Africa we know we came from, we cannot get those records and the old folks all I can say, they died before my mother could have--could ask for my father. So we could only trace through the cemetery, that's why we know. The tombstones have marked the 1802 and 18--so we know from the cemetery when they were here, but they probably got here earlier. Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your grandparents, starting with your maternal grandparents? Their names-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and if you spent time with them growing up, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: They--on both sides, both my--on both they were deceased when I was born because I'm the youngest again in my family and back because of healthcare, whatever. My grandparents died, I would say both before they were fifty-five, and on both sides actually, on my mother and my father's side. And I think healthcare was probably the reason. Eating poorly and probably stroke or heart attack. Story_ID: 192198 Speaker 1: [HM] Mr. [W. Gregory] Wims, tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I remember because I remember, I said my parents [Earl Wims and Rachel Stewart Wims] had a farm and we had the old house that actually was built in like 1940. So when I really learned about sort of trying to read and so forth in kindergarten, I found out that we, in fact, didn't have electricity. I had no idea because the other kids who lived sort of, I would say, in the town of Gaithersburg [Maryland] had electricity, but we lived sort of back in a wooded area on land that was handed down or given really for 150 years by then. And so that's the first thing I remember, that I read by a lamplight, where all my friends at school, they turned on light with a switch; they had electricity. So I remember that, but also remember that we had a lot of animals around. We didn't have cows by the time I was born. My mother and them gave that up, but we grew the corn and we planted grapes. I remember grape harvests. Also, roses were all over. My mother had a lot of plants, flowers around. I remember that very much growing up, it was very beautiful and to this day, I love flowers and trees and that type of thing. So those are probably the first things as a child, about five years old, when I really realized what was happening. Speaker 1: And can you share some other family memories with us? Like, what were holidays like in your house growing up? Speaker 2: Well, again, my mother being a very Christian and church-type woman, we celebrated--Christmas was a big thing from the spiritual viewpoint. We exchanged gifts and I being the youngest was spoiled, I guess, with a lot of toys, but there was always the emphasis on why we celebrate, you know, about Jesus Christ, et cetera. That was the big one. Easter was almost as big, but of course, it was very important religious-wise, but it was always a thing 'cause we lived in the country; the Easter egg roll, hiding the eggs, that type of thing. Outside of that, Thanksgiving was with all of the family. We have, again, the Wims family and the Stewart family and when you put those together, immediate family you're talking maybe fifty or so people. But there was always a huge--I'm talking about it's for twenty years at Thanksgiving you would have thirty or forty people in one house; most people just outside or down in the basement, whatever, 'cause one house couldn't hold all those people. So we had a great family tradition, and it came really out of the church. The church was a part of all of that. Story_ID: 192199 Speaker 1: And what was a typical day like for you growing up? Speaker 2: Well, as a--in elementary school, it was getting on the school bus, and that brings up a point. Because we lived so far back and people didn't realize that we didn't have electricity, I walked to get to the school bus. My road, but is really the lane to my house, was three-quarters of a mile, so almost a mile. So every day, my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] walked me to the school bus till I got older, and then I'm thinking maybe around fourth grade, I went by myself. But that was something that I remember because to this day, I hate dust, and when I would try to wear nice shoes to go to school, they would always be dirty or dusty by the time I got there. And so, at times, I would literally walk barefoot with shoes in my hand and when I got to the bus stop at the end of the lane, then wipe off my feet or whatever, dust them off, then put my shoes on. And it's something that people laugh at today, but if those--if anyone grew up in the country and they knew--and when it rained, it was all mud, so there's a lot of fond memories, but I hate mud and dust to this day. Now, when I got older, though, it got a little better. And what I remember most was the activities in school. I would get involved in like sports, track or football, those type of things and meet people from different areas and have a lot of new friends. And it was, I guess, when I first went to junior high is when I actually had white friends that would come to the house or I would go to their house, but before that, we would never visit. I would see people at school, but we never really got together as friends outside of school. But when we hit middle school is what they call it now, I called it junior high then, that's something that I'll never forget, where you begin to meet people from different races. Story_ID: 192200 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit--actually, can you give us the names of your siblings and their birth order, including yourself? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] had four boys and they were all twelve years and older than me. So I came really late in the family, and that's why I didn't know my grandparents. But my oldest brother, who's deceased now, his name was Norman Floyd Wims. He decided to make a career out of the [U.S.] Air Force, so he stayed twenty-five years before retiring in the Air Force. And I can't remember exactly when he was born, but I know that when he died just this year, 19- 2004, he was sixty-nine years old. Then there's my other brother two years behind him, Earl Alexandir Wims, Jr., named after my dad--our dad [Earl Wims], and he is now sixty-eight. And then the brother next to me, his name was Gasey, and unfortunately, he died of a heart attack at a young age. He was only fifty, but he was two years younger than the next brother. And then I come behind twelve years later. Speaker 1: And could you spell his name? Speaker 2: Gasey? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: It's G-A-S-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Gasey, just like that-- Story_ID: 192201 Speaker 1: Now, can you kind of describe your community [Gaithersburg, Maryland] for us a little bit? Do you remember the name of the street that you lived on? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I know you lived in a rural area, but there-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was it a street? Speaker 2: It was named--it's very easy because it was named after my grandfather, it's called Stewart Town Road; it's still here in Montgomery County [Maryland]. Today, though, there's a golf course on one side and then there's original owners, my uncles and aunts, who live on the other side. So today, I own two houses that I purchased from family members on Stewart Town Road, the road that I grew up on, and there are three or four different aunts or uncles who have houses along that road. So still there, the history is there and it's called Stewart Town Road in the community called Stewart Town [Gaithersburg, Maryland]. Speaker 1: And what was the community of Stewart Town like? Speaker 2: It was a community of about thirty houses, probably fifteen of those Stewarts, named after my great-grandfather. The others were about four houses from the Plummer family and then the Owens [ph.] family, there were two different houses. And--but we all went to the same church, it was called Stewart Town United Methodist Church [Gaithersburg, Maryland]. We were a close-knit family. We helped each other. When there was major snowstorms or whatever, everyone would get out and try to shovel the snow so cars could get out. And the road--Stewart Town Road probably is one-and-a-half miles in length. So that one road in--with those community about thirty-some houses stretch out about a mile-and-a-half, and again, today is still there. Speaker 1: And did you spend a lot of time with your neighbors growing up, kids in the neighborhood, that kind of thing? Speaker 2: We--it's good you asked that question because we would walk out of the door--of course, we didn't lock the doors in those days when I was a child and just walked to a neighbor's house and played. And now with my daughter, we have to call and make arrangement, call it a playdate. It's one of the most ridiculous things I've ever heard to call somebody to play. We walked and we played and even now, as an adult, because I still own two homes there, it's just a matter of walking over to a neighbor and talking. Everyone's still very friendly. Our roots go back two hundred years, I mean, families. So it's that type of neighborhood that is what we don't see today. Story_ID: 192202 Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up. Speaker 2: Well, the most pleasant smells were of my mother's [Rachel Stewart Wims] rose garden, I would say; I would always love that. And then there were--I don't know, I think you call them seersuckers, but they were these little plants that you could actually pull and you could get some type of sweet taste from as kids used to do that, but they always smelled very good. I remember those very well, and that was pleasant. Something that was awful was the dust. When a car was riding along and you were walking, and it gets in your nostrils, your eyes. I would always hate that and I'll never forget the dust, as I said earlier. And what was the other question? Speaker 1: And sound. What sounds? Speaker 2: Oh, the sound? You know what? I--to this day, I have told a friend that I want to build another house and put a, if I could, a tin roof on. One of the most comforting, relaxing things I had was the sound of raindrops on the tin roof on our house. Remember we had an old house, it was dilapidated actually, but the roof is something that I would never forget. I could sleep so good when it rained, hearing the rain hit that tin-- Story_ID: 192203 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the elementary school years; what was the name of the elementary school you attended? Speaker 2: Well, that's a very interesting story because I started in kindergarten and first grade at an all-black school, and it was called Longview Elementary [School] in Gaithersburg [Maryland]. We passed probably two elementary schools that were white to get there on the bus. But that was a experience of love, nurturing. Everyone felt that they could achieve and it was an excellent experience. And I was there, kindergarten, first, actually in second, three years. But then they changed, what I call the nightmare year of third grade, when schools were integrated. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: I believe--I'm always trying to think, I think it was like '56 [1956], maybe it was longer, but somewhere in there. But it was very difficult because we were called the N-word, most of the African American students on a regular basis. That first year, there were fights and I got in a few and some of my older friends who were in fifth and sixth grade, the same; it was sort of difficult. As years and time went on, by the time I was in the sixth grade, I think we graduated from the end of sixth grade 'cause--from elementary to go to the seventh, it was a little better. But I re--I have a story that I will never forget and I think it stays with me that I was beginning again, like my father [Earl Wims], to speak out on some issues and I told a teacher that I thought she was wrong on something, or maybe I was even, you know, maybe I was out of place, I'm not sure, but the teacher slapped me in my face and, and the expression, I will never forget it. I went home and told my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] and father. My father was very angry, again, and my mother was saying, "Well, did you do something wrong?" Again, my mother was always the Christian type, turn the cheek, my father was different. But he went to the school and they said I did something, but the point was he said that no one was to ever touch me again, and I remember that, and nobody ever touched me as far as a teacher. But I tried to be respectful, but I would always speak my mind, but that's something that I will never forget. But it started getting better in seventh grade and middle school. Things weren't as bad and-- Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to elementary school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now 1956, so Montgomery County [Maryland] integrated-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --pretty quickly-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --because, you know, the decision came down in 1954. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, you know, you hear of places where, you know, integration really didn't place until-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, '60s [1960s], mid-'60s, [1960s], et cetera, so why do you think Montgomery County integrated so quickly? Speaker 2: Well, at the time, Montgomery County was a bedroom community of Washington where a lot of your ed--people with ed--degrees. There were a lot of folks back in those days--the population today is like 900,000; in the '50s [1950s] it was probably something like 200,000, so you had leaders who were well educated and they understood slavery was wrong, also discrimination was wrong and they moved quickly. That was the reason, they were very active, our leaders at that time. And I remember my mother talking about the folks who tried to make sure that housing was provided for people like ourselves 'cause we had a house with no electricity, and education was given to all, so that's probably why it moved fast. But in saying that, though, you still had those pockets because at school, we had those calling us the N-word, we had fights. And we still, although, we were going to integrate at schools, I remember still having to go to the side window or something to eat at the lunch counter because I don't think they actually desegregated, as I call it, or integrated the lunch counters till the '60s [1960s]. I'm almost sure in the '50s [1950s], I was still having that problem with friends or my parents, to not sit at a lunch counter in Gaithersburg. Speaker 1: The lunch counter's in the city? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this is in the city-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --not in the school. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: This is in the town itself. I think that ended in the '60s [1960s] 'cause I remember being a part of that movement as a middle school kid with my older siblings and parents and so forth, with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and that did change probably, like the early '60s [1960s], between '60 [1960] and '63 [1963], I'm almost sure. Story_ID: 192204 Speaker 1: During the elementary school years, what type of child were you? Speaker 2: Again, I--well, average student. Because of my father's [Earl Wims] personality, I was one that challenged things and--but I was still pretty much a--in a good spirit. I'm good spirited, loved people. I didn't let any of that deter me, and I think that's part of the church also, that you love your neighbor. I was a kind of guy I think that felt that I was somebody, that I wasn't what some of the folks--that some of the white students were saying, you know, piece of trash or no good or whatever. I didn't believe that at all. So I think that's the kind of student I was, at that time, in elementary. Speaker 1: And did you have dreams and aspirations at this time in your life? Speaker 2: Well, that's a very good question because at the time I'd have to say, no, honestly. I only thought about church, 'cause that's all I knew in my rural community with the fruits and vegetables, I would call it, you know. And so I didn't know what I was going to do. Speaker 1: And who were some of your friends during the elementary school years? Speaker 2: Well, elementary, it was mostly African American kids, you know, boys and girls from the church and the ones who lived in the Stewart Town community [Gaithersburg, Maryland] and we rode the bus together. At school, there were one or two kids that you could say was a friend, but you couldn't go home with them or they couldn't come. So it was actually, and I tell this story, probably until seventh grade, most of my friends still remained African American, and the network I had was with the African American community. Speaker 1: And what kind of subjects did you enjoy most in school during elementary school years? Speaker 2: Well, in elementary, I enjoyed math, although in high school, I didn't do very well at it and in college, but for some reason mathematics, and we took it on the multiplication. It was intriguing and I really liked to do that and do the homework, and so that was probably the, the best subject for me. Speaker 1: And do you remember some of your teachers? Speaker 2: I remember at the all-black school the teachers, and there was a Mrs. Gordon [ph.] who was very loving, and she actually--she was my kindergarten teacher; took me home with her--my mother gave permission to spend the night with her at one point, so that just shows you how we were. First grade teacher, Mrs. Phillips [ph.], I can remember that. Second grade teacher, I can't remember now, but I do not remember any elementary school teachers when I went to the integrated school. I remember getting slapped, but I couldn't tell you the name of that teacher (laughter). Story_ID: 192205 Speaker 1: And what was the name of the junior high school that you attended? Speaker 2: Well, it was Gaithersburg Junior High [School, Gaithersburg, Maryland] and the elementary was called Gaithersburg Elementary [School, Gaithersburg, Maryland]; everything was Gaithersburg [Maryland]. And so Gaithersburg Junior High was my middle school experience. Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about your experiences at-- Speaker 2: That was-- Speaker 1: --Gaithersburg Middle School. Speaker 2: Things became a little better for me, because I joined the track team and I found out that I was pretty good in what they call the hurdles and--or sprinting. And I think it was middle school 'cause I--in high school, I was one of the leaders, but I believe I was running hurdles, low hurdles in middle school. But I was definitely on the track team, I was on the relay team, and we would win most of our events. Gaithersburg [Maryland], at that time, was known to have the fast sprinters, you know. And it was good because you were sort of popular and you got along--again, you had your problems, and I remember getting in some fights in the gym because someone would use the N-word again; most of the stuff happened in the gym and outside. But for the most part, it was more positive. The teachers tried to encourage you to study and do something and it was a thing where, you know, you begin to look at the opposite sex. So it was a time I began to say, "Oh, I want to try to get a girlfriend by phone," because again, being rural and the Christian household, you couldn't have a girlfriend, but you could have a girlfriend to talk to on the phone. So I remember that about middle school, I began to look at things a little different. Speaker 1: And who was influencing you-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: --during middle school? Speaker 2: The whole time--actually, elementary and middle school, it was really the pastor or the deacons at the church 'cause teachers were good and--but, again, for maybe racism maybe, whatever, after school you really didn't see them or hear from them. But you always see the preacher or the deacons, because you would see them even at home coming to visit if someone was sick. Or we had youth clubs and so forth, where you have to go during the middle of the week to church, you know, to do something and then on Sundays you would go. So my influence really always, up to high school, maybe changed a little, was the church family. Story_ID: 192206 Speaker 1: So I think we were talking a little bit about--yeah, we were talking a little bit about junior high school [Gaithersburg Junior High School, Gaithersburg, Maryland]; tell me a little--did you have--start to have dreams and aspirations then? Like, what were you thinking you wanted to be when you grew up? Speaker 2: Okay. I think as--in ninth grade going into the tenth, at the very end of junior high, this is going to sound crazy, but it's all I had was I wanted to be a bus driver. And it was a school bus driver because remember my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] was a domestic cleaning houses, my father [Earl Wims] was a hard laborer working very hard, and the people that I noticed that had a job that paid a little bit more and was a little more easy was a school bus driver for the school system. So pretty much from ninth, tenth and eleventh grade, I pretty much said to my parents, "Well, I'm going to be a bus driver," and that was it. Things changed though in twelfth grade, but to answer your question, a bus driver. Speaker 1: Okay. So let's talk a little bit about high school now; what-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --was the name of the high school you attended? Speaker 2: Gaithersburg Senior High [School, Gaithersburg, Maryland]. Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your experiences there. Speaker 2: Well there, again, I--because of the track team, I played football. I was a popular student and like today, I guess anyone that's on the football team or the track team and you're a starter, you know, you're popular, so I had my confidence building. I had fairly good grades, Bs, Cs, for the most part. You know, considering that, you know, my dad couldn't read, and I'm looking when I say that, A's and Bs are the best, but looking where I'm coming from, you know. My parents were proud of me and I was pretty proud that I was making progress and I wanted to be that bus driver. But then in the eleventh grade, and I call it intervention, you know, spiritual intervention from God, something just said, "No, we want you to look at trying to go to college and study a little more." So my grades actually, at this latter part and then in the twelfth grade, were like A's and Bs and I was able to get an interview with someone at the local college; it's the junior college, called Montgomery Junior College [later Montgomery College, Rockville, Maryland] then, to talk about possibly scholarships and financial aid because my parents couldn't-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --afford it. Speaker 1: --hold that thought. Speaker 2: Okay. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: We'll come back to that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But let's go back to around the beginning of high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers in high school? Speaker 2: I remember, but the sports teachers. Mr. Hubbell [ph.] was the guy in P.E. [physical education] and he was the wrestling coach; Mr. Harvard [ph.], who's still living, was the football coach; and Mr. Hannon [ph.] was the track coach. I remember those names because that was important to me, football and track, but the other teachers I could not tell you their names. Speaker 1: And what were some of your favorite subjects in high school? Speaker 2: That switched. My favorite subject in high school was history. I loved to find out about the conquerors, you know, the--[Christopher] Columbus. You know, you name it, history was exciting and I pretty much got A's in history all through high school, because I really read and participated in, in those classes. Speaker 1: And what were some of the things--how, how were you spending your time? After you got out of school, what were some of the things you enjoyed doing? Speaker 2: Well, we still, up until the eleventh grade, lived in the, the old house and this was something that I wouldn't tell people where I lived in high school because they would laugh and tease me. But it was a house with no electricity, 'till the eleventh grade. And so what I would do is after school, I would either be at practice for football or track, depending on the season, but I would go home, but I wouldn't ever bring anybody home with me. So at home, I would do my homework, read, maybe help my mother around the house, and that was pretty much it until we went to a church meeting in the evenings, that type of thing. So it was mostly again, church, homework and just friends and family from the neighborhood. Speaker 1: And when did your family move or did the family-- Speaker 2: We moved when I went to the twelfth grade, my senior year, because development caught up with us and they were building all around us these beautiful homes. There were--there was a planned community called Montgomery Village, which I think has 25,000 people now, and our house was right in the middle of it. So the county [Montgomery County, Maryland] came and actually told us we had to move, condemned our house and they actually burnt the house down. And so we moved to an apartment-- Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: This was in--I can tell you exactly, it was the year before I graduated, it was in 1967, 'cause I graduated in '68 [1968]. And we moved to an apartment complex with a swimming pool and so forth, so I was able to, for the first time, do my homework with a regular lightbulb. Speaker 1: What was that like for you to move into a home with-- Speaker 2: Actually, it was great because I could invite friends over and not be em--I could invite friends, my mother always told me to, but I was embarrassed, actually. And I think, if you think about it, you have the--98 percent of people living in nice homes or at least with electricity and yeah, my home with an oil light, lamplight and actually falling down, that's why they condemned it. You know, so it was a great experience, and I invited people to come by. And then from there on, from there that was it, it was nothing to be ashamed of anymore. Speaker 1: Um-hm-- Story_ID: 192207 Speaker 1: And so were you involved in any clubs in high school [Gaithersburg Senior High School, Gaithersburg, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Well, mostly sports then. I didn't join like the glee club or anything like that, it was athletics was my thing. And we--in church, I was involved in several clubs at church, that was--they kept me busy after school. Speaker 1: And who was influencing you around the high school years? Was it the same? Speaker 2: Okay. In high school, you still have this faith-based comm--you know, leaders, as I could call it, but I began to look more towards some of the civil rights leaders. And I'm not sure at the time, and I--I'm--well, I'm almost sure 'cause [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], 'cause he died and was assassinated in '68 [1968], I remember that well. But he was one that I looked towards and said, "Yes, we need to have more freedoms and we shouldn't be treated poorly," and there were others, [Ralph] Abernathy; I mean, I remember those. Eleventh and twelfth grade, I really--'cause remember, I loved history, so I began to get into civil rights and those were the leaders. And locally, we had a lady named Mrs. Edith Throckmorton, who was the president of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I think she was president like for twenty years; she was a hero of mine and a woman leader, and back then, you know, women weren't as--leaders in a lot of areas, but she was one also that influenced me. So the civil rights leaders outside of the church community. Speaker 1: And do you remember Dr. King's death? Speaker 2: I remember it very well, because I remember crying. I was very sad. And I remember my--oh, I should tell you before that, my uncle and aunt took me with them to the March on Washington and I think I was maybe fourteen, maybe thirteen, but they took me. My parents [Rachel Stewart Wims and Earl Wims], and I'm not sure why, maybe they were working or something, I don't know it was a Saturday, but I went to that march, so I got to see Dr. King and a lot of other people then and that was something that I'll never forget. So I remember when he died, I was very sad because I had seen him in Washington D.C. Speaker 1: What did you think about the March on Washington? Speaker 2: I thought it was awesome to see. All those people, again, 'cause coming out of the faith base and our church was part--we went as a group from the church, but it was my aunt and uncle that took me and we talked a lot about loving your neighbor and working and all that type of thing. And then I liked the fact too 'cause my father always said we should not be treated differently, that we were fighting and I was proud of fighting for civil rights where we could go where we wanted to, buy cars as we wanted to, and go to the school that we wanted to go to. So it was a very important thing for me, and I think that meant a lot to me in the--my--as I got to become an adult. Story_ID: 192208 Speaker 1: So now tell us a little bit, you had started a story, what were your thoughts about college? What were you thinking about college? Speaker 2: Well, I thought up until the eleventh grade that I was going to drive a bus and actually, I love to drive today, so it's still a part of my (unclear). But some people talked to me and I believe running track and, and being one of the better--I think I was the number one hurdler, at least, at my school and in the county, I think I was in the top five of all Montgomery County [Maryland], so people talked about maybe a scholarship, that type of thing. But what really determined, I went to the college and met a guy named Herm Davis, I'd love to get him. Mr. Davis, he was the financial aid director and he pretty much took me under his wing. I guess he saw something in me and said, "You're going to go to this school and don't worry about the money." And so I knew about midway through the twelfth grade that I was going to Montgomery College [Rockville, Maryland.] I got a Pell grant, which we understand, and I got a small loan, but then they gave me work study, which means between Pell grant and working at the college and the small loan, I was able to pay for it totally. And that was the best thing that ever happened because if I continue the story, when I was a sophomore, my second year, I got involved in politics, my--personally. I ran for vice president of the State of Maryland's Youth Council. It was under the governor, and I traveled all over the state campaigning to colleges to--and I won the election. And so I became the vice chair, now we call it, for the governor's Youth Advisory Committee and we met with the governor twice a year, but two times a year we met with the secretary of--it was called economic development then, but they had the Youth Council under it. So every quarter, we would go to Annapolis [Maryland] and meet in the governor's office, but we would meet with the governor or the cabinet member and that started all of my political life. Speaker 1: Were you one of the only blacks? Speaker 2: Yeah. Believe it or not, there was an African American man and he's now, I think he still is, a state senator in Baltimore that won the presidency; his name was--I'm drawing a blank, but he was a state senator later. He kept in politics when I got out of politics. So there were two of us, but everybody else was, was white, but the guy from Baltimore won and I won as his vice president. Speaker 1: And what were you studying at Montgomery College? Speaker 2: Political science 'cause I wanted politics, so that was my area, political science. Speaker 1: And what were some of your favorite subjects at Montgomery College? Speaker 2: Well, again, because it's political science classes, but the other one that was interesting was psychology. I learned about mind over matter and to this day, I don't have hurdles in front of me. I say, "I can do it." I concentrate and I pray also now today, but that was very, very important for me, those psychology classes. Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about the atmosphere at Montgomery College; it's the largest college in the State of Maryland-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --community college. Speaker 2: Right. And it's now called Montgomery College. Tremendous atmosphere. Hardly saw any racism. All the professors encouraged us all. The students, everyone, white, black, Asian, no one--and now, by the way today, in 2004, it's one of the most diverse in the nation for 150 countries, I think represented. But when I was there, it was mostly black, white and some Asians, hardly any Hispanics; but everyone was motivated. And I knew then that I was going to be more than a bus driver because of course, I'm in college. So I worked pretty hard and it gave me an opportunity to move to the next level because when I became that youth vice president, I decided that I would try to get more involved with the county. And believe it or not, I'm still in college, but I transferred after two years to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I was appointed--I'm almost sure it was in the second year at Howard, I was appointed to the Montgomery County Human Relations Commission. And to this day, I'm the youngest person in the history of Montgomery County, you know 200 years, to get an appointment where the county executive, which is like the mayor of my community, nominated me, but the county council voted on me. So I had to go to a hearing and I had to testify be--as a twenty--I was twenty-one at the time, before the council and said I would work well, I believe in civil rights. And they were impressed with me because they knew I was a vice-pres--vice chair of the governor's Youth Advisory Committee for the State [of Maryland]. So, although I was young, they knew I had some experience and because of my civil rights work with Mrs. [Edith] Throckmorton with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as a high school kid, I was able to be--well I made it through, so I would serve for four years as commissioner on the Human Rights Commission. So all of that happened in college while I was studying. Story_ID: 192209 Speaker 1: And what were some of the issues you all dealt with on the Human Rights Commission? Speaker 2: The most important issue and I think as history will sell it, I believe, I was instrumental and, of course, we worked with other commissioners, so I don't want to think I was the only one, but no doubt like my father [Earl Wims], running my mouth out front as a young man, about twenty-three then, after being on it two years, we were able to get more African Americans on the police force. Because when I started on that, on that commission, there was only one African American policeman in all of Montgomery County [Maryland] and we fought very hard and we had press conferences then, and again, I'm very young, to talk about it. And we were able to get several more of them before I left and then as I moved on, there--a lot more came. But that was probably the most important issue for me, getting the--our--the committee was called the Criminal Justice Committee, but to get African American officers on the force. Speaker 1: And so when you transferred to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], what were your experiences like at Howard? Was--were they drastically different than Montgomery County? Speaker 2: No, because Montgomery County again, everyone was supportive and at Howard, it was just the next extension except for you had mostly African American teachers and students, but everyone again, that I associated with, was motivated to make something and do something with their life. And so I saw it as just an extension of carrying out the goals that I had set then and that was to be in politics, I call it, but it's really civil rights that I actually was in, it wasn't politics. And it was a great experience. And actually, I dropped out of Howard. I stopped in my junior year. I do not have a degree to this day. I decided that, that I wanted to get married, was the first and most important thing, but also, to start working like my dad, I guess he gave me that too. I wanted to work and provide for my family, but I thought then after coming out of Howard, and remember being the vice president of a State of Maryland thing, and being a commissioner at the young age of then twenty-two, that I could pretty much start a business and do whatever I wanted. And as it turned out, I actually worked probably for twelve years for somebody else until I did start my business. I eventually started my own business, but I dropped out in my junior year at Howard. Speaker 1: So was that 1972? Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], actually, I think, was when I finished--it might've been '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Probably was '72 [1972], now that I think of it, that I actually ended my formal education-- Speaker 1: Um-hm-- Story_ID: 192210 Speaker 1: So what did you do next? After you left Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], what did you do? Speaker 2: Well, it was a great opportunity for me, it was in working. I was hired as the--I think they called it coordinator for the University of Maryland's Extension Service 4-H program in Montgomery County [Maryland] for low-income families. And what the meant was that we work through 4-H Clubs. I was charged with, and I think had a secretary at the time, to establish clubs in the pockets--poverty pockets of Montgomery County. And we identified about six areas that were historical communities like Stewart Town [Gaithersburg, Maryland] where I grew up, so it was easy for me because I knew the pockets because there were people like myself. And it was a very good paying job, excellent benefits. Again, I'm twenty-three or whatever, I don't know at that time. And I stayed there for four years and really loved it. And I also took classes at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] for free, so although I really stopped, I call the formal, I never stopped going--taking classes 'cause I could get them for free, so I took classes at the University of Maryland. Speaker 1: And so after you left there, what did you do next? Speaker 2: Then it was like, again, I have to thank God for this because my whole world changed. In 1996, I took a chance-- Speaker 1: Or '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, '76 [1976]. I'm sorry, 1976, I should tell you this, my wife worked and I worked and we had one child at the time, but we saved our money and we were able to build a house on our own land, the land that I had purchased from my family that had been there for 200 years. I built--we built a house. It was a beautiful house actually, for that time. It was a four-bedroom brick rambler, and if you remember coming out of--let's see, most of the people had the old--like we had old houses and so forth, so it was a major accomplishment for me and my wife at the age, I think, of twenty-five or twenty-six at the time. So I say that to say that I took a chance with my wife's permission to quit my job and campaign for a politician by the name of Newton Steers, and I was a Democrat, but he was a Republican and he was running for [U.S.] Congress. And I quit three months out before the election and he hired me on his staff at a minimum fee, but I believed in him because he spoke at my church and I said, "You know, this guy really has some great ideas and I think he's going to be great for everybody, African Americans, as well as whites." So all my friends and my parents [Earl Wims and Rachel Stewart Wims], they thought I was crazy. You have this brand new house, one of the most beautiful houses in the community, you have a baby and a wife and you're quitting your job. And I said, "Well, I believe that this is what I need to do." And again, I think God intervened and told me. So to make a long story short, he won the election, a very close election; 200,000 people voted and he won by 10,000 votes. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: But I played a major role and, and he credits me and to this day, others who remember that campaign say, "[HM W.] Greg[ory Wims], I think you delivered about 12,000 of those votes yourself," because I worked hard. And I had another stake 'cause I knew, I said, "Man, if I--if he loses, I'm really up the creek." But he won and although there was no commitment to hire me, he hired me and I was the first, again, African American professional in Montgomery County's history to go to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. I worked for him as his legislative assistant and until 1976, when he, when he won, but I actually started in '77 [1977] 'cause the election was in November. We all was--went to work in '76 [1976], January, you know, they had the inauguration of I think the president. It was a presidential election that year also. So, again, history, the first African American professional to work on Capitol Hill rep--from Montgomery County in Congress. But, you know, there's something I missed that I didn't mention. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: In 1974, two years prior, I was a 4-H coordinator, I also became the first male Head Start teacher in Montgomery County. And so, actually, I was the first African American, but I was also the first male because there had never been a male at all teaching Head Start. And I did that and did the 4-H, I had two jobs at the same time, and that's how we were able to buy--build a house. But it's history and to this day, I do whatever I can volunteering and mentoring with Head Start programs in my spare time because that's something I was an actual teacher in Montgomery County, certified Head Start teacher. Remember, I didn't have a degree so I couldn't be an elementary kindergarten and up, but at that time, you could teach Head Start at Montgomery County and I was full rights, full union or whatever it was, but it was Head Start. And so--but I resigned from all of that to campaign and then I went to Capitol Hill in January of 1997 [sic, 1977]-- Story_ID: 192211 Speaker 1: And so what office was Newton Steers running for--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a United States Congressman. He was a representative--official United States representative representing the 8th Congressional District [of Maryland] which today, Congressman Chris Van Hollen represents. Very prestigious position, and I worked with him for two years, and then he was defeated. The Democrats came back and beat him, but again for me, it was a blessing because then I went to work for the congressman from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands. So I was actually a staffer on Capitol Hill and help-- Speaker 1: What, what-- Speaker 2: --set up-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: His name was Congressman Melvin Evans. But the Virgin Islands actually, and Puerto Rico and Guam, they don't have a vote like Eleanor Holmes Norton of D.C., so they're called delegates, but they are congressmen. So I was the legislative assistant for the delegate from the Virgin Islands and I help set up the office for him because he was an incoming freshman. Because I had worked on Capitol Hill for two years, my primary responsibility was to set his office up, to show him the ropes and then once he got established, I was a legislative aide again, dealing with matters dealing with the islands in the Caribbean [Sea], et cetera. Speaker 1: And so you worked for Congressman Evans from 1978 until-- Speaker 2: 'Til 1980. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 192212 Speaker 1: And then, again, another blessing. I took another chance. This time I didn't quit my job, I worked on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], but I actually went out and volunteered to work for then governor Ronald [Wilson] Reagan in California. So I would travel to California at my own expense and do a little campaigning on weekends and so forth, then I came back home and then he started--of course, he won the nomination, so I campaigned, you know, wherever I could go. I mean, I went to New York, I went to Georgia. Speaker 2: And why did you want to campaign for President [Ronald Wilson] Reagan? Speaker 1: Because now remember, I worked for a Republican in '76 [1976] while I was a Democrat, but I switched my party to the Republican in 19--two years later when the Dem--when the Republican from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, because he was a Republican also, and I said, "You know, the Republicans actually are who I work for now," so I switched to the Republican party. So when Reagan won it, I was a Republican, but I thought he could win. I think he ran against [George Herbert Walker] Bush in the primary. And because I started so early, I actually knew, very well, Ed Meese, [William J.] Casey, the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] director, all these people you hear about, the Kitchen Cabinet, those like Mrs.--I'm drawing a blank, but she was very big with Bloomingdale's. All those people knew me very well because here I am, a young African American campaigning for Ronald Reagan who wasn't getting a lot of African American support. And so when he was elected, they gave me one of the most visible jobs at the inaugural where I was the director of what they call the information visitors center. But at the time, because security wasn't like it is today, it was actually where all the security people worked for me to screen badges and so forth, coming in. Now, the CIA and all those people, they were at the next level behind me, but I was sort of the front. And so we would talk to the media. We would let people go in to visit the president or whoever, and this was all during the inaug--president-elect, I should say, during the inaugural. And with that, I was able to meet--I met a lot of senators. I met so many people, it was unbelievable. So when the president was, was sworn in, again, I'm in the first 200, my first job in February of '80 [1980]--'80 [1980], I guess it was, when he won, '81 [1981], I think actually when the--well, whenever the president was sworn in, it was--I was a--'cause I'm coming from Capitol Hill, I was in the legislative affairs office of the secretary of agriculture, his name was John [Rusling] Block. And for three years, I dealt with the Hill as a--I call it a lobbyist, but I was actual legis--legislative liaison for the committees, the agricultural committee and representing the president and secretary of agriculture. So, again, now you see I'm getting all kinds of experience, agriculture stuff, and all that, I've had the islands, Caribbean experience with that, you know, so it's coming. So in 20--well, '83 [1983] or three years later-- Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you this. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So how did you enjoy working for President Reagan? Speaker 1: I enjoyed it because--you have to remember, I knew everybody, so I was advising the White House [Washington, D.C.] many times. To this day, I have some artifacts that if I put on eBay, I could get a lot of money. I have so many cuff links, napkins, things you wouldn't believe because I'm just in and out of the White House all the time, but my son that--remember I said I had a son? He actually participated against twelve--there were thirteen people in a race at the Easter egg hunt at the White House the second year that Mr. Reagan was in and Ed Meese was the bunny rabbit at the time, just to give you a little--most people don't know that because he was in a bunny suit, but I know because I worked there. But my son won the Easter egg roll, the official one, and he has to this day an egg signed by Nancy [Davis Reagan] and Ronald Reagan that's wooden. A wooden egg, I would never (unclear) with their original signatures on for the winner, and that is another artifact. So I enjoyed working for him because I was in and out. We were doing things we thought that would make the country better and it was a tremendous experience; but remember, I'm now like thirty-something years old, African American from Gaithersburg [Maryland] who wanted to be a bus driver up until the tenth grade, so, so I enjoyed it. Speaker 2: And what was your family thinking about this? Speaker 1: They were very proud of me because Montgomery County [Maryland]--remember, I was the very first African American professional working on Capitol Hill; I think it's safe to say, I was probably the first Montgomery County African American to work for a President of the United States, but I'm not quite sure, but I know about the, the congressional. But they were very proud and at the church, the pastor would always say we have someone, although sometimes he would disagree with Ronald Reagan, he'd say, "We're so proud to have one of ours though working for the president." So I had a lot of respect in the community. Story_ID: 192213 Speaker 1: And so how long did you stay with the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan Administration? Speaker 2: Well, all through--I stayed with Reagan all eight years, and I was able to--in my last--probably, the sixth and--sixth through the eighth year before he--I guess he had to leave office, he gave me a new appointment and I was at the top of my grade, which was of course very good for my family. But I was the special assistant to the, to the director of the 8(a) program for the SBA [Small Business Administration]. The official title was the Small Business Administration Office of Minority and Economic Development, but my job was to work and assist running the national program and certifying minority businesses to be in the program. And as an 8(a) participant with the federal government-- Speaker 1: Tell us what 8(a) is. Speaker 2: Okay. Actually, it's--it comes from the small business act of 19-something, and there's an 8(a) section. And in that section of the small business act passed by congress and signed by the president, minority firms, and that way you had to be the majority owner, African American, Hispanic, Asian, you could have-- Speaker 1: Or a woman? Speaker 2: Or, or--well, minority woman at the time, when I was there. Now, it's a woman, but at the time, it was a minority woman. Could get or bid on contracts without bidding against the larger white firms. So let's say there was a contract for $2 million with the [U.S.] Department of the Navy, which there were a lot of, they would set that aside in some cases--again, ten percent of the budget was supposed to go to this program and only minorities would compete, or in some cases, get sole source contracts and that helped really push the economic engine for minorities; again Asians, Hispanics and African Americans across the nation because when I was there, I know I personally certified and signed letters for or with my boss of about 3,000 firms. And this program has gone on and on, so I would say that they maybe--there have been like say maybe 10,000, as a low number, firms who have participated. Now they're all over the country finding jobs for people, so--but that was a very rewarding job and that's what I did and did it on behalf of the president because he was the president at the time. Speaker 1: And so what are your thoughts about 8(a)? Because some people say that, you know, 8(a) really cripples minority firms, in terms of like just going after government contracts and once it's over and-- Speaker 2: Well, at the time, remember when it was just starting, Parren Mitch--Congressman [HM] Parren [J.] Mitchell [III] from Baltimore [Maryland] started it all, really probably--well, actually, [President] Richard [Milhous] Nixon started it and so, again, it really came from Richard Nixon and the Nixon administration, that's what most people don't realize. But Parren Mitchell was a congressman and he fought hard to get Richard Nixon to go along with it. So when Parren Mitchell, Democrat African American, President Nixon said, okay, it was passed. So to make a long story short, at the time the program was needed because of discrimination throughout the nation. You had your urban areas like L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and Washington [D.C.], yeah, there are firms that could compete and could do things, but everywhere else, it was very hard for an African American firm or an Asian firm to really get the big dollars, half a million and up. So it was worthwhile, but I think some of the changes that are made for today was good to help because what they say now is that when you get into your seventh year of nine years in the 8(a) program, you have to wean off or cut back on your sole source government contracts and bid and compete for non-government. It's a good thing because it makes the firm focus on being like all the other firms. So I stand by the program. I think it's working well. It's a little different now too that now white women who are disadvantaged, like you could be from Appalachia, and I'll use that because someone from West Virginia who is very poor can get in the program, so it's pretty much open now to all the minorities. So, so it's a little harder, harder to get a contract because you have so many people looking at that small 10 percent, but you have the wider pool, but I still think it's a great program that provides jobs and some income for minority businesses. Story_ID: 192214 Speaker 1: Well, actually, let me ask you this, when were you starting to become involved in civil rights issues? Speaker 2: Okay. I started as a child with my--going to the March in Washington, and then when I actually got involved with actually sitting at the counters and so forth, that was probably about the same time, high school [Gaithersburg Senior High School, Gaithersburg, Maryland] you could say, in there. But officially, because later I actually got involved in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I was probably--the second year with Newton--Congressman Newton Steers, that was when I actually joined committees or, you know, was a dues paying member of the NAACP for Montgomery County [Maryland]. So I guess I was in my thirties then, but I had started as a teenager doing things. Speaker 1: So tell me, we didn't talk at all about like trying to integrate the lunch counters; what was that like in Montgomery County in the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: For--it was difficult because you had people refusing to serve you and then the police would come and escort you out. In my case, they didn't lock us up, they just said we had to leave and we left. So we came back again and then eventually, they just said, "Look, okay, that's it." And so it was exciting because again, I'm a young person--a teenager at the time and involved in something that was meaningful. But it was scary also, because the police would come and you didn't know if they actually were going to arrest you or not, but it worked out fairly well. And after that, it--things just seemed to get a little better. But housing turned out to be the big issue. Eating at the counter was one thing; just living in a neighborhood that you want to live in was the other, and I think that's when I really got involved because of the housing; and education, getting the proper or the same type of education everybody was getting in integrated schools. Speaker 1: So--okay, so after you left the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration in 1989, what did you do next? Speaker 2: Okay. That's when I started my company, called Hammer and Nails, Inc. It's a management consulting firm helping small businesses work with the federal government, 'cause you see, I have an expertise now on knowing the government and helping firms from around the nation actually, that they don't know anything about Washington D.C., and that's what we do at Hammer and Nails, Inc. The reason it's Hammer and Nails is because we started working exclusive with construction firms, but now I pretty much would work with anyone. If say a IT [information technology] firm out of Oklahoma said, I heard that you know your way around Washington, we need some introductions to various members of Congress or cabinet members, those are things that I can do. And I'm happy with the firm and also, it gives me an opportunity to do my volunteer work in civil rights and others that we'll talk about later, but with the NAACP because I'm my own boss. I was able to run for vice president of the local chapter and won-- Speaker 1: And what year was that? Speaker 2: I'm drawing a blank on the year, but-- Speaker 1: The early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: --but I'm sure--yes, when you say that, like '91 [1991], '92 [1992], because I became president of the chapter. I ran again. That's the politics in me though, political part of me, and I won as the--to be the president and I was the youngest president. Again, in history again, to be elected by a vote of members in the county, and I think it was '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994] you became president. Speaker 2: Oh, it was '94 [1994]? Okay. I think that was for the State of Maryland; I think in the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Montgomery County-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, that paper doesn't say it, but in '92 [1992], I became president of the Montgomery County chapter and I was the youngest president. Then in '94 [1994], I left the county chapter and ran for the state president and won that and was the youngest president-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at that time. Story_ID: 192215 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your involvement with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the early '90s [1990s], so around '92 [1992] or so. You were very active fighting against discrimination at the National Institutes of Health [NIH]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Bethesda [Maryland]; tell us a little bit about-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --how that all came about. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, first I have to go back to my father [Earl Wims] being a fighter, although, he only went to the third grade and that's always been in me. And then with the great experience that I like to say, from Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], four years, and then with the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration working at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and that; as a matter of fact, I even traveled abroad, went to Africa, to several countries as an ambassador for the president. There was a lot of things that I learned and did in those eight years working for President Reagan. When the NAACP first approached me to work with them, I used all that knowledge that I had, one in recruiting members. And when I first--well, actually, I was--I said I was the vice president, I was actually the director of membership for the NAACP, locally, Montgomery County [Maryland] from '90 [1990]--probably '90 [1990] to '91 [1991], for about two years. And then that's when I ran for president because I had brought in 1,000 members; it's like unheard of, anywhere in the nation. If you think about it, ask that--an individual bring in 1,000 members-- Speaker 1: How were you so successful with your recruiting? Speaker 2: Because I learned the marketing skills again, working on Capitol Hill and understanding media and relationships and working with the president and with the companies around the nation. I just had a feel for how to present material. I would sell information. And so I would present the NAACP as the only avenue for civil rights and that I made a commitment to them that we would work and not just be a paper tiger, and people believed then that message and so we--and we did some things. But when I became president, I had watched from my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] cleaning houses of doctors and scientists at NIH, how they had an opinion that they were like God; that they were more important than anybody. And so I've never forgotten that part, that they were human beings like all of us. If you--in an auto accident, you bleed like everybody else if you--and when I was at NI--the president of NAACP, the first group of people that came to me, they were literally thirty women and about--there were thirty-five guys saying, "We're being discriminated against. We cannot get, in the janitorial thing, permanent status, we're, we're indentured servants," as I called it. Now, see, they were--what they were, they were contract employees, five, ten years some of them, no health insurance, no benefits at all. They worked for a salary, you know, and it was ridiculous, in the federal government. The women who came, I cannot move as a secretary to the next level, get a grade raise say from a GS-5 [General Schedule] to a GS-7 because a white woman would come in, I would train her and then she would move ahead to maybe a GS-7 and that would happen almost every time with the women 'cause there's always white women against the women. And then some of the other guys who happened to be, sort of, maybe professional, a few, not that many, first came to me, they were a GS-9, which is still low, but they couldn't get the promotions just because of racism. So with that information, I held a meeting and asked people to come, and to my surprise, one hundred employees came to the meeting and they all had stories; I mean, I couldn't believe it. I said one hundred people, would you certify--would you sign a letter saying that you have been discriminated--and from there on I was so outraged as the leader. We had to talk--we were working with the NAACP, we had to get permission from the executive board said, "This is the issue. I would like to have a press conference and I would like to denounce all of this." And the folks who had been there for years said, "Well, we have heard of these things, but until you came and really put it all together, we didn't realize it was this widespread." So they gave me permission and we went down and what was so big about this where it go to be a national story and an international story, the employees came out with me to the press conference, and that had never been heard of, where people who worked for the government would come out and fight against the government. And we ended up going back because nothing would happen, each week for three weeks and it grew to 200 employees, stood with me and the NAACP in that third week, and then the lady, the director said, "Yes, we have a problem." Speaker 1: And was it Bernadine Healy at that time? Speaker 2: Bernadine Healy. She was one of the few people in all my NAACP history would admit that they were doing something wrong and said, "Yes, we have a problem. We're going to work it out." And it turned out that we helped a lot of those people and it was a great experience. But there was actually a public hearing on Capitol Hill. Congressman Albert Wynn, an African American congressman who rep-- Speaker 1: From Maryland? Speaker 2: --from Maryland, who now is part of the Congressional Black Caucus, held hearings to talk and called the scientists and doctors in and my statement was, "These guys are not God. They should treat us taxpayers, although, we're working there, as human beings." I remember that statement. And we had some things changed. Story_ID: 192216 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit more about that; were you at all concerned about taking on the federal government? Speaker 2: I wasn't concerned because, you remember--and in the past, and I'm not saying this in a negative way about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and even today, you have people though who come out of the church community, the faith-based community, for the most part. You don't have a lot of businesspeople at the leadership role. And if you look across the nation, you'll say, you know, you're right, it's educators and preachers or deacons. I'm coming from the White House [Washington, D.C.], remember, and understand how to sort of push the envelope, how to deal with committees and congressional hearings and all that and also, with the SBA [Small Business Administration], knowing about business and my own company. So I wasn't concerned at all once I found out that it was a fact that they were discriminating against all these people because I knew that the laws were in my favor. And with the public attention that was given and the public hearing at the congressional level, it worked. So it didn't bother me at all because I guess I had the training from my previous work. Speaker 1: And were you finding that the discrimination was pervasive among African Americans, all African Americans at NIH [National Institutes of Health], or just African Americans who were in some of the lower paying jobs? Speaker 2: Well, in every se--they call them labs at the NIH, which by the way is one of the world premier health institutions, I want to say that and I said that then, fighting cancers or stroke, asthma, you name it. It was widespread. You didn't have maybe as many in some of the upper echelons, because there weren't that many African Americans either, but every lab had its problem, so it was widespread and that's why 200 people came out and filed complaints and supported us. Even today, though, I'm not there--this was like maybe six or seven years ago, there's problems still, but it's much better than what it was. Speaker 1: And were you at all feeling any backlash from the community? Because, you know, NIH is--was a--is-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a big employer of the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the community. Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: As a businessman or in general, as a citizen too. Speaker 2: I will say that there were those who didn't like what I was doing, even within the NAACP because it was this--like a sacred cow. The NIH is--it's wonderful, it is today, but once they heard the evidence, and then when Mrs. [Bernadine] Healy said, "Yes, I agree with the NAACP," everyone came on board, "We need to do something to fix it." If she hadn't come on board and said, "No, we don't have a problem," you--I'd probably see more of a backlash, but she was true to herself and to the employees and said, "Yeah, there's a problem. You have 200 people standing in front of my building who work here saying I'm being discriminated against." That was a problem. Because usually with NAACP, you have one to maybe five people. They're small groups that complain about emotions or sexual harassment, whatever it is; when you get 200 people, all the complaints, and I would say 98 percent were legitimate. They--you know, there's always some that are not, but 98 percent were real complaints so it worked out pretty well. Speaker 1: And this was also elevating you somewhat personally on a national--I mean, you were becoming recognized nationally, that kind of thing; what kind of impact did it have on you personally? Speaker 2: I have to say that it didn't faze me at all, like the media attention, maybe going on CNN or something, because remember my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] and father [Earl Wims] had me grounded in the church and we learned that you have to be humble and that's why sometime when I'm telling this story, I try to do it the humble way and thank God for everything because if not, you will lose it all and, and I, to this day, I know that if you go and you don't give God the glory and so on, it just takes it from you. So I--that part didn't faze me, but I knew that I was popular when I would go to the grocery store and people would stop you and talk to you and--but I would always talk to them, you know. And I have to say, my family members, brothers, you know, they always said, "Why are you talking to all these people?" 'Cause they want to do whatever they're doing. I say, "Well, because you have to talk to them. They all have concerns." So to answer your question, it didn't faze me at all, but I did realize that I was becoming popular and, and in a way, getting certain powers with the NAACP; it wasn't me, it was with the organization and I understood that also. Story_ID: 192217 Speaker 1: And what other things did you accomplish with the Montgomery County [Maryland] NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Well, this is the part that you didn't ask, was, that it actually frightened me, and I'm glad to go on tape with it. The next big issue was GEICO [Government Employees Insurance Company] auto insurance which is a monster of a company, I mean, a big company nationwide owned by Warren Buffett, one of the richest men in the world. We had an employee that come to say that he was discriminated against and he brought with him some sensitive documents showing that they were redlining some African American communities as it related to homeowners' insurance. And I went after them through the NAACP again, and we had about a hundred this time going, and they fought me very hard. They said everything was not true, it was a lie, and of course, I had the documentation, I could eventually produce it because the employee gave it to us. But we were very afraid, because Warren Buffett is very powerful. We didn't know what would happen, and then myself personally, I didn't know because, you know, you hear people who fight the establishment that things happen to them, but I kept praying and the community stayed with us. And we went out for two weeks in a row there, with a hundred people, then we finally came to the table and negotiated and as it turned out we worked where they said they still weren't redlining, but they would make sure. And they had the brochures and they had things and they spent money in the community to say they wouldn't do this as it related to homeowners' insurance. So--and we actually today, I should say after that story, have a very good relationship with the--with GEICO. And as I moved to my other volunteer areas, the GEICO was one of my better sponsors for me, [HM W.] Greg[ory] Wims doing things, not the NAACP because we sat at the table and we worked it out after I was frightened, they were frightened. And then there was another one that was very touchy, Hughes Network Systems, which is owned by Howard Hughes Corporation out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], has an office here of about 2,000 employees in Montgomery County, Maryland. We went after them for discrimination and we had a big picket planned of a hundred and so people. Now, that thing was so big that people from L.A. came out and said, "Look, before we were ready to go and march, what can we do to help you? We don't want to have this. This hurts--it hurts our stock, the Hughes Corporation and all the people in L.A. that don't want to be associated with this." And we in fact own, and they did own General Motors [Company], which I didn't know--or General Motors owned Hughes. And so you had General Motors calling saying--and putting pressure me at the top because at the time, the president of the NAA--I mean, the, the national chairman of the NAACP was Ben Chavis [HM Benjamin F. Chavis Jr.], just like [Kweisi] Mfume is now, the General Motors people came to see them and said, "What is this guy doing down in Maryland killing us, you know, with this discrimination and going to shut us down when we have all this sensitive stuff with satellites?" 'Cause they deal with satellites. I mean, this is very sensitive 'cause we, we worked--well, they do sensitive work for the government and these would interrupt everything, dealing with the federal government. And they said, "Well, Mr. Wims has looked at GEICO, he's looked at NIH [National Institutes of Health] and I'm sure that he knows what he's doing and we're not going to back off." And so General Motors was very frustrated, but as it turned out, they came to the table before, we worked it out and to this day, Hughes Network Systems and the Hughes--and General Motors are very good friends of NAACP and my--myself, as we do other things because we worked out the problems and it did work for the benefit today, they're an excellent firm getting a lot of minorities, Asians, Hispanics, African Americans, job opportunities and this is the day--that was maybe seven years later. Speaker 1: And what kind of discrimination was taking place at Hughes? Speaker 2: Very simply, not promoting those very qualified. Now at that company, everybody there was--had a degree. It's very technical. Satellite is very technical, but they--African Americans complained that they weren't being promoted as they should. And--but they are now and can say that without a doubt because I keep very close with that company. They're doing a wonderful job. And General Motors, of course everybody knows is fabulous, you know. Story_ID: 192218 Speaker 1: So in 1994, you were elected president of the-- Speaker 2: Of the State of Maryland. Speaker 1: The state of--the state chapter [of the NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What were some of your accomplishments-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --as the state president? Speaker 2: Well there, and humbly saying this I have to smile because I didn't realize this until last year when I went to Annapolis [Maryland] to testify on a bill. I said, "Oh, I had an impact on this." We were approached by the Eastern Shore of Maryland, that's where you have a lot of chicken hatcheries and it's very dirty, and a lot of people get sick in those factories; I call them, they process the chicken, they--the people get cancer and all kinds of things happen. So they were saying that they had no voice in elected official--in--they had no elected official that was African American in Annapolis or in the local council. So one of the first things I did--again, remember coming from fighting General Motors [Company] and Hughes [Network Systems] and all them and said, "Well, let's go down to the Eastern Shore and from Montgomery County," although I'm state president now, our headquarters was in Annapolis, "Let's go--" and it's about a--maybe a hundred miles or so, "--there, and let's say that we need to get African Americans elected." So it turned out this was the biggest demonstration we ever had at the steps of the city hall for a place called Carol- Worcester County [Maryland], and it's the home of Ocean City, Maryland, which is famous for all the tourists and people seeing this around the nation know Ocean City, Maryland. So we had there 250 pro- 300 protestors to come out that day because they hadn't heard of the things we did before and sure enough, the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] saw it, they joined us. They call and--see, people once they see us on TV doing things, people start calling. They filed suit and they--and we--AL--NAACP State of Maryland with all its chapters and the ACLU filed suit and basically after a year of fighting, we were able to get the district realigned and we got, two years later, the first African American elected to serve on the county council, the district, which is part of Ocean City. And that was probably the most important thing, 'cause for 200 and some years, there had never been an African American elected; now, I think there are two today, 2004, and we can take credit. But, again, 'till you brought it up in this program, probably never really talked about these terms; is this something that you do? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: One of the other things that we did there is that we built the membership up, and again, this is working with everyone, probably brought on about 10,000 new members statewide during that time because people were joining us because they began to see that we were doing things and getting things accomplished. And the other most important, 'cause it has not happened since I left, unfortunately, as a president, I'm now on the executive board, was that in one year, the first year, we raised sixty-some thousand dollars. And for the NAACP, you remember that you have church clergy type folks and educated, they didn't know how to raise money and they had raised, when they do fundraising a year, maybe $30,000 or less; we were able to in one year, to raise $60,000, that was a big thing for the NAACP. So I think those two things, raising money, showing them how to do it and the elected officials on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. Story_ID: 192219 Speaker 1: And what about the federal employment task force that you helped organize? Speaker 2: That came out of--remember, we talked earlier about NIH [National Institutes of Health] when I was the local Montgomery County [Maryland] president? When we got to the federal level--I mean, I'm sorry, the state level, people would continually call me and I would say, "Well, I'm no longer the Montgomery County, you have to call that president, but maybe we need to look at it as a federal thing around the nation, although, I'm the Maryland president." But Ben Chavis [HM Benjamin F. Chavis Jr.], he had confidence in what I was doing in the State of Maryland NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] so he said, "Look, let's go ahead and let you form this." And so there was a woman named Janice Washington, who worked for pay for the NAACP that was a full-time coordinator, and I volunteered. Everything we talk about is I volunteer, you know. So we were able to establish this task force and then we went and we sort of discriminated, demonstrated and picketed the [U.S.] Department of Navy at the Pentagon [Arlington, Virginia]. And we were going to the Pentagon, but they said, "Well, it's the federal defense on that, they'll lock you up," and so forth, so we decided we would go to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] and protest on Capitol Hill about the Navy. And as it turned out, the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] actually came out and videotaped us and, and recorded everything we were doing because I said, "Well, who are you?" Because I worked for the White House [Washington, D.C.], I understand how to talk to the media. And they gave me this name of some firm, some said we were, like Fox News. I said, okay. I thought, that's not Fox News after I called them and then I knew it was CIA after a while. But at the same time, we talked about President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton and that's why the CIA, we found out, was coming out because we were saying we were going to protest at the White House [Washington, D.C.] because of what was happening in Africa at the time. It was all part of the federal task force because, see, it's all federal, it was tax dollars, so we sort of expanded to do whatever we wanted to do. But as it turned out, we again negotiated and talked with the [U.S.] Navy about things and things worked there. President Clinton went to the--Ben Chavis. He moved away from me and went to the, the national NAACP and they dealt--I think it was--at the time, it wasn't Sudan, but it might have been because it seemed like things for history repeats itself, but it was definitely about genocide and the wars and people being killed. So the federal task force was the spark, the big guys, as I call them, the national president of the NAACP, executive director, took over, but we still continued to look at different agencies. And I remember, and God bless his soul, the last thing I did before leaving that position was we picketed Ron Brown and the [U.S.] Department of Commerce. And, of course, Ron is deceased; he was then the cabinet member. And actually, he didn't mind because he understood that pressure had to come because he said, "Well, I have some 30,000 or so employees, I'm trying to do what I can, but it's hard with this bureaucracy in the federal government." So when we did that, we met with him and others and we were able to get some things accomplished at the Department of Commerce nationally. Speaker 1: What were the problems at Commerce? Speaker 2: Same thing. African Americans, secretaries at the lower level not getting the job, white women coming in. Professional GS-13 [General Schedule], not being able to get to the 14. The 15 is like the highest you can get until you get to the--what they call executive service which is mostly your political or your, your really top managers. So just 15, anyone can get to if you work hard, but African Americans couldn't get to that and so we had to fight for those at that level and we did make a difference. And Ron Brown was the boss. He was--he made a difference before his death and people started getting promoted at the Department of Commerce. But I--it was the first time I actually had to demonstrate against an African American, and at that one--oh, that was the largest actually, 'cause we had 300 people. The reason is we had the employees, but then all these other people came 'cause we didn't have a national task force so people came even from Virginia and Philadelphia and places like that, and that was just a one-day demonstration. And we actually just sort of walked around his building for about three hours and then it broke, but again, we went and talked to him afterwards and it worked well. Speaker 1: And did you find that you were kind of changing the face of the NAACP? Were you recruiting and bringing in more young people? Was that part of your goal? Speaker 2: Well I would say humbly, at the time, it definitely was, there, because you remember at--when I was at the local level where I lived, we brought in 1,000; then at the state level, 10,000. Now, we're doing a federal task force, it helped members--membership nationwide to join in local chapters because they would see that the NAACP were doing things, that's the first thing. And the more members you have, the stronger you are and then more income to the organization that follows suit, et cetera. The other thing is we were bringing in more young people, not as many as I would even like today, but we saw that young people were joining because they saw people doing things, protesting in the street; they like that type of thing, young people, not just sitting around and sort of litigating, is what we would do a lot of in the NAACP. So the face was changing, but I'll tell you what was more important than all of that, because Mr. Chavis said it, and later--and Mr. Kweisi Mfume said it to me as I retired, as I call it, from the leadership, was that it gave the NAACP much needed publicity on a national level again. Because we were again, at the Pentagon or against Ron Brown, it was national news, but also, it gave him some power as he started to negotiate on Capitol Hill with the White House because he saw that his branches, the people under him were doing things. And I would say today, 2004, the NAACP is still strong, but you don't have but a few demonstrations, I'm talking in the fifty states, there are just a few here and there. We have gotten away from that demonstration. Story_ID: 192220 Speaker 1: But do you think that there are more negotiations going on and that demonstrations may not be necessary? Speaker 2: I can tell you from being a part of the executive committee that we probably have to go back to demonstrating because negotiations actually aren't really working the way they should today and it's--and there's two reasons: One is because the White House [Washington, D.C.] has not invited Mr. [Kweisi] Mfume in at all in his first four years and he doesn't have that support coming from the White House and giving him leverage. Two, the young people are not really coming in to bring complaints or to say we want to picket, so they just--the ones that are there may be there, but we're not getting the new ones in like we should. And then the third reason why I don't like the negotiation is because we're not getting the media attention. When you're negotiating, you're marking some victories, and yes, there are negotiations going on all the time, but the membership is stagnant or dropping because people don't see it on the TV. And that's really how you get your memberships when people say, "Oh, I agree with that cause. I'm going to join them today." I'm convinced that media really is the most important thing in getting new members 'cause people see you doing something, but when you're negotiating, you don't have the media; when we are protesting, you have the media. Speaker 1: What do you think is the biggest challenge facing the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] today? Speaker 2: I think, as I said earlier, getting the young people to join. And by whatever means you can use, because now you have--and I'm getting older, I'm not young anymore, you have us, the older folks who are not able to face--get out again with the demonstrations and doing that, but then a lot--also, we're hurt by another thing, getting older. We sort of are not motivated like we used to be because we say, "Well, I live in a nice neighborhood," and most NAACP-ers are, I think, statistics will show you, middle-class or upper middle-class. You don't really have your lower income and you hardly ever have any poverty level people to be members, actually. And so I think that's what's hurting us, we need to get more at the--right at poverty and lower to join us somehow, even if we--'cause it costs thirty dollars, I think, to join, even if we reduce it to ten, because I think everyone should pay something, but maybe for those who are under the poverty guidelines, to get them in. Speaker 1: And what do you think, do you think the Montgomery County [Maryland] NAACP is still as strong as it was in the mid to late '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: I would say yes on that because you have a very--the membership is still--I don't know if it's 2,000, it's a strong membership for a local chapter; it's one of the top ten, I think, in the nation, or top fifteen in the nation. They work, but in Montgomery County, we negotiate a lot and they get a lot of things accomplished in the media because they know, I guess, from things hopefully that I started and so forth, that they write press releases and so they'll be negotiating, it gets in the media so people can see things that are happening because there's a press release that'll go out. I think though in Montgomery County, we probably could benefit from going out and actually demonstrating on the sidewalks or something, you know, maybe every now and then just to let everybody know we can do it, but it is a strong chapter. Story_ID: 192221 Speaker 1: So, around the mid to late '90s [1990s], you started becoming involved--you started getting involved in victims' rights issues. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what spurred your involvement in victims' rights issues. Speaker 2: When I left the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I wanted to--I like to call myself a renaissance person. You know, the issues are there, but people see, but they don't know what to do with it. So when it comes to victims, I'm saying, "Well, every day there's a victim in our community and people are saddened by it. They don't know what to do." So I said, "From my experience again, through the church, the NAACP," I said, "What can we do to help them?" So what I thought of, and I got several colleagues to start the Victims' Rights Foundation, a 501(c)(3), a non-profit foundation, is to one, volunteer. Everything we do will be volunteer, that no one will get paid, no matter how busy we are, how widespread that we're known throughout the nation, because people need to know that we care about them, that's why we volunteer. Two, to go to court with the families that are victims when they have to look at for the first time, the person who committed the crime, whether it was someone who murdered their loved one, or someone who abused their child or whatever. And, usually, court dates only go from two to a week. You know, you see on TV these long trials, but for most victims, it's mostly, low income on low income; I wouldn't say black on black 'cause there's all kinds of victims, but those trials don't last that long. So for two days to a week, we would sit with the family and support them during the trial, and that means a lot because usually the family members are only one to three people, but yet, the lawyer has his people and the family, 'cause they're trying to stop the person from going to jail. There might be ten or fifteen on the criminal side, as I call it, but on the victim's side it's just us. And then the third thing, so it's very--there's only three goals in, in the organization, is that we would raise money to help some family members that were desperate for medical or burial on some cases, there might even be a reward that we put out for something that's really bad with crime solving. So in starting that organization, we have been able to help now in eight years we have been volunteering, you know, several dozen families, but we've raised something like a million dollars for help, and we have been to court maybe twenty-five times or so with families over the last eight years with Victims' Rights Foundation. Speaker 1: But was there any particular case or issue that really initiated this? Speaker 2: That's a good question, because it was inspired again, I call it divine intervention by God, because I've never been a victim or any one of my immediate family and people ask me that, they're really surprised. I'm blessed, and I'm hoping I won't be a victim or no one in my family, but I can see from just church work what was happening. Speaker 1: Is it victims of violent crimes? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because we don't, can't help--because we're volunteering. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: We--strictly, the worst of the crimes. And I have to say, sometimes I pray to God as a God, why do you let me see these things? Because when I go to see a--like a case we're working on now, a mother went to the store and she came back, her nine-year-old daughter was shot in the back and her husband shot several times in a robbery, and I'm dealing with the mother now who's crying almost every time we see her on my shoulder. I say, "Man." and that gets me. Why do you see--but if it wasn't for us helping her, she probably wouldn't be able to make it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So it's victims of violent crime, and we support them in a volunteer effort. Speaker 1: But was there any particular case, in particular? Speaker 2: Oh, now this started--there was one case that you know how everyone says, "I'm going to do something about that?" Three African American women, ages nineteen through twenty-three, went out to a club after work on a Friday night just to have a good time. Some man approached them and evidently, he wanted to try to rob them or try to rape them, but whatever the situation, it didn't work and he killed all three young ladies, nineteen to twenty-three. And the bad part about it, 'cause we had not seen that kind of thing before, he drove them off from where he murdered them, as we now know now because the trial has already happened, and dumped their bodies on the side of a road in Prince George's County, Maryland, and it just so happened it was adjacent to the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture's research building there. And that's when I said, "Boom, somebody has to do something. This is the most horrifying thing we've ever seen." Called our friends, and on that one, we actually raised money to put up a reward. We put up a reward. It was on TV. We counseled the families, and then we went to court with 'em and that started a long campaign now of eight years going. Speaker 1: And did the reward lead to the arrest of the-- Speaker 2: As it turned out-- Speaker 1: --perpetrator? Speaker 2: --we could put the money back in the bank. The good detective work helped, but what the reward did was gave it more media attention. It wasn't just another statistic, 'cause after a couple weeks people forget and they move on, but we kept it in the media for--actually, it was about four months. They didn't catch the person 'til about eight months out, actually. And that's what we do also with the media, we keep it alive. Story_ID: 192222 Speaker 1: And you all were very active during the sniper incidents in the Washington D.C. metropolitan area; was that 2002? Speaker 2: Yes. That happened two years ago, 2002 in October. We'll never forget it. It started five people were killed in one day, and as it turned out, these snipers were going up and down the East Coast as it turned out, and altogether there were something like, I think, twelve people actually killed and-- Speaker 1: And the majority-- Speaker 2: --four wounded. Speaker 1: --of them were in Montgomery County [Maryland]? Speaker 2: Right. And so what we did, after the fifth shooting, we had a board meeting and we decided that we would volunteer to have a prayer vigil for those families. And then we found two days later, there was a sixth shooting and so we kept going. And so we said, "Well, let's take it to the next level. Let's raise money for these families." And, again, we say that God helped us because as it turned out, I had to stop and close down my office, my business, Hammer and Nails [Inc.], to volunteer for those first three weeks because it was so awful and everyone was afraid; schools were closed. But then when we started raising money, checks started coming in from all over the world, literally, and my office here where we're doing this taping, I had to take off another month, so I didn't work. What most people don't realize, I sacrificed my family and income for two months because you had to take the money in. But the good news is, we raised in three months a half a million dollars and all that money went to the victims' family; we split it equally among all of them. And as a average check, 'cause we all gave the same thing, it was $32,600 or something like that, went to all those families. Now, it didn't bring back the loved one that was killed, but what it did was in most of these cases, the person who was killed, and I would say 80 percent of the cases, they were the breadwinners. The spouse couldn't pay the rent; the breadwinner was taken. They couldn't pay the insurance for the auto. That money gave them a bridge until insurance kicked in and in some cases, they had no insurance, they had to start over, but it was something like as your viewers who are listening to this or will see it, know every day there's a victim that gets nothing. They lose a loved one and they go on welfare, public assistance or they just--whatever happened. These families were able to get $32,000 to help them and we keep in touch. Just two years later I get a call maybe once a month from--'cause there's sixteen families now, so either they call from time to time, but we stay in touch. We bonded and they have been very helpful, very thankful to the Victims' Rights Foundation and to myself for helping them. Story_ID: 192223 Speaker 1: Did you feel like too often victims were stripped of their rights in court or they didn't have rights? Was that--is that--was that an issue for you? Speaker 2: Well, the main reason, remember I said when the three young ladies were killed and their bodies were dumped on the side of the road, was that somebody had to do something to help the family. One, just as you say, maybe the way they helped those families that are suffering; but two, you bring a good point, the bad guy, and I use this--everyone knows Jesse James, everybody knows [Osama] Bin Laden, but who would know and like Erika Smith, the nine-year-old young girl? (Unclear) you wouldn't know, that was shot in the back in her home. That's why we really did it besides helping the victims. We said we want through--to praise what we call our heroes who are home or going to work and are murdered or robbed or whatever and not let the glory go to the people. Now, now, unfortunately, everybody knows (Mohamed Atta?), you know the names, you say that, but they also know that there were victims. They know some of the names of the families. They know what they did and that was really what the goal was all from eight--for eight years for all of the victims. Let people remember the names of the victims, because you're going to always know the villains, as I call them. So I think that answered your question, praise our heroes who have fallen and help the families who survive. Speaker 1: And how do you choose who you're going to help? Because like you said, there are victims of violent crimes every single day. Speaker 2: Because we volunteer, and remember I had to take off of work for two months, we can't do that all the time. We ask the local police departments around the region. We are now regional; Maryland, Virginia and [Washington] D.C. The calls, when they think they need us to help the family that's by themselves, they don't have relatives or they need money for reward, so that we can call the media in to bring it to the attention, so we now went with the local police departments. Now, if we see something that's so bad ourselves, we will just say, "Look, we want to contact the family." And we did that in the case of two grandmothers were working in a Prince George's County [Maryland] flower shop, eighty--I mean, seventy-six and seventy-four, and they were stabbed to death. We called the family directly and said, "Look, you don't know us, but we've helped sniper victims, we did it, we want to help your family." We went over, we prayed with them, we told them we were legitimate and we worked with that family as a volunteer. We selected them because--'cause very frankly, it was me thinking of my grandma. I said, "What if my grandma was killed in a shop full of some flowers?" And so we, from time to time, will go approach a family that has been victimized. Speaker 1: And what do you think is next for the Victims' Rights Foundation? Speaker 2: We want to move nationally with this concept of volunteering, and we've already--today is August 2004. My goal is by November 2004, be in Charleston, South Carolina. They have a lot of domestic violence there. They lead the nation like in the top five cities of men killing or beating their wives, and in some cases, spouses beating the husband, but it's mostly the male on the female. And I've talked with several people there, and I'm hoping that we would expand to Charleston, South Carolina; then my next goal is L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. I want to go west because if we can find--and all we need if someone looking at this, for someone to say, "I will volunteer," even if it's just once a month to help one family, 'cause we're volunteering, you establish, I will fund them with the money from here until they get going and then they--'cause we raised money to help the families all--again, all volunteering. So hopefully, let's say by 2010, we will be a national organization, starting in 2004 to South Carolina, and hopefully, '05 [2005] or '06 [2006] be in Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: Now, there is a national victims' rights foundation, the Stephanie Roper Foundation-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is that right? Speaker 2: Now, that is, is different than ours. It's not called found--victims' rights, it's called the Stephanie Roper Foundation [later, the Maryland Crime Victims' Resource Center]. And it's--I don't think it's national, I think it's just in this region, but they have paid staff and they can help more; they can work on it every day. They do a lot of lobbying and so forth. Our thing is, again, which makes us unique, is always volunteer. And I put in several thousand a year out of my pocket and our board members put in a couple thousand every year to just keep--make sure it's going and then we get money from the community. As I said, we got a half a million for, for the sniper families. So as long as we continue funding personally, we don't ever really have to work; we don't have to give money, and that's the difference with us. We can't help everybody, but at least when we do, that people know we do it because we want do it because we're volunteering. Story_ID: 192224 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community, in general? Speaker 2: Well, from my experience from the clergy, as I say, that faith community, the political part of it, the civil rights part, and now the victims, you know, what I'd like to see is that first of all, that as a community, we come together and, quite frankly, just trust our neighbors. Come together and ask that we support each other on issues of education. If we come together and go to the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings, that's all we have to do. The teachers will do a little bit more. Not to say they're not doing anything, but it's the community saying we want one thing. The victims, if we started saying, "Yes, I saw--he's--I know who did it," they don't--a lot of people don't call now. They're afraid that they might be next. They saw a violent crime, but they would not tell the police who did it, "Oh, I didn't see anything." We come together and support ourselves, it's victims and their family, just coming together again, is that. And then politically, register and voting. No matter who you vote for, we are underrepresented at the voting booth because once we elect the people and say, "Hey, I voted," and they know that we're voting, that will give us more power than you could imagine, as far as programs or money or assistance or whatever. So the bottom line is for us to come together with our neighbors, I call it, 'cause it's community by community how you win any battle, and not being strangers in our--to--strangers in our own neighborhood. Story_ID: 192225 Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why? Speaker 2: Well, I think the most important thing that God's blessed me that I could be a leader. Take a leadership role in various arenas with no college degree because I think he, God, has said, "You are someone that wanted to do some things. And give me the glory, you don't do it yourself." And that's what I was trying to say that I can't do it without him, and I know that, because again, I'm not--I don't have a degree. I'm not technical in some areas, but when we take a project, I like to call it, and we pray on it and we do it, it works. And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is a perfect example, from local to national, victims' rights, local to national; the--some of the other things I've been involved with, it shows. And I want to go--what I--the only thing that my goal is, is simply is that God will give me the strength and energy to be a volunteer and do what I do for fifty years. I'm now on my thirty-fourth year of volunteering, so I have, what, sixteen years to go? And I think I can do it with the health, 'cause that's what it really takes because if I get sick, I have to stop. I want to say to my grandchildren, hopefully, "That I was a volunteer for fifty years and you can do the same. You need to volunteer and help somebody; not maybe fifty years, but just get involved," so that's my personal goal. Speaker 1: And is there anything that you've done that you wish you would've done differently? Speaker 2: Well, I think, 'cause again, I think we have divine intervention. Most of the things we did, we did it the right way. Probably, but I wouldn't--if--'cause education's so important to me, and I tell our young people they can't do what I did and drop out of college; probably wanted to get my degree, but, probably, if I did at that time, I probably wouldn't be doing what I'm doing. So--but, but I encourage people not to follow my role 'cause they couldn't anyway today; you have to have a degree just to get a $25,000 job. Now, again, this was back when I--in the '70s [1970s], a huge difference; that might be the one thing. And I would say on camera, I encourage everyone to continue and go as far as they can. Hopefully, Ph.D., or a lawyer, doctor, as much as they can, they need it. Speaker 1: And do you think you would've chosen a different career path? And if so, what would it have been? Speaker 2: Well, remember, I wanted to be a bus driver before we got into the politics which led to everything else. You know, there was something that I tried and it's come out in this interview, I actually wanted to be a preacher. I went to seminary school to look at it, but then I decided, I said, "No, I'm just not ready." I mean, 'cause if I'm going to do it, I'm going to be serious about it, and I just wasn't rea--I wasn't ready at the time. I guess God wasn't ready for me to do it. But that would've probably been--you would've been calling me Pastor Wims (laughter), but it worked as, as it did, I'm a businessperson and committed to volunteering, hopefully all my life. Story_ID: 192226 Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important? Speaker 2: Well, one thing, it gives you a roadmap, if you look at it and study it, not to make that same mistake. And I think if people look--just let's take the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I think history's going to show maybe ten years or long--later, if we had stopped going to the streets and being vocal, we're losing ground; I think that's why you look at the history. But if you look at the history of where we were in the past, and that's why when I got involved, I said, "With [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy and others, they're willing to speak and this is why we're doing it," and it worked. So that's the thing, the history tell--and then in some cases, history, like in [President] Richard [Milhous] Nixon in politics, you make a mistake, you do something, but don't lie, but don't try to cover it. You're like, [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton was great at it; he made some mistakes and he fudged a little then he came forward and he's probably as popular now than ever. So you learn from those things and I've learned it, if you make a mistake, you just say, "Hey, I made a mistake. Forgive me." And you move on, so that's why it's so important and it's for the African American community in particular though. Now, that--I don't know that I can say majority, but more African Americans are middle to upper middle-class, you don't want to forget where you came from and then to leave maybe those behind and say, "Well, those people," or, "Why can't they do what I did?" Because, actually, everybody that's where they are now had help from someone. And I'm here, a lot of people helped me, but also, I believe God helped me, but individuals have helped me and that's so important and not forget where you came from. Story_ID: 192227 Speaker 1: And what values are most important to you? Speaker 2: I think the most important thing we see is really family. If you have your family value, you would have--like, teen pregnancy and so forth, you would say, "Look, I cannot get pregnant unless I'm married to someone," and if it happens, still you have your family and network there to support you and you--you're still family. The family is so important as it comes to education. They will help. They'll do anything they can, like the Asian community, 'cause I work with them. They all pitch in to make sure that they can pay for the college and someone like that. And then family, again, on just value and being honest to each other and when you have that, you're hopefully honest to others. So I think the most value you get is family values, whatever that is; it's--we're losing it. We--divorce, same-sex marriages, you put it all together, it's hard to see that traditional family today. And I am not shy at all to talk out against these things that are destroying the family 'cause I see what's happening. You have--every--not everybody, but a lot of young folks going to jail, a lot older. And women today, for the first time--like I said today, we started about five years ago, gangs, drugs, selling drugs, things that they never did; and you have a lot of women in prison today, and that really destroys your family, because you have mom in jail. So that would be my most important thing, family values. Story_ID: 192228 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Actually, I've already thought of that, and I'm writing a will as we speak to say that, "He was a volunteer that was inspired and had his health from God," that was it. I--all the other stuff doesn't matter. Everything I told you about, I--that's fine, I'll still forget, but I wrote down a lot of things. I've forgot what I wrote down when I was talking to you because just to be a servant is the most important thing I want to be remembered and, hopefully, that will encourage others because I know a lot of times I'm by myself because nobody's out there and we go to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings, you have a few, you go to court, nobody's there; people are not volunteering. I mean, there is volunteers, we know there's the Red Cross and stuff, but I mean, when you look at the millions of people in America, that's what I mean. You don't have the majority of people, even half of the people volunteering. Story_ID: 192229 Speaker 1: What do you believe your legacy will be? Speaker 2: I think it will be volunteering. I think out of all the things we talked about they would say, "He sacrificed," 'cause remember I said I had to shut down my own business, lost income for the victims' rights? But I've done that a lot with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and church stuff. So the sacrifices that he made to volunteer to help somebody, I think that's what I'll be remembered for and that's what, and my church. My back--my--the people that I really pay attention to is my church community and that's what they're saying even today while I'm alive, they say, "No, no doubt, they'll know that you gave, you volunteered, you helped with the church, with the building fund." That's what I think people will say. Story_ID: 192230 Speaker 1: And what message do you have for your children? I mean, your--and your grandchildren when you have them? Speaker 2: Very simple, remember, family is so important and you have family and you pray and fear God, that's the first thing. The second thing I would tell them is that with the blessings that they get, they have to give back, so that's volunteering. It doesn't have to be like I did and nobody probably--most people won't do what I'm doing, but to give at least every week some time, every week some, even if it's one hour. But every week do something on a volunteer basis, that's what I'm telling and I'm actually preaching that now to my daughter [Rachel Wims]. Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to share that perhaps we didn't touch on? Speaker 2: I think we've touched pretty much on everything these two hours. I can't think of anything else. Speaker 1: We've covered your life. Speaker 2: Yes, my life has been covered. The thing I would emphasize is just for people who hear this is just to give, because life is short and I--now that I would say from the victims I see, nine years old, three years, infants; I mean, life is very short. Even if you live to the age of my father [Earl Wims] who was approximately ninety, when you look at the scheme of things, that's short, and if you don't anything to give back or help anybody, what good is your life? That is probably what I believe, life is short, do something with it. Story_ID: 192231 Speaker 1: Well, that is Mrs. Sharon [Percy] Rockefeller from the famous Rockefeller family out of New York. She's presenting an award to me called the Hometown Hero award and that was primarily for the work we did with the sniper victims during the Washington D.C. sniper incident. Speaker 2: And that--what year was it taken? Speaker 1: That was taken last year, 2003. Speaker 2: Okay, great. Speaker 1: The picture--the tall gentleman in the middle is the lieutenant governor of the State of Maryland, Michael Steele, and the gentleman on the right of him is Ron Rush, who is the chamber of commerce executive director. That picture was taken this year at a chamber of commerce meeting. Speaker 2: Okay, so 2004? Speaker 1: 2004, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Oh, thank you. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you--I guess you don't need to take the picture out in the back 'cause I can see it. Oh, he's focusing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Of course, everybody knows that picture. That is Oprah Winfrey and we took that picture when I worked with the National Council of Negro Women in honoring [HM] Dr. Dorothy Height on her 90th birthday. Oprah was there, and she asked all of us who were on the committee to raise money to take a picture with her and that is 19--I'm sorry, 2003. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me see-- Speaker 2: We'll flip it (unclear). Speaker 1: Now, Roper--Mrs. Roper of the Stephanie Roper Foundation and Ellen Alexander, okay. That picture was taken in 2004, where I received the governor [Robert Ehrlich] of the State of Maryland's award as the top advocate for victims' rights. It was in 2004, and the lady with the blue dress is Mrs. [Roberta] Roper, who's the executive director of the Stephanie Roper Foundation and the lady on--in the white dress is with the Montgomery County Police Department who nominated me to the governor to get the award, and her name is Ellen Alexander. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: That is a celebrity, Ms. Lucy Liu of 'Charlie's Angels' and others. She and I took that picture as I was presented with an award at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. So she was actually at the NAACP awards dinner. Speaker 2: Okay. About what year? Speaker 1: That was in 2001. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know you had that one too. Okay, that picture is--they call him A.J. [Calloway]. He's a anchor on BET [Black Entertainment Television]. There's a show called '101 and Parks Street' [sic, '106 & Park']. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that picture was taken this year at the Grammys [Grammy Awards]-- Speaker 2: At--okay, so-- Speaker 1: --in 2004. Speaker 2: 2004. Speaker 1: At the Grammys. Speaker 2: Okay. You got it, Matthew [Hickey]? Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that says on there--is that-- Speaker 2: 1999. Speaker 1: That was 1999, it was [HM] Russell Simmons. He and I talked at the NAACP Image Award program about getting more young people involved in NAACP; so Russell Simmons. And then that was--somebody must've taken--and that is a famous producer and Grammy winner, Pharrell Williams, who spoke with me about getting young people involved, again, in civil rights, at the Grammys-- Speaker 2: So what-- Speaker 1: --2004. Speaker 2: 2004. Speaker 1: And that is my lovely daughter, Rachel [Wims], three generations of Rachel named after my mother [Rachel Stewart Wims] and grandmother, Wims, and she is eight years old in that picture. Speaker 2: So what year was that one taken? Speaker 1: Last year, 'cause she's nine now, so 2003. Speaker 2: Okay, great. Speaker 1: Actually, you know what? On that picture, that was 2002, because she was seven on that picture. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Seven years old, 2002. Speaker 2: Okay, great. Speaker 1: That's a good picture. She said, "Daddy, you showed that old picture?" Should've known that's what she would say, you know how the young people talk--..