 Story_ID: 657005 Speaker 1: So, my name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I want us to start out by having you state your name, including your middle name and spell it for us, and give us your date of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is David Andre Wilson [HistoryMaker David Wilson]. D-A-V-I-D, A-N-D-R-E, W-I-L-S-O-N. I was born April 15th, 1977. Speaker 1: And can we have your place of birth and your--and today's date? Speaker 2: I was born in United Hospital in Newark, New Jersey. And today is February 19th, 2014. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a filmmaker and media entrepreneur. I am the founder of the thegrio.com. Story_ID: 657006 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers. Speaker 2: That's fine. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, I would have to say my favorite food is chicken red curry. Thai chicken red curry is my favorite food right now. Right now. It evolves. But that would be my favorite. Speaker 1: You're still young. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is May and September. I love it. In May and September in New York the weather is nice. So, perhaps if I'm in Brazil that will change. But for New York, May and September. Speaker 1: And a favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: My favorite place to vacation, Brazil. Bahia, Brazil. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite or saying. I have many, but I guess, you know, one thing that I say is, you know, you can--you are the best you that anyone can be. Don't forfeit that one advantage in life by trying to be someone that you're not. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you know, you're on the younger side of people we've interviewed. So just realize that if you have to help an old lady out, you can. Speaker 2: Oh, god. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Story_ID: 657007 Speaker 1: So, (clears throat) I want to ask you about your parents. And can we start with your--okay--on your father. Can you tell us his name and what you know about his growing up? Speaker 2: My father is Vernise--I'm sorry, Vernise. My father is Vernon Columbus Wilson, Sr. [Vernon Wilson, Sr.]. He was born in Belleville, New Jersey; born to Virginia Karney Holloway Wilson [Virginia Holloway Wilson]; and his father was George Leon Wilson [George Wilson, Sr.]. He was--is--my father is really a brilliant guy, and he, really intelligent, had no high school, full high school education, but somehow became a person who would invent different products and patent different products for Beecham [Beecham Group, plc] and Mennen [Mennen Company], and is just really a brilliant man. He is deeply religious. That comes from his father and his father before him. His father, George, was the first black preacher or started the first black church in Belleville, New Jersey, and he sort of followed his father, Ruben Wilson, Sr., who started the first black church in North Carolina. And so there is a history within my family, particularly the men in my father's line, the Wilson line, of pride of family and pride of literacy. My mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] and father had ten kids, and so it was seven boys and three girls. And my father was always very adamant about doing things as a family. We, growing up in the '80s [1980s], we were probably the only family in our neighborhood in Newark [New Jersey] that was still eating dinner at a set time all together. And if you can imagine a family of ten kids, that was quite a big table. As a matter of fact, there was no table that could seat us. We had to use a church table with the--that you had to kick out the legs. But he would encourage us every day to read the newspaper, and not any newspaper. We could read, you know, certain papers. We couldn't read, you know, Daily News [New York Daily News] and New York Post. We couldn't even read the Newark Star-Ledger [The Star-Ledger]. He wanted us to read The New York Times or The Wall Street Journal. And it wasn't until years later when I started to do research for my documentary ['Meeting David Wilson'] that I understood where that came from. I discovered that his grandfather, Ruben Wilson, was born a slave in 1841 and had gained his freedom in part because he was literate and became a religious leader down in North Carolina and Virginia; started several churches down there. And he imparted to his children the importance of literacy. And my grandfather imparted that to his kids. And then my father sort of imparted that to us. And it wasn't until I learned all this that I went back to my father and said, "Dad, you know, you remember you used to be so adamant about us, you know, reading, and not just reading anything, but reading, you know, top tier papers, you know." I said, "Do you know why that is?" He said, "Well, I just want you guys to have a great education." But then I said, "No, dad. But I can tell you why that is, you know. Your grandfather, literacy for him was a passport to freedom, and that's why your father was so adamant about it with you and your siblings, and I understand why you were so adamant and so tough on us about that." And so, you know, my father, you know, was a very prideful man. And I use past tense because he has acute dementia right now, and so all of the, the knowledge and everything that he sort of--he had has sort of--now, has sort of been taken away by the disease. But he was the person who always challenged us to be creative, to look at a situation and find a solution. If something didn't work properly, he would sit us down at the table and he'd say, "Kids, I will give anyone five dollars if they can figure out how to make this thing work a proper way." And he challenged us to be creative. And so I credit my father with the desire to, to problem solve. And I think any creative person ultimately wants to do that. They want to problem solve. They see a problem, they see a void, and they try to fix it. And I think that's what my father, the thing that he passed on to us. Story_ID: 657008 Speaker 1: So now, can you--did he talk about growing up? And did he grow in Newark [New Jersey]? Speaker 2: My father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] grew up in Newark. My, my grandfather [George Wilson, Sr.] moved to New York [New York] at the turn of the century, during part of the Great Depression. So he moved to New York in about 1910. His first wife died. He had three kids by his first wife. She died around 1918, and he moved back down south and met my grandmother [Virginia Holloway Wilson], who was several years younger. He then brought her back up here and had his next set of kids with my grandmother. And my father was on the younger end of it. So my grandfather was born in--actually in 1883. My father was born in 1936, so he was--my grandfather was quite an old man when he had my father. So he grew up primarily in Newark. My grandfather had established--had an establishment in Newark. My grandfather ran a chemical plant and built a nice, sort of house for his family in Newark, a nice house for his family in Newark. And that's where my father was raised. And so we didn't really--you know--and I--we eventually grew up in Newark, so, because of my grandfather's moving up here. But my father, you know, he was not the most vocal about his growing up. You know, he's one of those old, sort of--he was one of those--is one of those sort of old, stern black men who didn't--you know, every once in a while, he would reminisce on certain things, but he didn't really share a lot of the details of his growing up. Every now and again certain things would slip. But, you know, I do believe his parents were very loving, but they were also very stern, and they, you know--and he, you know, got his love for chemistry working at a pharmacy and just learned how to, even without a college education, learned how to make things work chemically. Speaker 1: So where was he in the birth order of the family--you know, of his--? Speaker 2: My father? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: So my grandfather had his first three kids by his first wife--I want to say her name was Etta Slade [Etta Slade Wilson], who, by the way, is part of the Slade family. If you go down North Carolina, the Slade family is a family that actually figured out to cure yellow tobacco, which--it's quite significant. But he married Etta Slade. She died about in 1918. And so he had his first three kids by her, then his next six or seven by my grandmother. So I think he--my father is the next to the youngest of that. Speaker 1: So he was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he's--I think he's the number--he's number nine of the ten, you know. Speaker 1: So he never talked about what life was like growing up in a way? Speaker 2: (Cough) Not extensively. Not extensively. He--my father was--could be very quiet. And as a kid, you don't really ask all those questions. Every now and again, he would let certain things slip. I do know that, you know, obviously he had a number of siblings. I learned a lot more from my uncle. But the fact that, you know, he was--my father was very devout religious--you know, he was very religious. He took a lot of comfort in church and in church life. And, yeah, I just think that, you know, he grew up in Newark. He boxed. Sometime he loved to box. He also was a percussionist, you know. That's another thing that we sort of got from my father's side. My father is a--was into music and, you know, it sort of rubbed off on some of my siblings. My--one of my older brothers [Joe "Flip" Wilson] is a music producer who's been, you know, a music director for Lady Gaga and Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles], and so that's another influence of my father. And, but he didn't really go into various specifics about his growing up. Story_ID: 657009 Speaker 1: Talk about your mother-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and her name and what you know about her background and her growing up, her maiden name included. Speaker 2: My mother is Beverly Walker [Beverly Walker Wilson]. As a matter of fact, yesterday she celebrated her seventieth birthday. My mother is one of the most intelligent and sweetest people you know. I don't know how she raised ten kids. That's--it's, it's, it's, it's in- it's incredible. And I have to say this because, you know, the way society is today, all of my siblings are from the same mother and father. You have to say that nowadays. So we--she grew up in Asbury--well, she was born in Asbury Park, New Jersey, but she spent most of her years in the Bronx [New York], growing up, adolescent years in the Bronx and Manhattan [New York]. That's where she grew up primarily. Her mother, who just passed last year, my grandmother Ethel Walker, she was ninety, she was a very sort of a tough love type of woman, and she, you know, my mother being the oldest of nine kids--you getting the theme, big families, and my family--my mother was the oldest of nine kids, you know, was interested in, you know, the arts. You know, she is still is--very much interested in the arts. She's, you know, a New York kid in a lot of ways. She was born in 1944. She met my father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] because she had gotten a job at Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] in Newark, New Jersey. And so, she had ended up meeting a--someone who invited her to church, and she ended up staying with this older church mother who had invited her to the church that she liked to attend [Bethesda Church of God in Christ, Newark, New Jersey]. And she ended up meeting my father at the church. And so church was always such a big thing in my family, huge thing in my family. But, you know, my mother took care of her sisters, her younger sisters and brothers. And, you know, she dealt with a lot of hardships as a result of the type of upbringing, her mother and the household that her mother sort of established. And, you know, but she turned out, and she's always said to me that she made the decision not to be like her mother and to sort of raise us in, no matter what was going on in the outside world, and even going on with her, to make sure that we were shielded from that. And, and, and, and because of that, you know, she raised ten kids in Newark, New Jersey. That's a monumental feat. I mean, I've known so many of my childhood friends who were killed, murdered, in prison, and, and, and, and got into so much trouble. But the fact that we're all still around today, and, you know, and doing well; that's a monumental feat. And you can talk to any black mother living in any sort of, you know, whether it's in Chicago [Illinois] or whether it's in Newark, to raise one child successfully in a city like Newark is a huge feat. But to do, to, to, to raise ten kids, I think is, is an ultimate blessing. Story_ID: 657010 Speaker 1: So your--let's talk about your, your siblings. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you their name and birth order and where you fit in line? Speaker 2: So my eldest brother is Vernon Columbus Wilson, Jr. [Vernon Wilson, Jr.], who then later changed his named to Yehudah Benlewi, and he is, age wise, probably like forty--going on forty-nine. Then there is Joseph Wilson [Joe "Flip" Wilson], and he's the producer; he's the second. And there's Stephen [Stephen Wilson]; Stephen is a preacher. And then there's Philip [Philip Wilson]. Philip is also a keyboardist. Then there's Christine [Christine Wilson], the first girl. And then there's my brother Timothy [Timothy Wilson], who is, you know, sort of the life of the family. Then there's me. And then behind me is my brother Jonathan [Jonathan Wilson]. And then the two youngest are girls, Rachael [Rachael Wilson Lewison] and Rebecca [Rebecca Wilson]. So seven boys and three girls. Story_ID: 657011 Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: You know, I'll have to say there was a lot of fun in the household. When you have nine siblings, you're never bored. Hungry, yes; never bored. Frustrated, yes, but never bored. You know, I've never had--there was never a bored moment when we were just like--just totally bored. I never had that emotion growing up. But, you know, we had some hardships. Now, you know, to be completely candid, my father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] was someone abusive towards my mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] physically. And so that was always a stress in the family. And when my brothers got a certain age, they begin to sort of challenge his authority and then he kicked them out. And so, my three oldest brothers, I don't think they stayed in the house past the age of sixteen. And so, you know, we--a lot of church [Bethesda Church of God in Christ, Newark, New Jersey]. We went to church three or four days a week. I'm Penteco- we grew up Pentecostal, COGIC, Church of God in Christ, just to break down the acronym. And, you know, on Sundays, we'll start church at Sunday school, which was started at nine A.M.; and then Sunday school would end when we had morning worship, which started at eleven A.M., and then you break from morning worship around three P.M., right. Morning worship would go literally to about 2:30, 3:00; you break for dinner; then after this little dinner, you have the afternoon service, which would traditionally start at five; and then, after the afternoon service, you have the evening service, which would start at eight, and then sometimes go until midnight. And so then, you imagine that was just Sunday. And then, forget about Tuesday night, and then Wednesday night, bible study; and then, you know, Friday night, prayer--you know, it was literally church was everything. And I, and I think that was actually a part of the secret ingredient to keeping us out of trouble, we were always in church, and it was such a big part. And our church family, in the church community, we were tighter with than some of the actual community that we were actually physically surrounded by when we went back home. And so I think that kept us out of a lot of trouble and saved us from a lot of trouble, because we were--we, we had this very tight knit community in church. And in, in a lot of ways, they were our family. Story_ID: 657012 Speaker 1: So, I remember that. I remember, you know, the food stamps, the hungry days. You know, when you have to feed ten kids, you know, not every day you're going to get the--you know the three square meals. But it was--you know, as much as there was the stress there, I didn't take it as stress at that time. It was just what it was. You know, I remember, particularly the summers. I didn't like summertime growing up as a kid. I know there was a--because there was a, you know, and I do remember when the crack cocaine epidemic really hit, which was in 1984, there was a shift; that even as a young kid, I was only seven at the time, I could perceive a difference and a shift in the neighborhood. It became much more guarded. People became much more guarded. There was a lot more crime. When you go to sleep at night, you hear a lot more gunfire. Almost every night during the summer, you know, as a kid, I would stay up until I heard the last of my siblings come inside the door, because it was that--just that type of neighborhood where, when you hear gunfire, and you don't know who that is, or whose that is, and it was so often. And it's interesting, you know, a few years ago, a buddy of mine was sitting on a couch. This was maybe, like, six, seven years ago. And we were sitting on a couch in my apartment in Brooklyn [New York], and I heard a gunshot outside my window. We ducked and, you know, eventually got back up. And I remember we looked at each other, and even, you know, this--it was a very--it rattled us. And for a few weeks out, I couldn't--you know, the couch was next to the window--I couldn't sit on that couch, because--out of just, you know. And then it made me think. I said, wow, here I am, I'm an adult man now. I dealt with that all throughout my childhood [in Newark, New Jersey] and I forgot how I dealt with that. That was the reality that I always dealt with as a kid, that, you know, the, the, the, you know, the constant bullets outside the door. You know, you coming home one night and you see, you know, the, the police lights flashing and glaring, and then someone says, "Oh, so and so got shot." That was the reality. And it sort of actually made me appreciate the durability that kids have to crises, that I was able to go through that on a consistent basis and just recognize that as life. And now here I am as an adult, I could barely handle it. So I got a great deal of appreciation for, you know, getting through that as a kid. And, yeah, I, I, I don't know how, if I was put back into that scenario right now as a, as a, as a thirty-six year old male, how I would handle it. Story_ID: 657013 Speaker 1: So when you think about--well, you didn't know at that time, also, you know, maybe as much about danger, but I don't know what, you know, what age you're talking about, too. But I want to ask you, if you take yourself back to your neighborhood, because-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --your family moved into the first--into Georgia King's--King Village; is that the place that you--where you--how long did you live there? Speaker 2: Where did you get--where did you get that from? That's true. Where did I say--yeah, Georgia King Village. Was that from the doc? You watched the--is that from the doc or--okay. 'Cause I was gonna say, "Wow, I didn't mention that, did I?" Yes, Georgia King Village. Georgia King Village was the first housing projects built in Newark [New Jersey] after the '67 [1967] riots. It was erected in 1977. And so I didn't realize it at the time, and it's interesting, because walking around Newark, you know, as a kid, you would see these charred up places and these burnt down houses, and little did I know that they were ruined in the '67 [1967] riots. But nor- Georgia King Village was a sort of dangerous type of place, because, initially it was supposed to be for sort of black middle class. But then during the crack cocaine epidemic, it was a haven for drug dealers, because it was--it wasn't--it had a lot of sort of paths in it. And if you weren't familiar with the layout of the projects, you could easily dip and dive and, and, and completely lose whoever's chasing you. And, and that's what often happened. And it's interesting, you know, during the filming of 'Meeting David Wilson,' I went back to Georgia King Village, and that's--it's still very much notorious for that. Now it's sort of run by different gangs that we didn't--we didn't really have the Bloods and the Crips growing up on the East Coast at that time, but they're there now. But, yeah, it's Georgia King Village; '93 [1993], Georgia King Village. Speaker 1: And you were one when you--when your family moved in? Speaker 2: I was--yeah. I was--yes. I was, I was born there. I was born in Georgia King. Speaker 1: You were born there? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 657014 Speaker 1: So the question that I have is: what is family? Well, I want--let me just-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --before I ask that question, I--we have a question we ask, like, can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood? You've talked about some sights, but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well this is going to sound a little stereotypical. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: Fried chicken (laughter). Fried chicken. It just seems like we used to make a lot of fried chicken. So every time I saw a fried chicken, especially like the grease, you know. Not so much the chicken itself, but the grease, it reminds me of home cooking. There's sort of old, not mildew, but, you know, like the--yeah, I guess the mildew from the kitchen, from an old kitchen, sort of takes me back to the church basement [at Bethesda Church of God in Christ, Newark, New Jersey], because we spent a lot of time at church and that sort of reminds me of it; that sort of reminds me of growing up. Sounds? Old, old gospel hymnals reminds of my family, because we, we would--there was a lot of music in my family. And so even when we get together, we sing a lot, and we sing a lot of the old gospel hymns. Speaker 1: Give me an example. Speaker 2: Well, my father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] used to have a song every morning, you know. The, 'Yes, Lord.' I'm not sure if it's--you know, (singing), "Yes, Lord; yes, Lord; yes, Lord." 'Yes Lord,' he would sing that--hum that while he's shaving. Yeah. So, old hymnals. I don't sing. I will spare you that. But, yeah, those sort of things remind me of it. Old, old--an organ, gospel organ. Yes, a gospel organ. Someone playing a gospel organ. Story_ID: 657015 Speaker 1: So what was it like in--de- describe your apartment. Speaker 2: Now? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Then, of course. Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't--it wasn't an apartment. It's actually in a house [in Georgia King Village, Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Oh, it was a house (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We--it was a house. And because it-- Speaker 1: So was--so it was like a townhome or-- Speaker 2: It was a townhome. It was all brick. Orange brick and you walk in on the front--the first door; you walk in and there's the living room. And then you go up the steps and there's the kitchen. And the reason why the kitchen was on the second floor, because on the back door, you enter the back entrance and you would enter into the kitchen, to the kitchen. And so you have that. And then we have the--you know, go down the stairs. Once you're into the front door and through the living room, you make a--you make a right. Once you're about to hit the stairs to upstairs in the kitchen, there was the basement that went downstairs. And it was a pretty good sized basement. It was a pretty good sized basement as a matter of fact. A lot of flies down there every once in a while. But a pretty good sized basement. All right. Back in the living room again, going up the stairs you have the kitchen. Straight, at the top of the stairs, you had the bathroom. You make a left and make a right, you go another flight of stairs, there are two bedrooms. The first bedroom on the left hand side was the bedroom which was the first bedroom that I shared--that I lived--slept in--that I shared initially with my older sister [Christine Wilson]. Me and my younger brother [Jonathan Wilson] shared with my older sister. When she got older and she started going through puberty, we then sort of got moved up (laughter). And, oh, by the way, at the end of the hallway was the master bedroom where my mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] and father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] slept. But the other--that smaller room there, once my sister hit puberty, me and my younger brother moved up to the--another floor where there was just one room and an additional bathroom. And that's where I spent most of my childhood. Then if you go up the stairs again, there are two additional bedrooms and another bathroom. So the house was pretty big. We had--how many bedrooms is that--that's one, two; I think there was like five bedrooms. Five bedrooms and three baths. So it was a pretty--it's a pretty good sized house. And then, you know, we had ten kids, you know, we--you know, it was a pretty good sized house actually. So I don't know how, you know, them landing that was a big, you know, was huge. Speaker 1: Them even being able to get it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So were there other families your size around you? Speaker 2: Yes. There was a family that was a few blocks down. And, you know, we--well, they used to call us the Brady Bunch growing up because of the size of our family. But there was a family down, down the, down a way, and they used to even call us the Brady Brunch, and their mother had twelve kids. So we're like, "How are you guys calling us the Brady Bunch? You have more kids." But anyway, yeah, they were--but they were from a--there was a single mother, and they were a completely different--hm. They were a completely different type of family than we were. They had a--there was a mother who had kids from a number of different fathers. They were, even though we were poor, we had a sense of progressiveness about ourselves. They didn't have that much. There was--they didn't have that type of emphasis on education and things, and they got into a lot of trouble, the kids did--the family did. But we weren't particularly close with them, but there was a lot of them. There was twelve of them actually. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: There were twelve. Speaker 1: There were twelve? Speaker 2: Of them, yeah. Speaker 1: So maybe they called you the Brady Bunch 'cause you were more orderly. I'm not sure, you know. Speaker 2: True. And getting back to my father, I'll tell you something. In 1984, my father always believed in technology and made sure we had access to it. He felt that access to technology was a way forward and a way out of the--out of the ghetto. We had a Commodore 64. My father purchased a Commodore 64 for us. We had our first personal computer inside our house in 1984 in the heart of Newark [New Jersey]. And when you go back today and talk to some old friends, they will say, "The first time I ever seen a computer was at your house." So even in 1984, my father purchased a Commodore 64 and got us interested in engaging in--you know, engaging and getting sort of--engaging in technology. Story_ID: 657016 Speaker 1: So now, tell--describe--are there, are there chores inside that house? You know, who has what roles, you know, what are holidays like? I mean, I'm just trying to (unclear) the light. 'Cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. There were chores. There were chores, you know. It's particularly on the weekend there was chores. During the weekday, you know, it was--you know, the house was--obviously, it's, with ten kids, you can imagine it wasn't sort of--we weren't going to be the sort of--ever going to be in a spread of Home and Garden [Better Homes and Gardens], ever. But, there were a lot of chores, you know, that we had to do. You know, and the house would never stay clean more than, you know, ten minutes, because of, with so many kids, you know, things were bound to get messy. The holidays were always fun. Having--because there's so many of us; Thanksgiving--and then not only that, but my mother's family was always close by. And so, she comes from a large family, and so cousins were always over. So families were--Thanksgivings and Christmases were always big. My father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] was also big into doing big, big things. So there were always big holidays for us. Speaker 1: Like what? Big and--doing big things like what? Speaker 2: Just big. My father--we'd have to sing before the Christmas, you know, before we opened the gifts; do a big prayer; have a big dinner; it would be--it's a lot of people coming over. It was really big, just, I think big in the size of people. Even to this day, now, we, as a family, we don't get together on Christmas. We get together on Christmas Eve because everybody now has in-laws and other family, and they want to spend time with their own individual families now. So what we do is, we have a Christmas Eve party over my--over one of my brothers' house. And literally it's a, it's a--it turns out to be about fifty or sixty people there, you know, between us, our cousins, spouses, the children, friends; and it's a big party. And it's fun, because it's you know--it's fun. Speaker 1: So did you--so a lot of time is really spent in church [Bethesda Church of God in Christ, Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what time is not spent in church is in school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Is that what I'm hearing? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: What about chores, David [HistoryMaker David Wilson]? You didn't mention them, you know. Speaker 2: We did chores, you know, mopping the floors, cleaning your room; my room was always dirty; mopping the floors, cleaning rooms; you know. There was a lot of helping my mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] out around the house. Story_ID: 657017 Speaker 1: So your mother [Beverly Walker Wilson]--so how were your parents handling all of this, and because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time? Speaker 1: Yeah, because-- Speaker 2: My mother was more stressed. But my father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] was too. You know, my father--I'll start with my father, because he was the head of the household. And he--now looking back as a man, I understand it a lot better. So I told you my father was, you know, worked for Mennen [Mennen Company] and Beecham [Beecham Group, plc]. And he was very brilliant. Started several patents. One of his patents--you ever know, you ever get the massaging oil that heats up as you ru- start to rub it? That's my father. My father invented that. He invented it and started several patents for Mennen and Beecham as well. Never made any money off any of it, and he was let go, and let go in the '80s [1980s] from the company. And the dilemma that he had was, he was--on paper, he was underqualified for the job that he had and the job that he wanted, and the job that he probably should have had based off of his actual real experience. But he was also overqualified for the jobs that black men were getting at that time with no, no formal education. So there was this huge--you can imagine that, you know, he's a man who has all these kids and he's struggling, you know, trying to make things meet--ends meet. And I, I, I, I guess that he had a--the reason why he was so controlling inside the house was because he had so little control, and he probably felt that he had so little control outside of it. And I think that he desperately did try hard to make things work. We spent a lot of time on the food stamps, and I think--so I think there was a lot of frustration with that. And I think he took that out on my mother, and he took it out on us sometimes, too. He wasn't physically abusive towards us, he was very strict. We got beatings, you know, but it was never for no reason. But my--to my mother he was, you know, and my mother is a person, I guess because she was so free spirited naturally, a free thinker, they sort of butted in that regard, and he was physical towards her. So, you know, I think that was the stress. Speaker 1: So was--do you remember him always being physical or did it get worse as the kids got older? Speaker 2: I think it got--it was--yeah. It was just--not--I don't--I would imagine that I probably caught the tail end of it because the--I was younger. My older siblings were around longer to see it. But from a certain age, I don't know if it got worse. I think it got--I don't think it got worse, I just think my mother just didn't want to tolerate it. So they end up divorcing right before I went to high school. But--and it was--and, obviously, you know, the best thing for them, particularly for my mother obviously, the best thing. Speaker 1: It was not--it was the best thing. Speaker 2: It was. Oh, yeah, right. Absolutely. Absolutely. It definitely was. Yeah. Speaker 1: Was there any--was there any alcoholism or anything like that-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Nothing. He was just-- Speaker 2: My father--my father didn't drink. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: My father was so--he was a devout-- Speaker 1: Christian. Speaker 2: Christian. Yeah. God forbid, we didn't--we barely went to the movies. I got a beating for going to see 'E.T.' ['E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial'], and I was only five. So, yeah. We couldn't even go to the movies, because the Bible said, "Thou shall not sit in the seat of the scornful," which made no sense, because we got on the bus every day, and it's just as many scornful people who're sitting in the seats on the bus than there are in the movies. So, it never made any sense, but I guess they can always justifying anything with the scriptures. But, no, we were, no, there was no alcoholism involved or anything. No. It was just--I think it was just his own insecurity (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stern. I mean-- Speaker 2: It was insecurity more than anything else. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: His insecurity. He needed to control the house, because I think felt like he had little control over anything else. Speaker 1: So was he working the whole time that he was in the household or did he lose his job (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was always looking for work. Speaker 1: He was always looking for work. Speaker 2: If he wasn't working, he was always looking. Later on, you know, after the divorce he started working for New Jersey department of sanitation working for the sewage company where there was something where he was doing things that better suited his experience. But when I was growing up, you know, he was always looking. He was never a type--my father wasn't the type who sat around the house. He was out searching. Speaker 1: And what would he tell you about--what were some of the--I mean, you're having to do the reading of The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, what is he--what is he, and you're, and you're obviously studying the scripture. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, you know, I will tell you--one thing I will tell you about my father based off of this, and I want to also paint this a little bit. My father said this to me when I was making the doc ['Meeting David Wilson'], and I sat down and talked to him. Story_ID: 657018 Speaker 1: We were just--(cough) you were talking about your, your father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.]. Where were you--you were getting read- I had just said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh. Let me just clear my nose. My father--sorry-- Speaker 1: I tried to ask was there drinking, you said no he was very strict-- Speaker 2: Okay, I know what it is. I know what I was--when--let me know where you're ready. Speaker 1: We're ready. Speaker 2: When I was taping for the film ['Meeting David Wilson'], I had the opportunity to talk to my--sit down and talk to my father. He said something that I didn't really understand, you know, until later. And he said, "Look, you know," the pressure that he was under, you know, he felt that, it was set up to destroy black homes. So he would say that, you know when we were getting welfare, (clears throat) he, you know, it's sort of that the government rewarded, if you were young or a single black woman, you received more welfare assistance than if you were a, a household with both mother and father, and that, even though the job market was horrible for both men and women, what it did was, it encouraged a lot of women to keep the men, you know, or, you know, when welfare workers would come around, to make sure that the men weren't around, because it would cut into their--the amount of money they would receive. And in the time where, you know, obviously, you understand, you know, people say, "Well, you have a household with a man, then that man should be working and you should have some income." But when there was no employment for black, black men, you know, my father felt that there was pressure always in the community for, you know, for households with, you know, single parent households. Now, that's not saying that's the whole reason for it, but he felt that pressure. And that's something that he explained to me. Speaker 1: So what about the number of kids, though? Did people ever question, why ten kids? Speaker 2: You know, I still question it, why ten kids. I mean, I'm glad we're all here, but I, you know, I guess they--my father was, being strictly religious, didn't believe in any sort of, you know, contraceptives, I guess. And so, boom. And then my mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] ultimately couldn't take any more. She got her tubes tied. And so, I think I remember that was also a point of contention as well. But, I don't know, I guess my father felt that the world needed populating; he was doing his part. But, yeah, I--you know, you would think that we were raised on a farm, you know, with ten kids. But, no, we were raised in the heart of Newark [New Jersey]. And I always said that if my father did, you know, raise us on a farm, I'm sure, you know, we would have been able to really tend to the land quite efficiently with all of the--you know, the hands that we would have had around, so. Story_ID: 657019 Speaker 1: So how--how--wh- where are you--what are you in this birth order? I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm number seven. I'm the seventh oldest of the ten. Speaker 1: I know you're the seventh, but I guess I was trying to understand, who are you as a young person? And where are you in the family structure? You know, you talked about, I think, brother number five, who was very--had a per- you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, my brother Tim [Timothy Wilson]. Very loud and, you know. Speaker 1: That one. Speaker 2: Very quiet. Very quiet. Observant. I always felt like I had to chart my own path. You know, when you went to school, you were little, whoever, you know, they knew, you'd be the little Vernon [Vernon Wilson, Jr.; Yehudah Benlewi], little Joe [Joe "Flip" Wilson], little Tim, little Phil [Philip Wilson]. They put that little in the front of your name. So you didn't even have a name. You'd just be little this one. And so I think, as a result of that, there was always for me to try to find a place where I wasn't little anybody, I was just Dave [HistoryMaker David Wilson]. And so I've always tried to find, you know, an opportunity to do something that none of my other brothers have done, or to be someplace or go someplace they haven't gone, just to, you know, to get my own sort of individual--sense of individualism. Speaker 1: Did you live inside your head? Speaker 2: A lot. I lived inside my head a lot and fantasized about things, you know, what it would be like to have money, what it would be like to not live in Newark [New Jersey], what it would be like to live in New York [New York] and be successful, what it would be like to--just a lot of things. I was always, always was trying to escape. And so, you know, I would escape in my head. And I would go, sometimes, and I would walk and wander on my own so I could just be inside my own head. I did that a lot growing up as a kid. I walked, you know, around on my own a lot. And I loved--I still love doing that today, you know, just--it just helps you think. So there was a lot of that. And the house was noisy sometimes, and so just to be able to, to, to be able to be silence was a--very valuable. Story_ID: 657020 Speaker 1: So you went to--what was the name of the church? Did you tell me that? Speaker 2: Bethesda Church of God of Christ [Newark, New Jersey] (laughter). Bethesda Church of God in Christ. Speaker 1: And the minister there? Speaker 2: The first minister was Bishop James Screven, and then there was his son; and after he died, it was Bishop Nathaniel Screven [Nathaniel Screven, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And what are--you went to Martin Luther King Junior-- Speaker 2: High school. Speaker 1: --school. Elementary school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Dr. Martin Luther King elementary school, 8th Street school [13th Avenue/Dr. MLK, Jr. School]; one of the worst schools in Newark [New Jersey] at the time, ironically. K through eighth [kindergarten to eighth grade]. And there were a lot of fights there. I also had a lot of good time there as a kid, yeah. It was a typical Newark school, Newark public school at that time. Speaker 1: What are the--are the teachers black, are they are white? I mean, is it a mixture? Speaker 2: The majority of my teachers, with the exception of my kindergarten teacher, Miss Carita [ph.], they were all black. My kindergarten teacher, Miss Carita, was, was, was--I don't know what she was actually. What's Carita? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: I don't know what that is. Speaker 1: Was she Asian or (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, she wasn't Asian. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had the opportunity to go back and see her when I was doing a film. It was amazing that she was still there. And she taught most of my brothers too. Miss Carita. Yeah. Speaker 1: So you--you were the last boy and then the two girls [Rachael Wilson Lewison and Rebecca Wilson]. Speaker 2: No. There's a brother beneath me [Jonathan Wilson]. Speaker 1: There's another--okay. That's right. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 657021 Speaker 1: So what are you--what is--so when you say there're a lot of fights, I mean, are you--do you feel you got a good education? Where do you--? Speaker 2: At Newark [New Jersey]? So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In elementary school [13th Avenue/Dr. MLK, Jr. School, Newark, New Jersey], in, in elementary. Speaker 2: So--I love to share this story. Each year you get your new textbooks. And I'll never forget this. You would open up your history book and you have that first page. And I noticed on the first page, you know, obviously there's a lot of names written on that first page. You know that first blank page where you--and then there's the actual page where, you know, and there's names written throughout--but then there's an actual page and it's designated for you to write your name, and those were all full. And I always say that, this is a really telling story, because you would open up that book, and you look at the page where the names, where there was designated spaces to write your name on the book, and the name would start off--it would be like, you know, Katy Ann, you know, Sara--and you go down further and further, and you start looking at the names on the other pages where people had this book for so long that they just passed it on over and over and over, and the names got blacker and blacker. So it start with Sara then it would go to Shemika, and then it would always be like (unclear)--and you used to--got to seeing that these books, well, these weren't fresh books; these were books that had been used and used literally for, you know, in some cases, decades. We, you know, I, I remember I had a history book where the last president was--who was JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] or LG- LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]. And I'm a kid growing up in the '80s [1980s]. So there were--there were a lot of that there. And so, you know, we, we, you--it was just really fascinating, you know, looking at how sort of the education that I received. And I, you know I'll never forget when I went to college eventually [at Rowan College of New Jersey; Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey], I always said to myself, you know, well, right now when I first started, I know people had a better education than I did, but I'm going to start off now in--you know, we all have a zero GPA [grade point average], and, you know, I want to make sure that, you know, I'm just going to work hard to make sure that I have just as good of, you know, a showing as anyone else and to try to make up ground. Because I know that, you know, my elementary school education wasn't the best. And when I went to high school, I went to Milton Hershey School, I asked my mother--I begged to go away to high school. So I went to Milton Hershey high school, in Hershey, Pennsylvania in high school for--and I was so unprepared for that, my education. And then my parents [Beverly Walker Wilson and Vernon Wilson, Sr.], at that time, they were getting a divorce. So I couldn't really concentrate, so I did poorly there. And the divorce was happening, and so I couldn't--I, I really just decided to go home. But that was a very important experience for me, because it was the first time I had really been exposed to the country. It's the first time I had been exposed to, to white friends, having white friends. I didn't know any white people prior to that; maybe like one--no. I'm sorry. I had one white friend. One white friend in Newark, and we weren't that--all that great of friends. But first white friends that I had were when I went to, you know, Milton Hershey School. And that was also, you know, an interesting experience. You know, we did things I've never done. I remember this, this one thing that sort of, sort of like burned in my memory of going to this apple orchard and seeing these trees for miles and miles, from what it seemed. And it was just like it was so beautiful. I'd never seen anything like that in Newark. Seeing deer. We'd never seen anything like that in Newark. So that was a new experience for me. And I think it gave me a sense that what I was used to wasn't the norm. And I eventually went back to Newark and finished up my high school at Arts High School in Newark, New Jersey, where I studied the arts, and it was one of the better high schools in Newark. But it was still far different from, you know, Milton Hershey School in Hershey, Pennsylvania. Story_ID: 657022 Speaker 1: So, (clears throat) I want to, now, go back to elementary for just a second, and are there any, are there any teachers that influenced you in elementary school [13th Avenue/Dr. MLK, Jr. School, Newark, New Jersey] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Miss Carita [ph.] was also just a great teacher. Speaker 1: But she wasn't elem- was she eleme-- Speaker 2: Kindergarten. Speaker 1: Kindergarten, okay, that's what I-- Speaker 2: My eighth grade teacher, Miss Jones [ph.]. I wish I could find her actually, Miss Jones. She was more of who--she kept up with me after school, she wrote letters; yeah. Miss Jones. She was very inspirational. Speaker 1: So you said there were fights. Were there fights inside the, you know, in the sch- when you--why did you mention fights? Were there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were they in the school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Were there fights-- Speaker 2: I mean, a lot of schools--'cause there were a lot of fights. It was--you had a lot of kids who had a lot of frustrating--a lot of frustration from home, lot of confusion, a lot of stress. And so you, you add them into--you put them into a place where they don't know how to really sort of work through their emotions, there's a lot of fights. Speaker 1: What do you mean by a lot of fights then? Speaker 2: You know, just a lot of fights. Kids get into fights. Speaker 1: Like, what does--is that daily or is that-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, of course. Daily. Yeah. And then I remember it got so bad, I remember one time a group of kids beat up the security guard. You know, how--and I think back on that like, how do elementary school kids beat up the security guard? It was bad. So, yeah. There was a lot of that. Speaker 1: Any knives or things like that? Or those were kept? Did you have metal-- Speaker 2: We didn't. We didn't have metal detectors-- Speaker 1: This is before metal-- Speaker 2: This is before metal detectors. So there weren't any metal detectors. And there were shootings around the school, not in the school, you know. And to my knowledge, there, there weren't any stabbings, you know. It was a lot--it was a lot of fights, you know. But, yeah. Speaker 1: And how far is the school from where you lived in the projects [Georgia King Village, Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: By walking, it's about a ten minute walk. It wasn't that far. Speaker 1: So, close. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was close. Speaker 1: And were you getting--was lunch being provided to you at the school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lunch was provided, um-hm. Lunch at school was provided, which was a go- I'm sure a godsend to my parents [Beverly Walker Wilson and Vernon Wilson, Sr.] yeah. Story_ID: 657023 Speaker 1: So, how does the Milton Hershey School [Hershey, Pennsylvania], how does that come about? How do you find out about it? 'Cause-- Speaker 2: Well, a older cousin of mine had went to Girard College in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I so desperately wanted to, to get away. I just wanted to get out of Newark [New Jersey], and I wanted to go to Girard College. Well, it turned out that Girard College was--I was too old to get into it, 'cause they take kids younger than I was at the time. So another woman from church [Bethesda Church of God in Christ, Newark, New Jersey], Sister Garrett [ph.], had a daughter who went to Milton Hershey School, and so she's--you know, learned, learned about that. And so I applied, did all the things to try to get into it and I got into it. Went to Hershey, Pennsylvania to the (unclear) got into it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So explain what the school was like, what is? Speaker 2: So Milton Hershey School is a school that was started by Milton Hershey, who is the founder of Hershey chocolate [The Hershey Company]. He couldn't have kids of his own, so he started this school with this endowment, and, and left all of his inheritance to the school; his personal wealth to the school. And, initially, the school was only limited to white boys, then it eventually opened to, you know, white kids of both genders, then eventually opened up to all races. And it really was a school for kids--underprivileged kids. And so, you know, I went. We applied. We went there. And it was--it's actually a quite wealthy school. It's a school that is now, you know, has about two--when I was there, about $2 billion in the bank, and they don't even touch the--they live--the school operates off the interest. And so it does quite well. It, you know, it's a, you know, pretty well run school. Speaker 1: So it's a boarding school? Speaker 2: It's a boarding school in Hershey, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was nice waking up in the morning sometimes to the smell of chocolate. It was cool. It was different, and much different than Newark. Speaker 1: So how--how many kids? How many kids were in your class, and how many black kids or black boys? Speaker 2: Oh, it was mixed. It was mixed white and black, Latino. It was pretty mixed. And so that was, you know, an interesting experience. A lot of the kids came from New York [New York] or Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Did you go sight unseen or had you gone there for--to visit, or were you-- Speaker 2: We'd gone there to visit there once. No, hold on. Maybe once. Or maybe not. Maybe my first day there was the first time there. I can't remember. Story_ID: 657024 Speaker 1: So what, what is your mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] saying about this, and what are your other brothers and sisters saying about this? Speaker 2: My father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] was against it. He didn't want me to go [to the Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania]. My (pause) my father was against it. He didn't want me to go. My brothers sort of stood up. One of my brothers stood up and my father ultimately relented. This is a time in which, you know, my father and mother were going through sort of the beginning of a separation; it was starting to happen. And, you know, I think, you know, he was partially distracted with all that going on, so. But, you know, I decided to go and I did. It was the best thing that could have happened for--to me. I needed that exposure, that something outside of Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: How did your other--how are they handling everything, your other brothers? Do any of them go in to any--or your sisters, sorry. Do any of them--are there--any of them part of any special programs, whether it's summer camp or-- Speaker 2: No. We were all smart kids. Speaker 1: Hm? Just smart kids. Okay. Speaker 2: We didn't need it. We didn't do any summer camps. We just--during the summertime, we all got out and dispersed, and then knew that it was time to come home at a certain time, we just came back in. And that's literally what it was, you know. And it was interesting that that's the, you know--we just had a lot of, you know, independence as kids, you know, when--particularly on like a Saturday, you know, we just pretty much run free. And in the community, my mother still knew everybody, and then we would generally stay inside Georgia King Village [Newark, New Jersey]. And, yeah, and we would just come back home. Story_ID: 657025 Speaker 1: So when you're at--so you're staying at--it's a boarding school [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania]. You're there for the year. You're there for the year? Speaker 2: Yeah, for the year. Speaker 1: For the year. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And you'd go home, obviously, for--on Christmas break and you'd go home for summer break. Speaker 1: Okay. Were, were you at all home- you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Homesick? Speaker 1: --homesick and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, I, I nearly burned the house down where we were all staying at. We-- Speaker 1: At school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Which really escalated things. Like, oh, I got to go home. I wasn't used to an electric stove. And so it was my turn to actually cook the, you know--so, what we have is called a student home. And in that student home, there would be about twelve students; twelve to fourteen students. And then you have house parents. So the house parents would have their own quarters. These were people who actually worked to take care of the student homes. And they were spouses, and they would sometimes have kids of their own, and they had a certain section in the house that they lived in. But then the rest was, you know, and then there's the common area. So it was like a big house, essentially. We would have rotating, rotating chores, and, you know, you would get kitchen duty sometimes. And the kitchen duty you would have to--in kitchen duty, you would have both cook and then clean up the kitchen, you know, and that would be the part of the duty. And you had different sections of the house that you were responsible for. You know, outside, you have the lawn. They had just gotten rid of farm work right before I got there. But prior to that, you had--people had to milk cows and things like that. Thank god they got rid of that by the time I got there. But this time I was doing the kitchen duty and I was making fries. And I'm from Newark [New Jersey], we didn't have any electric stoves. And I'll never forget that there was a--there's an electric stove there--and, you know, an electric stove, there's a point where you can't tell whether it's on or off because it's the same sort of thing. You know, you turn--on direction, and I couldn't tell whether it's on or off. And so I would--had a--deep frying some French fries, and we--I thought I'd turned the knob all the way off. Go back inside to the dining room, we're all eating and whatever. I go back inside the kitchen, I noticed that there's smoke coming out of the pot. I'm like okay, this shouldn't be. So I go, and the nozzle is above the pot, turn off the pot. As soon as moved my hand, (makes sound) a short flame sort of bursted out of the pot. So I'm like, okay, this is not good; let me try to find the fire extinguisher. This kid named Ryan Dobbs--I'll never forget his name--Ryan Dobbs, he was from Pottsville, Pennsylvania, and he goes and gets the fire extinguisher and gets close to the fire and (makes sounds), and the fire goes up higher, 'cause you're supposed to have a certain distance. So the fire went higher and he got burned in his face, and he's like (makes sound). So I'm like oh no. Then the house father, who was supposed to be the mature guy, gets a big bucket of water and--keep in mind, this is a grease fire--takes the bucket of water and throws it on top of the pot (makes sound). The entire--I mean, just this flame--it's like a mushroom from this pot that was literally, you know, about this big. I'd never seen anything like it. This flame shot straight up and spread throughout the ceiling. Everybody panicked, ran out the house. Anyway, we got the flame under control, and I burnt down the kitchen. We had--everybody had to move. And so, I was sort of to blame for that, and I took it really hard. And that was actually one of the things that--because I was so depressed; there was my family, with my mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] and father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.] going through a divorce at home; I had burnt down the kitchen, everybody had to leave the house because of me, be displaced to different other student homes. It was really stressful at that time. So I eventually left. I came back to Newark. Story_ID: 657026 Speaker 1: So were you there [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania] the whole year or you were there just part of the year? Speaker 2: I--I left--I was--fortunately because I'd just--if I didn't leave at that time, if I'd gotten back to Newark [New Jersey], I would have to go to some of the other schools in Newark, the more tougher school. I went to a school that you had to apply to in Newark, Arts High School. So there were sort of top school--tiered high schools in Newark -- Arts High, Science High [Science Park High School, Newark, New Jersey], University High [University High School, Newark, New Jersey]--that were sort of schools that specialized in getting kids geared towards the sciences, the arts, or going to college. And then there was the other schools where, depending on where you lived, you were sent to. And you didn't want to go to Barringer [Barringer Academy of the Arts and Humanities, Newark, New Jersey], you didn't want to go to Weequahic [Weequahic High School, Newark, New Jersey]. Weequahic is the school which I would have had to go to when I got back. Thank god I--and I just got in, in Arts High just at the right time. Speaker 1: Now, you came in ninth grade? Or you came in, in tenth-- Speaker 2: Tenth grade. Speaker 1: And so you came-- Speaker 2: Second semester, tenth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, so you went away--you went away in tenth grade? Speaker 2: I went away freshman--freshman year of high school. Speaker 1: So that's ninth grade. Speaker 2: Ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I came back the second semester in tenth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So a year and a half. Story_ID: 657027 Speaker 1: I want to understand at this point--I mean, have you been--is, have you shown an inclination to the arts? Because I haven't heard, I haven't heard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no. I'm a great artist. Speaker 1: But where did I hear that in your--? Speaker 2: Oh, I drew all the time. I still do. Speaker 1: So you were drawing? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So when did you start drawing? Speaker 2: Oh, since I was two or three. I'm a really good artist. As a matter of fact, most of my family members thought I was going to be an artist, you know. I really got into comic books. I mean, really good artist; sketch artist. But, you know, I was never able to motivate myself to draw for anybody else. I did horrible in art class. Because art for me was always very personal. I only did it for myself. I can draw something, I can do, sketch someone and it would be--if I wanted to do it, it'll be awesome. But when somebody say, "Oh, I'll pay you to sketch me or I'll pay you to do this," oh, it would really suck, because, I was never motivated to do that by anybody paying. I had to feel moved to do something artistically. Speaker 1: Well, did you have art classes in school, and what--and then you're saying you were---you didn't do well in art? I mean, you had art class, didn't you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have. Speaker 1: You said you didn't do what-- Speaker 2: But, yeah. I-- Speaker 1: But there's no payment there? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: There's no payment in art? Speaker 2: What do you mean? Oh, in art classes? In high school and everyone else? No. It's just still--I was still--there was a thing that you just had to do something. And the idea that I had to do something, and I always felt that it was always weird, because you would learn technique in art, which I always thought was weird, because I had my own technique, and why am I learning how this person create--did art. And I always thought that was weird. Like, I, you know, if I need to draw something, and so there was a thing where, okay, this is how you draw a figure. And you, you do the little, you know, the frame and everything else like that. And I was able to just sit and draw a figure without doing--building a frame. And I was able to look at something and see--and do it proportionately. So I was always frustrated with the idea that I had to go through some sort of system to do that. And the same thing with math. I used to hate the idea that you had to come up with--you had to show your work. I was like, why does it matter if I got the right answer how I got it. You know, my--the way I thought was different. You know, I had my own way of coming to the same conclusion. What difference does it make? And my own way, I don't quite understand my own way, but I was able to make certain associations to certain things, and I would come up with the same result and same answer. And that's why I started to do bad in math when we had to actually show your work, because I couldn't really justify it. I couldn't say, "Oh, this reminds me of X, Y, or Z," and it would have no reference to anybody else. It only had reference to me and application to me in the way I thought. So I can understand that. So I've always liked things where it was--you know, that's why I loved English. It's up to your interpretation sometimes. You can read a book and say, "Oh, this is what I got from the book," and you could be right. Another person can read the same thing and say, "This is what I got from the book," and that person can be right, you know. I've loved that more than that. Speaker 1: So when you come back to the arts, it's called the arts academy-- Speaker 2: Arts High School [Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Arts High School. 'Cause that's where [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore went to school actually-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: 'Cause--oh. Speaker 2: Tisha Campbell [Tisha Campbell-Martin], [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Has a good reputation. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think also--didn't Sarah Vaughan go there? Speaker 1: I don't know about that. Speaker 2: Someone else did. Speaker 1: I'm not sure. But it's--I thought that it had closed too-- Speaker 2: It's--no, it's still not. It's one of the--it's the oldest school of the arts in the United States (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It has--but something happened. It was closed for a bit, because-- Speaker 2: I think they moved it to, to, to--at one point when I was going there. Speaker 1: Like within re- I'm talking about in recent years, within the last five years-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. It's still around. No. It's still around. Story_ID: 657028 Speaker 1: Who are some of the, the people who attended Arts High School [Newark, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Arts High School has a lot of famous alumni. Tisha Campbell [Tisha Campbell-Martin]; Michael B. Jordan; Latin singer, Frankie Negron; [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover, he attended even though he didn't graduate there, but he attended there; you mentioned [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore. It's a lot of folks who went to that school. It's a, it's a pretty established school of the arts. It's the first school of the arts in the United States, I believe. Story_ID: 657029 Speaker 1: Now, when you go there--well, I want to also understand what your interests are, I mean, besides art. I mean, what are your musical interests; what are your art int- what are your interests? Speaker 2: When I went to Arts High School [Newark, New Jersey]? Just art. Speaker 1: I mean just period. Speaker 2: I love comic books. As a kid, comic books. Speaker 1: Which kind of--which? Speaker 2: All Marvel comic books. 'X-Men,' 'Spider-Man,' 'The Hawk,' those types of comic books. I was really big in comic books. Yeah. I mean-- Speaker 1: Did you collect them? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, a lot; a lot of comic books. My brother has my collection, and I get upset every time I think about, 'cause we collected thousands of comic books. You know, we would take whatever little money that we ever earned and ever able to come up with and go out and buy some comic books. Speaker 1: So did he like--which brother is this? Speaker 2: My brother Tim [Timothy Wilson]. Speaker 1: Okay. So is--would he collect them as well? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what other interests do you have, though, at this point? I'm just trying to understand. I'm talking about your sophomore year of high school. Speaker 2: What interests did I have in sophomore year of high school? That was it. I was a boring kid. Speaker 1: Okay. So you--so you go into Arts High School. What is the curriculum? What are you studying? Are you taking art classes now? Speaker 2: I was taking art--I was taking art classes. That is part of the curriculum for me, and, you know, just in other general courses, you know; history, this, you know; different math, you know; geometry, algebra; all those things. Yeah. Speaker 1: And are there any popular artists you're liking at this point? Speaker 2: No. Comic book artists. I was such a comic book fan. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I was just strictly--I wasn't--you know, I wasn't into the fine arts. Speaker 1: No. I said popular artists like music, musical artists. Speaker 2: Oh. Music artists. Speaker 1: Right. Music artists (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's what I said, 'cause I'm thinking (laughter)-- Speaker 2: You know, I guess by that time, the Fugees were big. Man, at that time, the Fugees were big. Anything in the '90s [1990s], you know, from that time period. Man. They started going--you know, you had Snoop Dogg and a lot of the big West Coast--that's when West Coast rap (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rappers? Speaker 2: --really became popular on the East Coast. Yeah. All that. Man. Speaker 1: Okay. That's good, 'cause I was, like (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I was--yeah, I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how would you have referred to them? I'm talking about--I said musical artists-- Speaker 2: Oh. I thought you were talking about artists-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I was mentioning my sketching. Speaker 1: Oh, (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. Oh, yeah. I was definitely into music. But-- Speaker 1: So who were your favorite ones? Speaker 2: At the time in the '90s [1990s]. What were my favorite artists? Well, I listened to Snoop, you know, and then obviously as you got older, you listen to a little more of Biggie [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.], Tupac [Tupac Shakur]. Fugees were really big in Newark [New Jersey]. You know, obviously then Redman. Redman with like Wu-Tang Clan. Yeah. They were--yeah, those folks. Story_ID: 657030 Speaker 1: So what are--who are your friends, too, David [HistoryMaker David Wilson] at this point? 'Cause you said you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's friends, too. Friends too. Actually, it's interesting. I--one of my--I just finished having dinner with him yesterday--my oldest friend is from high school, Barion [Barion Grant], who would eventually help start TheGrio [thegrio.com] with me. He's, yeah. So, he as well as all the friends. And I had a couple of friends there, I mean, in, in college [at Rowan College of New Jersey; Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey]--I mean high school. And, then, you know, by the time I got to college, most of them, you know, the friendship sort of faded. But one of them, Barion, is still very much a friend. Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of your time at Arts High School [Newark, New Jersey] that you, you know, that sort of stick out of your time there? Speaker 2: No. I feel like when I was in Milton Hershey School [Hershey, Pennsylvania], I was a really goofy kid. And I didn't really, really feel like a respected person until I got to my junior year and senior year of--in high school. I just--I actually just didn't feel like I fit in life, you know, during that time of high school. It was awkward. Life was awkward. And I think it was until I got in my junior year--the end of my junior year that I felt like, okay, I'm getting the hang of all this. Speaker 1: And what did that mean then? If you were getting the hang of it, what did that mean? Speaker 2: Well, I had my set group of friends. I had a set group of friends. Just a little bit more confident. Speaker 1: And what were they interested in? Speaker 2: You know, being silly. You know, conversation, talk about what we want to do ultimately in our lives. Speaker 1: And what were the conversations about that? Speaker 2: I don't know. We just had--we would just--we were a group of friends who, I think, our mutual interests were, was in, you know, listened to music; but we were more or less, I think, people who wanted to do bigger things in life, I guess, and people who had an asp- sort of--these sort of aspirations for ourselves and, you know, we had the same sense of humor and, you know; some of us had similar church backgrounds we could identify in that regard. Well, yeah. Speaker 1: And so, when it comes to the time to talk--now, I also have another question. Are you going to parties and things on weekends as you're getting older (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I wasn't a party kid. Speaker 1: You were not? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were pretty--okay. Speaker 2: I was a pretty--I would--I think my mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] said that I--I probably gave my mother--me and my younger brother [Jonathan Wilson] probably gave my mother the least problem. I was, I was always in my head. I was never a--I never got into any real trouble growing up. Like I say, I never got into really any real trouble. (Pause) Yeah. Story_ID: 657031 Speaker 1: So when it's time to go--to think about college, what are you thinking about and? Speaker 2: So, this is when things took a turn, because I actually did meet a friend who was not the best influence on me. He was actually a, a, a, a next door neighbor, and we'd hang all the time, played basketball all the time. And I just thought he was really cool, and I kind of looked up to him because he was cool, he did all the things that I thought was like, oh, yes, this guy is really cool. And I would actually end up playing hooky and skipping school. And I was--one day, I told my mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] and father [Vernon Wilson, Sr.], and I told my brothers, that didn't--I wasn't going to go to college. Said, "I'm not going to go to college." And my brother said something. My brother, Phil [Philip Wilson], who is three older than me; three up from me; not three years, but the three siblings before me; said--and he said it with so much conviction, and he said it with so much regret that he'd wish that he had it all over to do it and go to college. And my brother, Phil, was--is probably just naturally the most intelligent of all of us. And he was so regretful. And I didn't want that. And I, and I've always lived off of, when I was a kid, observing my siblings before me and promising myself that I would not make this mistake or that mistake and this mistake. And I'll never forget, soon after I was in computer class in school and we got an announcement on the loud speaker and it says, "Oh, Rowan University [Rowan College of New Jersey; Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey] is here," you know, "giving a presentation. If you're interested," you know, "head downstairs to see the presentation." So I went down there, saw the presentation for Rowan, said, "Oh, this school is interesting. Okay." I applied for it. I didn't apply to ma- to many schools, but that was one of the few schools I applied to. And I eventually got in. And I just knew at that moment when I saw the presentation and I applied for it, I knew that was the school I was supposed to go to. Speaker 1: Now, did your, did your brothers or sisters and your mother or father know that you were skipping school at that time? Or was it just too much to keep track-- Speaker 2: I think there was so much going on. Speaker 1: That they had too much? Speaker 2: You know, but there was so much. And my parents--the level of--they were strict in some ways, but then there was also a level of independence that they gave us. And I don't think that--they didn't know. I mean, I would just--I wasn't just out with, "Oh, I'm not going to school today, ma." I would, you know, obviously, maybe just go over to my neighbor's house and then just hang out there and just not go. Speaker 1: And what was--what were you doing when you weren't going? Just hanging--what were you guys doing? Roaming the streets? Hanging out? Speaker 2: No. I don't even know, to be honest with you. Nothing. Literally nothing to do. I, I, I couldn't even find anything. Now I'm thinking back on it, I don't even know if there was anything worth it. I mean, I still wasn't doing drugs or anything or, you know. No. Story_ID: 657032 Speaker 1: So, so what, what is--what is Rowan? I mean, talk about the school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How large it is, and? Speaker 2: Rowan University [Glassboro, New Jersey], when I went there, it just--it was actually initially Rowan College [Rowan College of New Jersey]. It became Rowan University maybe into my second year. It got university status. And we--it was interesting. It was about ten thousand students, so it was about a midsize school. About 10 percent of the population of that school was black. It was a nice sized campus. It really gave sort of a really great college feel. You know, when you're there at Rowan, you felt like you're on a college campus, which is what I want, wanted. You know, I wanted that college experience, and Rowan gave it to me. I started my--you know, I started off as going--wanting to go into poli sci [political science], and when I got back from Hershey School [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania] and got into Arts High School [Newark, New Jersey], I saw the disparity in the way in which things were, and I wanted to get into politics. I felt like I would make a good politician. Or, you know, and so--then I started to learn about politics, and then I said, I don't like the whole process of it. You know, I want to do something else where I get--make a big contribution, and I decided to go into communication and do television. And one of my professors, Ned Eckhardt, was really good in documentary. I really fell in love with documentary and long form production. And my first big project was a student documentary called 'Hidden Heroes: African American Women in WWII.' Now, before I talk to you about that, the summer of 1997--before in the summer of 1997, there was a--in the communications department, there is a billboard. On the billboard, there was an opportunity for internship at WABC in New York [WABC-TV, New York, New York]. And, I said, "Okay. It's cool. I would love to try it out." So I went up to New York [New York], caught a bus from New Jersey, Glassboro, New Jersey, South--it was in South Jersey, where Rowan University is, and got to New York. I'll never forget. It was a really rainy day that day. And I'll never forget, this is my--'97 [1997], so I'm, like, a sophomore. I get into--to, to, to ABC on 66th Street and this huge waiting area, there's hundreds of kids. I was so intimidated. And then they took our names and then we go up, and I was just so intimidated. And these were people who--they were on it. They were polished. They were--and it was a long thing. And I remember interviewing and for different folks, and I learned about 'Like It Is' with Gil Noble. And I forgot how it happened, but I came back. At that time, I interviewed with a guy by the name of Les Clark [ph.], who was a producer there. And, then, you know, I got a callback a couple of days later or a couple of weeks later, saying that I got the internship, and I was going to be working, 'Like It Is' with Gil Noble. And this is the summer of 1997, and I remember meeting Gil. Story_ID: 657033 Speaker 1: And, you know, are you familiar with Gil Noble? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A legend--TV legend. Speaker 2: We had wanted to do his interview and didn't get a chance. Speaker 1: Oh. He, he changed my life. He changed my life. I was a bumbling, super stuttering, under confident kid. And the ritual with Gil was that, I would get there at WABC [WABC-TV, New York, New York] around eight o'clock in the morning. He would have me read the newspapers, and he would then have me come into his office and have me talk about what are the top stories and to explain and to articulate my views on those stories. And that did more for me than anything else. And he said, "Well," and he would give me exercises, you know, because at that time, I thought--I flirted with the idea of actually being on air. So he said, "Okay. Take a newspaper and you read the newspaper and you do it as if you're reading the news--the teleprompter." And I'll go home, read, you know, as I practiced. And it--you know, what it really got me comfortable with doing is being able to talk in public, and being able to be opinionated and share my thoughts in public. And he would have me sit down and watch interviews of--with, you know, Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]; interviews with Betty Shabazz. Every morning I would get a call, and, you know, I would answer his phone and I'll hear this voice, like, "Hello, David [HistoryMaker David Wilson]. Is Gil there?" I was like, "Who is this?" "It's Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel]," every, every morning. And, you know, calls from Charlie Rangel, Nipsey Russell, Percy Sutton; you know, giants. And, you know, they'd come by. Dr. ben-Jochannan [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan], you know, the Egyptologist. These were his friends. And it was just really good. And that summer was really important because it's also--two big stories broke that summer. The Abner Louima case? And then also the, the death of Betty Shabazz. And so that was important that summer. I learned a lot that summer. And he taught me one thing that was really important, because, before I was not one who wanted to--you know, I come from Newark [New Jersey], and I didn't want to--I always wanted to distance myself from being the (gesture) black guy. The guy who did the black things. And I had an opportunity at NYABJ [New York Association of Black Journalists] when they were honoring Gil Noble, and his daughters were there, and I was so happy they were there, 'cause I got the opportunity--I was being--we received--TheGrio [thegrio.com] received an award, and I got to say something to his daughters, which was, "Look, you know, Gil taught me that it was no less of a virtue to cover news that impacted my community." You know, I had always wanted to be--do mainstream stuff and just stay mainstream, and he taught me that there was no shame and it was just as virtuous to cover black topics and to be a black journalist. And that--I can tell you right now with 100 percent certainty that if I had not encountered Gil Noble in my life, we wouldn't be here right now, because I certainly wouldn't be doing TheGrio [thegrio.com]--I don't know where I would be. And then, you know, my first student documentary project, when I got back to school [Rowan College of New Jersey; Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey], was a documentary called 'Hidden Heroes: African American Women in WWII.' And I that doc--it was about a ten minute doc--and I got Gil Noble to voiceover, do the voiceover on it. And we won several awards. The documentary was inducted into the women's memorial [Women in Military Service for America Memorial] in Arlington, Virginia. Speaker 2: So let me ask you, did he ever tell you what he saw in you? Because he died when? Speaker 1: Just maybe two years ago (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two years ago. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: 'Cause--his collection, you know. What happened to his collection? Speaker 1: Oh, he had all of, you know, tons of foota- he has the largest-- Speaker 2: I know but what happened to it? Speaker 1: I don't know. I mean it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was the thing, I think, people were questioning. Speaker 1: Oh. He owned that, and he, he, he-- Speaker 2: He owned that-- Speaker 1: --and that was the pride of his life, his collection. Speaker 2: Right. I just don't know what had happened to it. But 'cause he had gotten ill, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 657034 Speaker 1: So, so the thing that--so he--this is the summer, this is the summer after your sophomore year? Speaker 2: This is the summer after my sophomore year, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And first of all, you get an internship that you don't think you're gonna, you know--remember you were talking about-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you were nervous about it and, you know, people seemed all together-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you get this internship, and then you get to work with this incredible man [Gil Noble]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So I'm--there is--there are a couple of questions I have. Rowan [Rowan College of New Jersey; Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey], does--so it had a good communications department? Speaker 2: Oh, it had a really communications department. The--even the radio department would win, you know, awards year after year. Speaker 1: And they have a good journal- is it, they have a good journal- (unclear)? Speaker 2: They have a really good program now there. It's a little known secret. I actually think that if Rowan was any further up the turnpike, it would be a lot more popular. Speaker 1: So why did--what do you mean by that? Speaker 2: You know, it was sort of tucked away in South Jersey. And in South Jersey, it's like, you know--you know, there's two New Jerseys; there's North Jersey and there's South Jersey. And, you know, people pay very little attention to North Jersey. You know, it might as well be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To South Jersey. Speaker 2: South Jersey. Yeah, you know. It's a suburb with Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: You know, because we're actually interviewing someone tomorrow, and I was wondering if you knew him. He's younger than you. Trymaine--I think it's-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Trymaine Lee? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Trymaine. Trymaine is from--so, here's the deal (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he went to-- Speaker 2: Trymaine went to Milton Hershey School [Hershey, Pennsylvania]. And Trymaine also went to Rowan. Speaker 1: I know. That's--I knew you went--'cause I was like-- Speaker 2: He also went to Milton Hersey School. Speaker 1: 'Cause I had not heard of Rowan--I have to be hon- I hadn't known of Rowan, so then I, like, Rowan, Rowan, you know, and then I said that he was younger, and I thought like maybe they don't really know each other. Speaker 2: Well, we didn't know--we--I mean, he--I think he remembers me from--or he's heard about me. I think we didn't really know each other while we were down there. And the funny thing was, he's only a year--I think a year younger than I am or two years younger than I am. Speaker 1: I thought, I thought he was a little younger (unclear). Speaker 2: We were maybe two years, maybe, but, he went to Milton Hershey School, too. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You didn't know him at Milton Hershey 'cause you weren't there? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: He went to Milton Hershey School, and he also went to Rowan. So we both share two, you know, two, two alma maters. Story_ID: 657035 Speaker 1: So now, I saw that. So you have--you have a strong practicum program [at Rowan College of New Jersey; Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey], though, 'cause you were producing things, this was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were producing things. We were, you know--yeah. We were out there in the field. And I had the opportunity to direct the documentary ['Hidden Heroes: African American Women in WWII'] by sort of like the luck of the straw--draw. Speaker 1: So what teacher did you like there? Speaker 2: My teacher (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Teachers. Speaker 2: --Professor Ned Eckhardt, who was the head of the documentary program. He was very strict. He wouldn't allow (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what did he teach--what did you learn? Speaker 2: Well, we were not allowed to miss any classes. Oh, that was--he made that the worst offense possible. I don't care if, you know, you got shot that morning. You made it to his course. And he was a really good teacher. One of the things that he taught me in making documentaries is, you know, show me, don't tell me. Which is a good thing for--which I think a lot of documentary folks forget, you know. Show people what you're saying, you know. Don't tell them what you're saying. And I think being able to do things visually, you know, I think which is a real part--the hard part of storytelling in, in, in a documentary format. Story_ID: 657036 Speaker 1: So (clears throat) you come back and you work--that's what you were saying, you worked on the documentary at that point. Now, I was wondering, while you were there, did you--was Melba Townsend Tolliver [Melba Tolliver] there at that time working with Gil or not? Gil Noble? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was Carmen Smith. Speaker 1: Okay. It was Carmen Smith. Okay. Speaker 2: Do you know Carmen? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Carmen Smith is now an executive at Disney [The Walt Disney Company]. Carmen had started off at--doing 'Live with Regis and Kathie Lee.' Then she went back--and she really didn't like that. She wanted to do something a little more hardedge, but she ultimately rose up through the ranks and became--right now, she's this big executive at Disney. I haven't spoken to her in years. Speaker 1: But, see, what's interesting is that where you wanted to intern at--and before you got--or that's what I read, that you were--you--well, I shouldn't say that. The more coveted internships were with Regis [Regis Philbin] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Oh, definitely. They were Regis and Kathie Lee [Kathie Lee Gifford], eyewitness news. Speaker 1: And so you're like, "I got Gil Noble." Speaker 2: I got Gil Noble. Oh, my gosh, he's--he's so boring. The black backdrop and, and this old story about somebody talking about the housing problems in Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York]. Like, oh. Like, you know, that's how I thought. But Gil was a rare breed because he was actually doing really a public service. He was actually talking about some real issues. And it wasn't flowery. It wasn't--he was no frills. I think the only sort of thing that he had, he had his African mask--it was a black duvetyne covering everything, and he had an African mask, and that was the only set design he had, and a desk. You know, it was a--very minimalist. It was only about what he was talking about, and the only thing that was there to focus on was what people said. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And often about what they talked about, there was--it wasn't celebrity, it was very substantive, and that's what he cared about. He didn't--he called it--what did he call it? Because the funny thing is, the same studio where Gil shot his show ['Like It Is'] is also the same studio where 'Live with Regis and Kathie Lee' and all this--and it is still now, with Kelly and Michael ['Live with Kelly and Michael'] shoots. And so he would always call it the circus. It was, you know, it was the circus. He referred to it as the circus. And it was so interesting that you could have that show and you have Gil Noble, I mean, completely polar opposite type of programming, and they share the same space, you know, people just don't know that. Story_ID: 657037 Speaker 1: Also, let's, the--I want to talk about also the two incidences that happened, and what you learned in the process. So can we--what happened first? Was--I think they both--did the murder [sic.] of Betty Shabazz happen first or was Louima? Speaker 2: Abner Louima? I want to say that Abner Louima happened first. Speaker 1: So talk about that incident. Speaker 2: That was huge, because, you know, I was--Gil [Gil Noble] was so well connected with the New York [New York] black establishment, you know. And-- Speaker 1: Everybody. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was connected with everybody. But he was also, from the media standpoint, the nucleus of, you know--and so everyone, you know, from David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins]--everyone that he--they had so much respect for him because he did something, and he was unapologetically black. And he would cover stuff, and he was this gentleman. You know, it was interesting. I'm not sure. He had very little to do with the network. Like, very little to do with the network. You know, when he first got to WABC [WABC-TV, New York, New York], at one point, you know, he had anchored the weekends and stuff. And he used to do correspondence. Gil almost to the point despised the rest of the news organization. He had his corner, but he had the respect, and no one dared try to talk about taking 'Like It Is' off the air. As a matter of fact, when he did, there was a big campaign, you know, going after ABC, and they backed off. So they respected him. And he just had this respect. And I got to see that up close during the Abner Louima case, and obviously during Betty Shabazz, how connected he was, and how--just in real time looking at the influence that he had on those stories, to be able to give voices when, when, when everyone was covering it, you weren't getting certain voices, and he was providing certain--a platform for people who didn't have a platform in this whole--in the whole discussion of that case. And I think that's--I gained a great deal of respect for that. Speaker 1: Talk about what happened in the case. Talk about it, just the. Speaker 2: Well, the details of it, you know, obviously, you know, is Abner Louima, who was brought in by the police, and he was, you know, brutally beat by police officers, and they sort of sodomized him with a, I believe, the end of a either broomstick or a plunger stick. It was a huge case in police brutality and the NY- NYPD [New York City Police Department]. And, you know, I was a kid from Newark [New Jersey], and even being from Newark, New York is a distance away, being the heart of New York when all that was happening, and getting the phone calls and seeing Gil sort of go into action and try to get all the details and then all the different advocates hitting him up and dealing with the family, you know, his family, and--yeah. It was just--it was sort of interesting to see that. Speaker 1: Okay. And then what about--then you have--so that's something--that case is where someone outside of the community, the police. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Kill [sic.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 657038 Speaker 1: Then we have the other situation with-- Speaker 2: Well Betty Shabazz. What that was, was, was interesting, 'cause Gil [Gil Noble] was also very close friends--built a really strong friendship with Betty Shabazz. And he just idolized, you know, Malcolm X. And he would have me watch so many Malcolm X clips, and so when she passed, you know, I had to go and I looked at--go through some of his old interviews that he had done--when he had done several interviews with her--and go and screen them. But, you know, he had just this wealth of knowledge about her, and he had so much respect from people. And I had kind of--I looked up to that, you know, that he was so respected. But he was also very broken. That was a really close friend of his. And it was actually one of the few times that--when I was there, where he was sort of invited back on air to help anchor the coverage of her funeral. But that was a big story at that time. Speaker 1: Well, the--also, he's lost a friend. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And he is someone who was raising the, raising the community up-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and he's probably--there's just no questioning about what all this was for or why it happened. Speaker 2: What would they say. Oh, well, you know, obviously, and it's unfortunate, because, you know, now we know that the grandson [Malcolm Shabazz] of Malcolm recently was murdered in Mexico [Mexico City, Mexico]. You know, it--I think most people just felt that it was an obviously--I don't know if there was a, an outrage towards her grandson for what he had done as much as there is--you know, that, you know, the kid had to have been--there was something going on there that, where it was sort sof disturbing. So I don't think there was a lot of outrage directed at him. I think there was a lot of just--people just baffled as to how it happened, you know. But--and I think Gil, among them, he was pretty baffled about, you know, how this could happen. Speaker 1: So can you talk about what happened just real quickly? Speaker 2: Well, it's, from my recollection--now you have me go back into these stories, but I--he, you know--and from understanding what we--initially, at that time, we thought was that it--he was playing with fire, and he burned the house down, and she was--burned the apartment down, and she was in it, and she suffered, you know, a number of burns all over her body. And she obviously died, succumbed to her injuries. But that there was, you know, other things going on that the son had--that the grandson had a number of issues. And it was sad, too, because, it was obvious--he spent time in prison and in juvenile--you know, and he'd gotten out, and I think he was really trying to make something of himself, and trying to live up to his grandfather's legacy. And then he got into an altercation down in Mexico and he got murdered. Speaker 1: That's almost tragic in a lot of ways, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very tragic. Story_ID: 657039 Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you learn by doing 'Hidden'--'Hidden Heroes' ['Hidden Heroes: African American Women in WWII']? Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting. It was a good experience. I learned that I loved documentary, the documentary format. I had the opportunity to interview black female war veterans who were in their, you know, at that time, seventies and eighties. And, it was just a gratifying story to see the level of pride and how much they appreciated the fact that I was telling their story. And to see how much it did for people to learn about their story. And so, I think that's when the bug for a long form filmmaking really, really got to me, that I really liked this. I love telling stories. I love being a storyteller. Story_ID: 657040 Speaker 1: Now, this is what I--so you, you graduate [from Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are you thinking you want to do at that time (simultanoeus)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I graduated? I wanted to go into television. I wanted to-- Speaker 1: You're the, you're the first in your family though-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --to graduate, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what about any of your other brothers and sisters, the ones who came after you? Speaker 2: Two of them did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Actually one of them did, I think. Speaker 1: So two, two of you out of ten. Speaker 2: Ten, yeah. It's not--it was, yeah. And you would never know. I mean, we're--everyone carries themselves a certain way, but yeah, we used--I went to college, and graduate, and I think my sister Rachael [Rachael Wilson Lewison] did. Speaker 1: Okay. So go on. Speaker 2: So after--I'll never forget. I went to NABJ, the National Association of Black Journalists conference--well, first, in 1998 I--no. The summer of '99 [1999], going into--so I, I graduated in December of '99 [1999]. That summer, I went down to--well, the semester before I had finished pledging my fraternity, Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and I had the opportunity to intern down in Huntsville, Alabama. I figured that I intern in the big market, I want to do something small. So I went to the WAFF-TV, the NBC affiliate in Huntsville, Alabama, and I interned down there. And I did some stuff, did a reel, you know, and that summer, NABJ had the UNITY conference [UNITY: Journalists for Diversity] in Seattle, Washington. So I decide I wanted to go to NABJ that summer. I went to the NABJ, CBS News had some job offerings and were, and was hiring. So I applied for a job at CBS News, CBS Newspath, and right then and there, forgot about it; finished my internship, finished--came back up to Jersey [New Jersey] to finish my last semester of school, and I got a call from CBS, said, "Oh, oh. We're interested in interviewing you for the Newspath." No. This is still the summer. This is still the summertime, actually. I had just returned. This is the summertime. I'd just returned from the South. So I went to the interview, and another thing--and I didn't get the job. I was heartbroken 'cause I really wanted that job more than anything else, the CBS Newspath. So I went back down to school, started my last semester; got a call, was CBS, '48 Hours.' They wanted me to come in, interview. And I did. And went back and went to several interviews, and it seemed like it was going quite well. I showed them my resume, that went quite well, Susan Zirinsky, the executive producer of '48 Hours,' is something of a TV legend. I'm not sure if you know the movie 'Broadcast News.' It's sort of based off of her. And she hired me. And then I was, you know, I was a production secretary. That's what they called me at CBS. Production secretary. And I'll never forget, I didn't tell them that I didn't finish graduating, because they would have fired me. So I had to figure out how to travel from New York [New York] all the way down to--my night classes were in Camden, New Jersey, because Rowan has a campus in Camden, New Jersey. So two or three nights out of the week, I would have to leave New York, get on a Greyhound bus, travel two hours down to Camden, New Jersey, for my night classes. The last bus from Camden would come--would leave at two A.M.; I would have to then--the two A.M., catch that two A.M. bus, get to New York around four A.M., take a two hour nap; do the two hour nap and then get to the office around eight o'clock. And I did that for about three months. And, you know, I had to call out sick for my graduation. And I knew they were going to fire me if they found out that I had yet to graduate. And so I also, you know, got a little bit of an understanding in long form from working at '48 Hours.' We, you know--but it was all murder stuff. Story_ID: 657041 Speaker 1: Also learned that there's a lot of different, sort of, race issues with that--those types of programs. Speaker 2: You mean perceptions of race (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --or people's lack of understanding? Speaker 1: Yes. So I'll never forget my first--we had an assignment editor there, and my--part of my first job there at '48 Hours' was to pitch different stories. And I'll find these really big stories, and I noticed that '48 Hours' never showed black people. Not that that's a great thing, 'cause they all dealt with murder mysteries and stuff. But I said, okay. I found these great stories and I would--I found this story of this black doctor who, for no reason at all, killed his wife and family. Exactly the type of stories that they love. I would go to the assignment editor, and she was so hardnosed. She would take my paper, ball it up. "No. No. No." And I would take them out the trash and I would say, "But, I don't understand. What's wrong with this story?" And she would say, "He's not a sympathetic character." And reading between the lines, "He's not a sympathetic character." A black doctor who runs off and kills his wife. Okay, we understand that he's not sympathetic characters, but what they meant by that is, it's almost expected that a black man would kill someone. No matter the fact that he's a doctor. But a white doctor goes out and kills his family, you now, for no reason at all, it's a big shocker. A black doctor does it, he's a black man. It's expected. And I learned that, and I said, "Okay, I get this." And then, you know, I dealt with a lot of--I dealt with a lot of racist things at CBS. I was the, the--probably only, in the whole news there, I was the only black male under the age of thirty-five. Then two other people came later on, a couple of years later. Speaker 2: Who were they? Speaker 1: Oh, I don't--one is a good friend of mine, Darryl Harrison. But he didn't work in news. He worked for news production, which was a little bit different. Before--for a while, I was the only--so I was this young black guy. And they didn't black men in the CBS News. And I went through a lot of--I went through a lot of stuff there. Speaker 2: Like what? Speaker 1: I had--someone always would think it was funny to--when, every time I left my desk to put a black book on my desk. 'How to Raise Your Black Teenage Daughter' [ph.]. Okay, I'm twenty-two years old. Do I look like I have a black teenage daughter? Just, and he would leave books on my desk? And I was--you know, there were just some things they did--like, why we leave a--and they would never, you know--I could understand if they were doing it, like "Oh, here's a book I thought that you might want to read." They would just leave black books on my desk. I had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black--black subject matter books. Speaker 1: Yes. I'm like, why do you think I want a book about black--how to raise my black teenage daughter? Do I look like I have a black teenage daughter? I'm twenty-two. Unless you think I do have a black teenage daughter. Then there was, there was other things. There were other things that happened, and I just didn't get a fair shake. But I determined, I remember that the first day (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how old were you then? Speaker 1: I was there for two years. And I remember-- Speaker 2: So 19--you start in 19--what years is it? It's--no. It's two--so 2000. Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999]. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999]. And you work there until 2001 (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One [2001]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And I used to work all these long hours. And I remember the second day that I was there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now was it paid-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --or was it--okay. Speaker 1: I was paid. I started there--I'll never forget--October 21st, 1999. And I'll never forget. October 22nd, 1999, I called my mother [Beverly Walker Wilson] and I told her, "I made the decision. I don't think I want to work for anybody." I knew then that I wanted to do my own thing. And every day from that point on has been directed at, how do I do my own thing. Story_ID: 657042 Speaker 1: So I left in-- Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001]. Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001]. King World [King World Productions] was launching this new show, 'The Ananda Lewis Show.' Speaker 2: The what show? Speaker 1: 'The Ananda Lewis Show.' And somehow they got wind of my information, and they courted me. And that was another horrible experience. I call it the Titanic with cameras. And I left. Speaker 2: Now wait. Speaker 1: For what? Speaker 2: Now why do you call it the Titanic with cameras and what? Speaker 1: This was a horrible show. And I learned--I will never do talk shows because talk shows (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But now what was the sh- well, talk about the show, for a moment. Speaker 1: Ananda Lewis--are you familiar with Ananda Lewis? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: She was--she was one of BET's first black veejays, you know, beautiful black young woman with long hair, and she then went to MTV [Music Television; MTV], and she was sort of a big deal back in the days of the MTV veejays thing. And, you know, BET [Black Entertainment Television] had this show 'Teen Summit,' and she was one of the hosts. Speaker 2: Oh, she was (unclear) 'Teen Summit.' Speaker 1: And they did a show, they wanted to make her like a young Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]. And I knew that show was going to suck, because I was like--for one, her audience is not the Oprah audience, and why are you trying to make her a young Oprah. Her audience is in school right now. Why are we putting this show on at one o'clock? Anyway, you know, we would have to do things; things that were sort of manipulative in production. Story_ID: 657043 Speaker 1: So talk about some of that. Speaker 2: I'll never forget. There was this one story of this young, this young white girl [Kelli Moye]. She was from Poplars Grove, Illinois [sic. Poplar Grove, Illinois]. It's a really sad story. She was pregnant and she didn't know. And she ended up giving birth. And her water broke and she gave birth. She panicked. She left the child, wrapped up the child, left the child in the--on the back porch of her neighbor's apartment--of her neighbor's, neighbor's house. The child froze to death. She was then put into juvenile prison. It's really a sad story because, you know, she just--you know, she was a young girl who panicked. She was, I think, at the age of fifteen or sixteen. And so we had the story. We had the parents of her boyfriend on. Her boyfriend [Michael Mirshak] was obviously upset because that was his baby, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah; which is also, obviously, that's, you know. But then I'll never forget, you know, one of the producers said, "Well, how about we go and we fill the audience with pregnant mothers?" Right? So they filled the audience with pregnant mothers. And, of course, pregnant mothers are going to be extremely hostile towards this young girl, who, by the way, had just gotten out of prison; didn't even go home. The show ['The Ananda Lewis Show'] got her straight from prison, put--drove her in the car and to the airport, flew her to New York [New York]. Didn't even get to walk through her own living room and see her--and go to her parents' house. And as you can imagine, there was so much vitriol and so much venom directed at her, sixteen or seventeen year old or eighteen year old girl at the time of that; and the time she got out of prison, so maybe eighteen. And the parents [Sue Moye and Jim Moye] were furious at the end of the show. The producers--they all sort of scurried back to their offices, and they pushed me out there and said, "Dave [HistoryMaker David Wilson], you talk to them." And I did. And they said, "Well, Dave, we know the problem's not with you. You've been good. You've been good with us and everything else. We went to talk to your--the producer. We want to talk to this person." And they wouldn't give the family the benefit of, you know--you know, after they did this and did this hit job on their daughter. So, and that was one thing. And then September 11 [September 11, 2001] happened. And they said, "Oh." And right after, you know, September 12th, while people were out trying to find their loved ones down at Ground Zero [New York, New York]. They said, "Oh, go down there and bring them back to the studio. We want to do a show." Said, "I'm not going to do that. So these folks are out there trying to--." I was gonna--and I just knew that there were things just exploiting these people, and I said, "I'm not going to do that." They said, "Well, we're not going to make you do it." And I decided not to go in the next day. I was still dealing with all of it. And the next day I didn't go in to work. And I eventually emailed them. I said, "I'm--I want to leave. Life's too short. I want to do my own thing." And I left. And I left with so much pride because I said, "No, now I'm going to focus on my own thing." Story_ID: 657044 Speaker 1: And so, as, you know, I left and, and I--just so happened that, November, I'd done a little gig to help make ends meet for Victoria's Secret Fashion Show shoot, and I ended up meeting my, still business partner today, at that shoot. And had I never left that, you know, 'The Ananda Lewis Show,' I would have never met my current business partner. And we started doing some things. We had a business that we had started doing TV pilots. That didn't go anywhere. And then we launched another business doing sort of CD business cards. We had these business--CD business--CD business card CDs--business sized CDs that we would then go out and produce content for different corporations for, and put them on these cards. Somebody forgot to tell us that the Internet existed, and the business failed. But we did have some good clients. We had Penguin Books, was one of our clients. We had some other folks. And we got a lot of press coverage. We were in Newsweek, Black Enterprise, you know. We got some good coverage. And then it-- Speaker 2: Now did you ever come across [HistoryMaker] Clayton Banks and Ember Media in the--and that--'cause he had been doing that too? But he's older than you. Speaker 1: No. Not that I-- Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: No. No. I don't recall ever meeting him or that name. Speaker 2: So your business partner, say his name again. Speaker 1: Dan Woolsey. Speaker 2: Dan Woolsey. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. And can you tell us about Dan? Speaker 1: Dan is from Chevy Chase, Maryland. Sort of, you know, just a very white bread sort of guy, all-American white guy. We come from sort of completely different backgrounds, you know. He grew in middle of, you know, Chevy Chase, Maryland. His father is R. James Woolsey [R. James Woolsey, Jr.], former head of the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency]. And we still to this day have a very contentious relationship, but it's always good, you know. I always say that we're always on the same page, but never on the same paragraph or we're least, we're always on the same page, but not reading the same line. And--but we work well together because we're always making each other better. And so, at this particular time, doing the business, I just started to get interested in my family history. I always had an interest in my family history, because I always was curious about how did, you know, how did we end up in Newark [New Jersey], and you know, all of this. I always had this awareness of, well, how did I end of here? And so I started doing research, and I, obviously, worked at '48 Hours,' and so now I knew how to actually do research and find people and dig up information. And so I used that sort of skillset and knowledge from doing investigative reporting to start looking into my family's history. And I would tell Dan some of the things that I found out about my family. I told him that I found out about this white guy in North Carolina who was a direct descendant of my family's former slave owners, and, you know, his name is the same of mine, David Wilson, and that he owns this plantation--the--still the plantation--the plantation that used to be the plantation where my family was enslaved on, the land. So Dan was like, "Oh, you have to do a documentary. You got to do something with that." And I'm like, eh, I wasn't motivated by it. I never wanted to be on camera. And, you know, I had had my time where with the idea of being an on camera reporting, and I just knew that it wasn't something for me, and I didn't want to do it. And he kept on convincing me, and so eventually I relented. And at this particular time, I had gotten a--I had started working at CBS again. They had called me back to be--for a job at CBS in--Network News Service [Network News Service, LLC], which is an ABC, CBS, and Fox News conglomerate. And I eventually rose up the ranks and became lead producer there. It was never anything I was interested in. It was just a job. But Dan convinced me, he said, "Okay. Let's do this documentary." And I called my other buddy, Barion [Barion Grant], who went to high school with me [at Arts High School, Newark, New Jersey], and I said, "Well, Da- Barion, we're about to do this documentary ['Meeting David Wilson']. You should come." Barion had worked on 'Tupac Resurrection' documentary for MTV [Music Television; MTV]. And we, we started working on it. Story_ID: 657045 Speaker 1: I had left my jo- in order for me to, to, to give my all to the doc ['Meeting David Wilson'], I left CBS again, and I spent the next two years broke and homeless making that documentary film. And it was the best decision I've ever made in my life, making that doc, because it--I learned--beside the fact that I wouldn't be here that actually led to the--all the steps that needed creating TheGrio [thegrio.com] and getting in contact with NBC and all those things, I learned a very valuable lesson; that I've been broke, I've been homeless. Everything that I--that one thinks could happen to themselves when you're in the pursuit of a dream or in pursuit of a passion, all those things happened. All the worst things. Again, I went hungry some days. I slept on couches. All those things happened. But I also learned that those things aren't as bad as I honestly thought they would be. And it gave me this sort of fearlessness when it came to approaching anything, any sort of entrepreneurial endeavor. And so, you know, we worked on this--on the documentary, and we finished the documentary in 2007. It just so happened one day we were trying--well, before we finished the doc, I had--we were ninety thousand dollars short of what we needed to finish---finishing funds for the doc. And I remember going into this bar, this club uptown in Harlem [New York, New York]. It was called the DEN at the time. And I had twenty bucks [dollars] to my name. And I remember going into the club. It was a five dollar restaurant--there was a five dollar entry fee. What is that called when you get the? Speaker 2: Get the, at the house-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Cover charge. Speaker 2: Cover charge. Speaker 1: Cover charge. Speaker 2: Five dollar cover charge. There's a five dollar cover charge. I'm like, I only have twenty bucks to my name. So five dollar, that's like, you know, that's a quarter of my entire worth right there. And then I got a little food, and then ten dollars. So I was--you know, I had friends there and I said, "You know, I'm going to talk to the owner, because it's not right, because I'm--why am I getting hit with a cover and I'm eating?" You normally get hit with a cover for, you know, 'cause this is not like a nightclub. I'm getting hit with a cover. So I talked to him, and we get into this long conversation about what I do and I showed him, you know, this--I had a trailer for the documentary on my iPhone or my--it wasn't an iPhone at the time, my phone. I just--no, my iPod, and showed him a bit, and then I said, "You know, we're looking for finishing funds." And he says, "Well, I may be able to do something." Anyway, to make a long story short, he introduced me to his father, who then introduced me to Byron--oh, my gosh. Byron--I'm about to say [HistoryMaker] Byron Pitts. It's not Byron Pitts. You know--you know Byron from UniWorld [UniWorld Group, Inc.]. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Byron Lewis. Speaker 2: Byron Lewis from UniWorld. Byron Lewis then makes the connection with NBC, 'cause NBC reached out to him about doing something else. And so he makes the connection. Byron Lewis makes the connection for us. And we--they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he saw your trailer? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He liked it? Speaker 2: Yeah. And he said he wanted to do something. He wanted to help us. First, he said he was going to help us get the finishing funds. Then he backed off of that. Then he came back to us and said, "Well, what I want to do is get you guys connected with somebody where they'll help you finish the film." Meantime--in the meantime, we couldn't wait for him, so we ended up finding finishing funds. And, but he did make the introduction with NBC. And we signed at NBC to--for the TV rights of the film, and the film aired on MSNBC on April 2008. Speaker 1: Well, who did you--who were you negotiating with at NBC or MSNBC? Speaker 2: The CFO at the time, who was--turned out to be a very great friend of mine, Adam Jones. He's now the CFO of Pret a Manger. He was the CFO at the time, and he negotiated me--I believe we negotiated the--even to this day, it's the largest amount of money that MSNBC paid for an outside film. Speaker 1: So how much did--how much did they pay? Speaker 2: Three hundred thousand dollars, licensed. And they don't do that, you know. Showtime is only on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They don't do that nowadays. Speaker 2: --Showtime was only going to pay us sixty-five thousand dollars. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. So they don't do that anymore. Story_ID: 657046 Speaker 1: So how--why, why were you successful in get- so successful in getting that negotiated that way? Speaker 2: I think several things, and things that are sort of outside of our--things that are outside of our control. I think, to be honest with you, I think Don Imus. Speaker 1: Don Imus was happening at that time. Speaker 2: Don Imus had just finished happening. And I think that this was sort of a film that they could show that would attract the black audience to something that they could sort of tout. I think it's something that was part of it. So they did this three hour television--they did the film and they did the hour and a half town hall hosted by Brian Williams at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], based--focused on the film ['Meeting David Wilson']. Speaker 1: And so, talk about--I know you've talked about this in other cases a lot, but talk about the Don Imus incident, because we both understand that. Talk about that. Speaker 2: Well, Don Imus made the comment, you know, about the Rutgers basketball team [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and, you know, he echoed the statement from somebody on his radio saying--he made the statement, "Nappy headed ho." And that created a huge firestorm. Don Imus was being simulcast on MSNBC at the time. MSNBC fired him, Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] and folks protested and met with the MSNBC president, you know, Phil Griffin and all those folks, and, yeah. And so, I think they, coming off of that, they wanted to do something that was going to be very diverse friendly. And I think that the documentary came at the right time. Speaker 1: Plus you're from New Jersey, too, on top of it. I don't know if they were going (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't if that--I don't know if they made that connection that deeply, but maybe. Speaker 1: You never know, 'cause you were going to them-- Speaker 2: You never know. They think about those things very carefully. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, yeah. And the doc was a success. And I remember the night that the doc aired, I spotted Steve Capus, who was president of NBC News at the time, and I had this idea based off of my knowledge, working at CBS and how the news industry worked. And I said to Steve, I said, "Steve, you know, I have this idea about launching a African American news property that could pretty much leverage all of the resources of NBC and all the footage from the affiliates and gather them in one place, and we put it on a different outlet. We build original content around it, and it will be a new offering for NBC for an African American audience, that we would gather stories that would be of interest to African Americans." And he said, "Okay." And I mentioned that to him on the night of the show airing, because I figured--well, I didn't know how the, the documentary would do in the ratings, and I figured that if it did horribly, nobody would want to talk to me again. And I figured if it did well, you know, I couldn't take that chance, so I just--you know, I just needed to talk to him that night before we knew what the ratings were going to be the next day, and then pitched him there, right then and there, the idea of TheGrio [thegrio.com]. And by December of 2008, we'd scouted--got in to NBC to start working on what we called the B-Cast [ph.] at that time. It was this sort of working title for TheGrio. And then we eventually launched TheGrio on June of 2009. Story_ID: 657047 Speaker 1: So you said--oh, god, what was I--you--well, you said you wanted to ask that--you were talking about you had to ask the question, and you ended up getting the deal. Now, I want to--I was saying that this happened in a very, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Short time. Speaker 1: --short period of time. I want to ask, 'cause actually, Dan, he had worked for The History Channel [History], right, Dan Woolsey? Speaker 2: Who was he? He wasn't--I think Dan did some shooting for The History Channel. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't he technically worked. Speaker 1: Did you become part of any of the, like, the Black Documentary Collective here [New York, New York]? Or were you sort of op- what-- Speaker 2: No. I never really belonged to any sort of organization. I was just--we just did a documentary ['Meeting David Wilson']. No. We just decided to do it, you know. We raised five hundred thousand dollars to work on that doc. Speaker 1: How did you raise the--who contributed to the doc? Speaker 2: A lot of individual investors from all over. I mean we really scrambled and scraped and just cobbled together money. And it took us two years to really do it. I mean, I probably--if we had the money up front, it would probably would have taken us less money, but, you know, obviously it cost money to raise money. And so, we ended up spending, you know, we ended up--yeah. It was really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was doing the writing? Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: Do you were doing the writing. He was doing the shooting. And then what was--is it--your other partner's name? Who-- Speaker 2: Barion [Barion Grant]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was doing most of the producing. Speaker 1: He was producing. Okay. Speaker 2: So I was sort of co-directing as well. I wasn't just simply just writing. I was co-directing and writing. There were things that I knew was specifically that I wanted. When I wasn't on camera, I was sort of doing a lot of the directing. When I was on camera, which is a lot of part of it, Dan was doing directing. So we sort of shared the directing title. Speaker 1: Were you going to things like Sundance [Sundance Film Festival]? Speaker 2: We went to Sundance, but the thing is, we were fortunate because NBC acquired us before we went to Sundance. So we didn't get into Sundance, but the interesting thing is, we know some of those docs that did, you know, our documentary has had a lot more distribution and a lot more success than the ones that even won Sundance that year. So-- Speaker 1: So talk about the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) take that, Sundance. Story_ID: 657048 Speaker 1: So talk about some of the highlights and the low points of making a documentary. Speaker 2: Well, we were making a doc--we were making a documentary film ['Meeting David Wilson']. We weren't doing this with any sort of corporate investment or any corporate backing or any--you know, we were out on our own. And when you're out on your own, you don't even know if what you're doing is going to make any dent, if anybody is actually going to see it. Right? We're simply there. Just out there just shooting and, and trying to make this thing happen. And you just don't know. Right? You really just don't know. This is a lot of uncertainty. And, you know, when you think about it, when you're shooting your doc, you're going along for months and months, you're gathering all this material, and you don't even know what that material looks like. I mean, you go back and you look at different parts and you don't know if it's going to actually mesh together. And there's a lot of uncertainty, and especially when this is your first time actually going out on your own and doing the long form project, you know. Sometimes doing a ten minute project is tough. But to be able to create a project that's eighty-two minutes long, it has to have a beginning, middle and end. It has to move. It has to tell an interesting story. It has to keep people engaged. All these sort of things. You're met with a lot of uncertainty. Speaker 1: So what are your--what--who's--are you renting equipment to shoot or did you have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were--we were renting--we were renting equipment. We rented post-production equipment. We didn't--on some post-production we had an apartment in Harlem [New York, New York] that we made our office space. I was living out of part of it. And we--yeah. We, we, we--we just went--we sort of just--you know, we, we--yeah, we just did it. And the three of us really, just going out there and doing it, shooting. Speaker 1: Was there a point where you were thinking, no, we're not going to do this? I mean any three? Are the others working? Speaker 2: What do you mean? Speaker 1: You said you weren't--you know, you--were they working--all of you working some kind of jobs to-- Speaker 2: Oh, we pretty much all gave our lives to it. You know, we gave our lives to it, which is very tough. And we, the three of us [Wilson, Barion Grant and Dan Woolsey] saw each other every day, talked about it every day. It was a really big project, and it takes a lot to do that. I mean so much so that I think part of it--and then people ask, "Well, why didn't you--haven't you done another doc?" And I always say to them, I say, you know, it's a famous--Alfred Hitchcock's quote about documentaries. You know, he said, "In narrative [sic.] films, the director is God. In documentary films, God is the director." And I think that with documentaries, you have to be moved. You have to have a passion about it. Right? You really have to be passionate about it, because you are really about to go on a journey that sometimes you don't have any control. You shoot certain things and you think you know what the story is going to be. You know, when you're doing a scripted film, you got your script. Now, the shots and everything else like that, those are all things that are up to your discretion. You may change everything, but you know what type of story you're going to tell. You know the result of the story. You have to figure out whether or not you're going to execute on it well. But with a documentary film, you have a general idea of what you--this story that you want to tell. You don't know the specifics. There isn't a particular scene when this person says that that's--that you, you know, have any--so you have to just create and follow the story. And you don't know whether or not that story is going to turn out the way you want it to. Whether it's going to be of interest to anyone outside of you and your team. And those are the insecurities that you sort of--you confront. And so, we start- we started and we said, look, we can't turn around; we're too deep into this thing. But we--it turned out for--it turned out for the better and it really worked out, and--but it's such a passion project. It's such a passion project, but I enjoyed it. Story_ID: 657049 Speaker 1: So the night that you're--who decides--is it NBC that decides--and I'm talking about the town hall--do they decide what they want to do as part of the launch? Is that it, or is it--are you deciding? You know, who comes up with the town hall? Speaker 2: NBC did that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They--'cause they wanted to really bring--you know, have the--I'm sorry. I'm looking off camera and I'm trying to find a napkin. NBC decided on the town hall. They--that was their--the way they wanted to flesh it out in programming. They did come to us and say, "Look, you have an eighty-two minute film. We're doing an hour and a half of it on television, which means that we need to have it cut to really, to be more like sixty minutes, sixty minutes in length." And so we had to find a way to cut twelve--about twenty minutes or so out the film; little bit--little bit less than twenty minutes. I think it ended up being like, more like sixty-eight minutes or so, but they did. So we had to cut out like fourteen minutes, which is substantial when you have a documentary 'cause, you know, that's like asking somebody, "Okay, which part of the baby don't you want, the toes or fingers," and--and you really have to decide, you know. And so, yeah. Speaker 1: And then talk about the town hall, because that was--held at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. What was the whole concept? Did they--both David Wilsons were going to be there. Speaker 2: Both David Wilsons. So I was there with the other David Wilson. They did a whole bunch of media and press leading up to it. We did 'The Today Show' ['Today'], we did stuff on MSNBC. And they had both me and the other David Wilson sit down at the town hall, and then they had a panel talking about the documentary ['Meeting David Wilson'] and the importance of the documentary and the impact on the discussion of race in America. So the film--you know, the film is really about how to talk about race in America. You know, we have two of us--you know, he's a descendant of slave masters, I'm a descendant of enslaved people, and we have this very common history. I still bear his family's last name. And really what--we were able to have a conversation about race that was very both personal and passionate, but it was also very civil. And I think that that was the, I think, the genius of the film and why it worked, because this wasn't about rage. It was about results. It was about being able to sit down and have a conversation. And it was a--and I think we've--you know, we ended up talking about things as it relates to slavery and as it relates to family. I don't think--still to this day, you see it in a lot of other places, because of--we were so--our history is so connected. You know, I wasn't just talking to a white man whose family was slave owners. I'm talking to a white man who shares my exact same name, the first--our first name is coincidental, but our last name was actually not coincidental, the actual history, there's a connection there, you know, that his family once owned mine, and that we were able to, even with all those emotions that were there, be able to talk and develop a relationship as a result. And we, you know, and it broke down generational. I mean, he was, you know, a white guy, at the time sixty-two years old; I was a black guy, you know, and I'm thirty years old. You know, we were able to sit down and have this discussion (background noise). Story_ID: 657050 Speaker 1: That's what I, I wanted to also ask, because--what is the relationship that developed with him during the making of the film ['Meeting David Wilson'], because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A very, sort of a--sort of avuncular relationship. Speaker 1: A what? Speaker 2: Uncle like relationship, you know, and a very deep respect. He still wanted more. You know, he still calls me, sends Christmas cards, we talk every now and then. So it's still, you know, it's a good relationship. Speaker 1: And how much did you learn? You know, because remember you talked about your learning of black history really started with Gil Noble. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So how much were you learning in the process? Speaker 2: During the--while I was making it in black history? Well, I learned, you know--it's funny. I think this is the best way I can describe it. I hear people say, this whole debate about what do we call ourselves. Are you black American or are you African American? Right? The whole debate. And I've learned that I probably call myself African American, and I've learned that for a couple of reasons. I think that the film, obviously, took me from the journey from my hometown in Newark [New Jersey] to the plantations of North Carolina and all the way back to Africa, particularly--specifically Ghana, where my ancestors were taken from, where at least my great-great-great-grandfather was taken from. And I've learned to adopt a pride even not for my sake, for their sake, looking at how they were robbed. You know, when you go to Ghana, when you go to Africa, particularly West Africa, you have to consider that that region was robbed of their most precious resource century after century after century, and that's the young folks. Not only just the young folks, but during the, you know, colonialism and during the slave trade, they weren't just randomly picking up people. It was very--a lot more organized than what we've learned, you know, and what most Americans think. They took people who were actually really good in agriculture, you know. They took people who actually, you know, were very smart. They took people who were very, also, physically fit, young. So it was very organized. And so, you know, I always felt like my great-great-great-grandfather, who was taken from Africa and brought over and given the name Peter, he had pride about where he came from. Now, generations later, I can have the opportunity to travel back to a place that he longed for, and develop that pride about--for Africa, my African connection and my African roots. So I loved having the, the, the title and the way in which I describe myself as African. I also learned that I, I, I'm not one who'll say, "Well, I don't consider myself American." You have some people who'll say, "Oh, I'm, you know, not American. I'm just black." No, I'm American, because they worked very hard to establish this country. And that, you know, to be American is every bit as much as our birthright as it is anyone of that. So I love the term African American for that reason, because they always said when I was a kid, I always felt that I was in a limbo, you know. We learn in society, in American society, that Africa is not a place that's beautiful. We're taught that, and that's sort of--that's the thing that is sort of put in our brain. So as a kid, the term African American, I was like, okay, African, a part that I don't want to associate with; American, a part that I feel doesn't want to associate with me. So you feel like you're in this limbo. But, through the film, I've learned to sort of--to claim both, and do it proudfully. African American. And so I think that sums up my--one of the things that I've learned and, personally. You know, I think the other thing is, as it relates to the other David Wilson, I think that, and I've always said that, you know, we have more in common than we have in differences; that once you start to look at people, the human element in all of us, everything else is secondary. We all strive for the same things. And that's one of the things that I learned with that. And so I was able to have this discussion with him, this really deep discussion with him, because we were able to see each other as just human people who--and whom--human beings who have the same desires. Story_ID: 657051 Speaker 1: Now, your--the film ['Meeting David Wilson'] won awards, too, right? Speaker 2: We won the Edward R. Murrow UNITY Award [Radio Television Digital News Association Edward R. Murrow Award]. Speaker 1: And that's with the unity--the org- the journalists of R award? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then what else--the name of your production company also was Official Pictures, LLC. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So now, what happens--so you have this tremendous success. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are people saying to you? And I'm talking about friends, family-- Speaker 2: Afterwards? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They loved it. They loved the film. They were happy for me and proud of me. You know. I'm always one to--you know, I've just recently learned to--it's funny. I just recently learned to celebrate the things that I do. The night that the film premiered, there was an after party and I went to it for a little bit, and I then went back to the hotel and just put my--covered my head. I had so much anxiety. Speaker 1: About everything. Speaker 2: About everything. Speaker 1: About maybe how you had done on-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --on the show-- Speaker 2: How I'd done. Speaker 1: --about how to-- Speaker 2: And how, did people actually liked the film, if they got it, if they understood it. Did I do a do a good job, should I have done this better? Yeah. Even now today when people talk to me about TheGrio [thegrio.com], I have a hard time. People say, "I know the TheGrio." There's always this skepticism, like, "Really, do you know TheGrio or are you just saying that or did you just hear that," you know. So I have to learn to accept that, too. Story_ID: 657052 Speaker 1: So when, when you--so when--because at the beginning, TheGrio is called--it was--it had-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was just a working title of B-Cast [ph.]. We had to find a name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I always loved the term griot because I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was there any stretch of time in between, or you end one thing and you go immediately into the other? Speaker 2: Well, the film hit in April of 2008, and I stayed on NBC's back about this idea called B-Cast; stayed on their back. And so, you now, then I'll have some communication there, a little bit there. This was going on in the middle of the election cycle 'til that happened, you know. Speaker 1: Because this is the presidential election. Speaker 2: Um-hm. So there were so many different things going on. Speaker 1: And plus there's a mar- there's a huge financial market downturn, 2008 was-- Speaker 2: There was a lot of stuff going on. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And so, you know, I was--we just weren't certain of what would happen. But the financial downturn turned out to be our best friend, because we ended up owning TheGrio, and--because NBC didn't want to invest in it. So we ended up owning it, and NBC had to purchase it from us when they wanted to in 2010. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So happens between 2009 and 2010? Speaker 2: We started, then we launched the site [thegrio.com] in June of 2009, and we just started growing it. You know, I think we-- Speaker 1: You hadn't done a site before? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So--I mean, you're-- Speaker 2: We hadn't done a site, and we didn't know anything. We--my intention, when I had pitched the idea of TheGrio was not to run it. My intention was, "Hey, here's a great idea for you, NBC, why don't you do it, and I--I'll maybe consult." But it--they wanted me to do it, and they didn't want--they didn't want to really hire anyone for it. So in order for us to start TheGrio, we had to physically, just us as a team--we just finished doing a documentary ['Meeting David Wilson'], we had no digital experience, and just had to launch TheGrio. Story_ID: 657053 Speaker 1: So how do you do that? So--'cause--I mean it's different doing a documentary than-- Speaker 2: It's completely different. It's an entirely different beast. It's the opposite as a matter of fact. I don't know, we just had to learn. And we made a lot of mistakes. Made a lot of mistakes. Speaker 1: And what were the roles then coming into it? Speaker 2: Well, it was my--I was the genesis of the idea, so I said, "Well, whatever it is, I'll just naturally assume the role of leadership on it." And so, you know, my--and Dan [Dan Woolsey] and Barion [Barion Grant], were out there to support in any way we can. So we just became as a nucleus and a team to make this thing work. We really didn't have any initial titles. We just did everything that we needed to do to make it work. And NBC gave us three desks, and literally, that was it. They like, "Here you go." And we then had to stitch things together. They said, "Okay, here's three desks. You can have access to our content to make this website." We did--they didn't give us any money, so we then had to go out and raise money. And they wouldn't--they didn't even give us term sheet, so that we could raise money. So we had to go to people, say, "Look, we have this idea. NBC is backing it." They said, "Okay. Really? NBC is going to give you their content?" I said, "Yeah. You gotta believe us." They said, "Okay. Yeah. We'll believe you, whatever." And they didn't believe us. So we couldn't even raise money. So we then had to go back to some of the same investors who invested in the film ['Meeting David Wilson']. I said, "Look, we're doing this idea, it's with NBC." And so we were able to raise a hundred thousand dollars, and we used that to hire a few people to help do a site build out. And we did all that in a month. We were trying to--NBC wanted us to go to msnbc.com. At that particular time, they were a separate company. They didn't believe in the idea, so they said, you know, whatever. They allowed us to do it because they had the digital rights to all the NBC content, so they allowed us to do it. And we had to do it, launch the site in a month, and we did it. Speaker 1: So now-- Speaker 2: And people didn't really--and we had to then go to Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] and say, "Ford, can you give us some money to launch the thing?" I had--'cause that was my connection, Ford, and Ford guaranteed us two hundred--they gave us two hundred thousand dollars off the bat. And so folks at NBC were like, "Oh, okay. They got Ford to invest money in it?" And then, you know, the next thing you know, two weeks after we launch, we got a call from the White House, wanted TheGrio to come down. So then NBC said, "Oh, you guys got a call from the White House, too?" So we started just really growing. And we worked within the organization to make it a natural thing where TheGrio was a part of the organization, so where 'Today Show' ['The Today Show'; 'Today'] mentions it, where Nightly News ['NBC Nightly News'] mentions it, and then we, you know, do a push for it. Speaker 1: Now, at what point, Comcast [Comcast Corporation] purchases NBC? You know (unclear)-- Speaker 2: In 2011. Speaker 1: So that's later. So, so you've been operating at that point? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: For two, two years. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, about two years. Speaker 1: Two years. Story_ID: 657054 Speaker 1: So what are those first two years like? I mean, so you get Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York], you get the White House, you have the election. The country--I mean, you're saying, "We did a lot of our work with launching during the economic downturn," and you said the economic downturn actually helped you. Why? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause we would have never--if we--if--(unclear) to NBC, and if NBC was interested in this three years ago prior to that, they probably would have just--outright, just, you know-- Speaker 1: Done it. Speaker 2: We see some of the other initiatives that they launched and they just threw money at. They didn't give us any money. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And again, then we had sort of, now I've been back in this situation where for the first year and a half of TheGrio [thegrio.com], I didn't get paid for TheGrio. We--so, you know. Speaker 1: So how are you surviving? That's about five years now. Speaker 2: I didn't have the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, no, because you did get money from other things, you did. Speaker 2: Well, that was a little bit of money. I mean, after we paid all our investors and everything else, I--fortunately I had been able to go out and do some speaking engagements. And so that helped me out. Speaker 1: Now, what are you learning in first two years about digital space? And who do you see as your competitors? 'Cause there's-- Speaker 2: What was it? It was The Root [theroot.com]. Speaker 1: Well, The Root was so new, too. Speaker 2: It was The Root, maybe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What about Tom Joyner's Am- Black America Web (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black America Web? Not really. They were much--they're still much smaller. Speaker 1: What about BET [Black Entertainment Television]? Were you looking at them? Speaker 2: Not really because they--BET was one, primarily news. I mean, from a--from a sponsor's standpoint. Sponsors see a black website and they just--so we're all competitive in that regard. But just actually in the actually space of news, it's primarily The Root and Black Voices [blackvoices.com]. Speaker 1: And at that point, Black Voices, are they still with the AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.]-- Speaker 2: They were. They were just AOL Black Voices, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so but you had--you have the advantage of having-- Speaker 2: We had NBC. We--and our brand advantage because of NBC was huge. And that's the thing that we--I knew from the beginning if we do this with NBC, that's a bigger--that's a bigger gun than anyone else has. Speaker 1: Now, Reverend Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton], how was he helpful? Was he helpful in any way? Speaker 2: It's funny. I first met Sharpton a week after the film ['Meeting David Wilson'] aired. He had watched the film on MSNBC and he said, "Wow, I want you to come on my show and talk about it." So I went on his show ['Keepin' it Real with Al Sharpton'], we talked about it on the radio, and then later, he gave me his number and everything else, and I--as we were starting TheGrio, and I'll never forget, a week before we start Grio, I said, "Well, let me reach out to, you know, Reverend Sharpton, because I want his support." We meet--we met for breakfast and he told me, "Okay. I'm going to support your--I'm going to support what you're doing. As a matter of fact, I'm going to have you on my show every Wednesday or every week to promote all this stuff and the content on TheGrio." And he's done that. So I've on his show for the last five years supporting or--whatever, how many years now--it's going on, yeah, about five years now, talking about TheGrio and stuff, and content on TheGrio. Story_ID: 657055 Speaker 1: So what are you learning about the news business? You're learning electronic publishing and you also (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I knew--I was from--remember, keep in mind, I was at CBS. So I knew-- Speaker 1: That's right. You had been-- Speaker 2: --I had to understand that it was-- Speaker 1: --'cause that was long form, though. Speaker 2: Yes. The digital is even more thankless than TV linear, 'cause you got to just keep on turning things out, and churning things out, and keep moving, you know. Every day has to get better. Your traffic numbers has to be better than the previous day. You know, it's always pushing and trying to grow and trying to grow. It's really like pushing a ball uphill. You really have to, you know, do a lot. And the reason, the audience is not as sticky as you may think they are. You know, people have other things they want to do, and, you know, they're going to give you this amount of time online, and then you have to figure out how to make sure that you get as much time for it. You know, it's a lot of stuff you have to learn. Yeah. You know. Yeah. TV's a--I mean, the Internet is a lot more fickle than television. That's one of the things you learn. Speaker 1: So you had--you made a presentation and you were talking of the growth numbers. Do you want to share some of those numbers? Speaker 2: The grow number--well, we're still pretty large. I mean, we do--we're still a site [thegrio.com] that's bigger than some of these traditional names out there. We're bigger than Essence [essence.com]. We're bigger than The Root [theroot.com]. We're bigger than-- Speaker 1: So numbers. Speaker 2: Oh, about 2 million uniques a month, and about 7 million page views; 7, 8 million page views. But we could do a lot better, and I want to do--I want to grow the site to be even bigger. Story_ID: 657056 Speaker 1: Okay. So, you--we're talking at a time that you had--you had, you had left. You left about (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I left about six months ago, because I wanted to--I, you know, truth be told, I wanted to start to--I realized at that time that there's things and places I wanted to take TheGrio [thegrio.com] that I didn't think the--that we would ultimately be able to go in the certain corporate setting that we're in. And so I left to work on another project. Speaker 1: Who took over at that point? Was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Yvette Miley-- Speaker 1: --Joy-Ann [Joy-Ann Reid]? Okay. Speaker 2: --became executive editor. Joy still maintained managing editor, stayed at managing editor post; and you've got Miley, who's over at MSNBC, because executor editor. I had decided to--yeah. And so, recently we got word that, you know, NBC was interested in trying to figure out what to do with TheGrio. And so, Dan [Dan Woolsey] and I, we went back to NBC and said, "Hey. How about the founders acquire it." So that's where we are right now. We're in a plan to sort of acquire TheGrio back (unclear). And really now, grow it to where we feel it can ultimately be, which is a good thing. And you don't get opportunities like this boomerang--boomeranging back, you know? And I think that this is--we've learned a lot. I think one thing I learned is, you can't outsource your dreams. You have to make those things come true yourself. You can't outsource your dreams. You have to, you know, we--you know, and NBC has done a lot to sort of get us to the point where we are a very well recognized brand name. But we have to do--we have to do the grunt work to get us to where we need to go. And that's where we are right now, where we are right now looking at, acquiring it back--if all goes well, it'll be in the end of the second quarter of this year. And I have big plans for it, you know. I want to grow TheGrio beyond just the AA [African American] space and into the larger, urban psychographic. For millennials, the urban psychographic, and I'm going to get there. We're going to get there. It's going to be--you know, we want to grow it to a property where it's reaching 10 million eyeballs a month. And, you know, maybe 30 million video streamings a month. That's where we're going. And to back in this situation, I am confident that it's going to happen, because you don't get opportunities like this, to start something, to relinquish it, and have it come back to you. But this time, it's coming back to us as a bigger product than when we started it. And we have the benefit of wisdom gained for the last five years. So we're really ecstatic, because, we're like, okay. Wow. We get to do this again? But now, with a much bigger product? And now with the knowledge that we have now? We're not, you know, two guys who are just coming off of making a documentary film ['Meeting David Wilson'], you know. We've been working on the digital project for the last five years, now we get to go out and do this on our own, and we still get to maintain NT- NBC connectivity. They're still going to support us and be partners? Awesome. So we're really excited about that. Story_ID: 657057 Speaker 1: What happened to your other partner, though, before-- Speaker 2: Barion [Barion Grant]? Speaker 1: Yeah, Barion. Speaker 2: He went over to Moguldom, Moguldom Films [Moguldom Media Group]. Speaker 1: Oh, he did? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. I see. So it's the two of you [Wilson and Dan Woolsey]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I want to ask another line of questions. And this is more about the digital space, entrepreneurism-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, your generation, you know, and what you would like to see the future of the black community-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --African American community. So I guess I, you know, I want to first talk about the digital space. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And where that is. I mean, that's one of the reasons that we're, you know, interviewing you, and we're interviewing people who were in that space and, you know, there's been all this talk of the digital divide. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And black people being sort of left, left out. So want you to talk about the opportunities you see in that space and the role that you would like to have TheGrio play. Speaker 2: Well, I think the digital divide is closing. But I think the big problem now is the technological divide. African Americans are now, you know, getting more access to broadband, you know, and, you know, obviously, mobile. So, you know, we're--as you know, we over index when it comes to social media. We're frequenting all the different websites, we're on Netflix, we're doing all these sort of things. But I think what isn't happening at a--the same progressive rate, are the black web developers; people who are actually developing technology; blacks in Silicon Valley. I think we need to find a way to get blacks into the ranks of--in positions where they're educated and where they are not just educated, but then also positioned in corporations where they can develop things. 'Cause I think that's also important, not to just be consumers, but to be developers; to be entrepreneurs I think is very important. And I think that, you know, hopefully, we will see a lot more of that. Now, I think one of the things that we do at TheGrio is we love to highlight those individuals who are doing that. We did that with TheGrio's 100, you know. And we do that every year. And I think that we want to just find stories and encourage people. And we know to that extent, we'll do anything to get more young folks interested in becoming entrepreneurial; not just in the digital space, in any sort of space. But there is this still--there is a, still exists a digital boom. I think there's limitless opportunities online, and I think we just have to instill in black kids, you know, like we have always had to, that you, you know, your path to success doesn't involve a--have to involve a basketball or a, you know, or a microphone or a studio. It can involve, you know, you using your computer and coming up with an idea; starting something that makes sense, that has some utility for people where you can make money and you can create your own wealth. I think that's a very important thing. And so as it relates to the digital divide, I think what's more important than the digital divide right now and more crucial right now is the technological divide that we're seeing. Speaker 1: So, but what you're essentially saying, you don't see blacks in that space? Speaker 2: I don't think there--I don't there's enough--there isn't as many blacks in the entrepreneurial space in the digital world. There's not enough. Speaker 1: There're not even people employed in a lot of places in the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. I mean, and when you go in editorially, we know that, you know, some of the digital newsrooms are far less diverse than the television newsrooms. And, you know, folks who like the site [thegrio.com] will say, they're saying, "Well, we just don't know of anybody who's--has these skillsets." And that's BS And I think, you know, I think there needs to also be a shift to make sure that, you know, these digital newsrooms are as diverse, if not more diverse, than the linear newsrooms are. Story_ID: 657058 Speaker 1: So, you know, David [HistoryMaker David Wilson], you, you made it out of Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And there are a lot of people who did not. I mean, think about it. Your--two of your--two, two of the ten children, so-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --graduate from college. But there are--you--did you--your family may have done well. Look at the ones who were fighting. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what are your thoughts about what the state of the black community is now? And-- Speaker 2: I, I, I, I will say this, and I will be a little bit more direct, 'cause I want to even focus more specifically on black men. So we all know about the Jordan Davis case that just occurred. We see Trayvon Martin. You look at the gun violence in Chicago [Illinois]. And not just black on white [sic.] crime, but black on black crimes. How there's a sense of acceptability, that this is acceptable. And I think when you look at black men in particular, how disproportionately incarcerated we are, how disproportionately unemployed we are. And when it comes to health, we're at the bottom of the totem pole in health. When it comes to upward mobility, same situation black men are. When you talk about adoption rates, young black boys are the least adopted. We have to stop looking at black men, as a society, as being disposable. I think black men are being looked at as disposable. The fact that you have so many young boys who are dying every day on the streets at the hand of gun violence, at the hand of drugs or being sent off to prison, we've made a collective decision as a nation that this group of people, that they are disposable. Because if it were any group of--any other group of people, we'll be up in arms. If the number of black men who died in homicides--even if--the number of--do you know the number of missing people who are--more missing people--black men make up more missing people in this country than any other group of people. If that number, if these were--if you put white faces on these statistics, we would be, you know, moving heaven and earth for it. So I think we've made a collective decision in this country that black men are somehow disposable, we don't like to talk about it, and we--it's, it's, it's, it's a tough thing to say--to swallow, but it's true. We need to figure out a way to change that, and that's what I'm most passionate about. And I think, you know, we have to instill--and I think black men get that message; black boys get that message. You know, when you see Trayvon Martin, when you see Jordan Davis, you get that message. "Oh, no. You're disposable. This can happen to you, and somebody can walk." What does that do for a black boy's confidence? What does it tell him about the way he's regarded by his country? What then does he have to lose? And so I feel as if we have to turn that around. And I think that, you know, a lot of people say, "Well, this is so, you know, the fact that this happened is, you know, the black folk's reaction to this Jordan Davis trial, this Michael Dunn trial, that's overreact- Trayvon Martin is overreaction, and that there's black on black crime every day and we don't hear about it." And you know what? They're right. I don't think it's a--but I think they're wrong to think that it's overreaction. It's an under reaction to the fact that so many black boys are dying at all at the hands of blacks or anyone else. So I think when you are a black boy and you get that message, when you see yourself reflected on the evening news and depicted a certain way, you're getting this message, and it only creates low self-esteem. It only creates a situation where people began to settle for less. They feel that there's no opportunity out there for them, and so they're going to get into the things that are going to create trouble. And they, they, they see drugs and they only see--and they only may see all these other things as their only outlet. Story_ID: 657059 Speaker 1: What do you see as the answer? And what role is your generation going to play? Speaker 2: I think we have to really do a lot more to boost the--you know, I'll--there's a study that says black women have the highest level of self-confidence. Now, I'm not sure how true that are--how true that is, but I will tell you that we've done more, even our own people, we've done more to, I think, to sort of uplift in a lot of ways. I mean, you can--we still are far away on what we need to do with black women and how we--we all need a lot of work, to overcome a lot of the obstacles that we face. But I think we need more black male empowerment organizations. I really do. I think we need to get a broader message. It's one of the reasons why I think President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] legacy will always be cemented for just who he is, because he's the one image of positive male black image that we see, you know, against this major tide of negativity that you see when it comes to black men. And so I think we need to figure out ways in which we instill--you know, and I think it's been offered--you know, I think it's through education. I think it's through history. I mean, I've always say--I always say that, you know, I had the opportunity as a child to learn of all the things that I know now about my family's history, you know, the amount of pride that would have instilled in me as a kid. You don't have--a lot of kids don't have that. You know, history is the only way in which we learn about our potential without actually exercising our potential. And I think that, you know, we just don't see a lot of great black history. You know, what you're doing is, I think, is great. But do we also see black history about, you know, pre-colonialism, African civilizations that existed? Had this conversation with Dan [Dan Woolsey], my business partner. He said to me, "So, well, you know, well that's because we live in a predominantly white world." I said, "Okay. I grant that, but I guarantee you most Americans know more about, you know, you know, Chinese dynasties than they do about African dynasties. Are you going to talk about that--is that because this proportional--you know, is it proportional to the population? No." So we have to instill people with a sense of confidence--young black men with a sense of confidence of who they are, and what they're capable of doing. And it can't just be--the genesis of our history can't be slavery. And that's a great thing what you're doing with showing other black men who are doing things, and who are making a way, who survived, you know, the hood, and there's many of us, you know. And I think more of us need to be on display. But I think that's where it starts, but if we really--America has to really change and really come to terms with, first, that it sees black men as disposable; and second, that it has to change it. Story_ID: 657060 Speaker 1: So what do you want to see people say about the, TheGrio [thegrio.com] twenty years from now and its impact? Speaker 2: I honestly want people--I (unclear) I really, to have every bit of desire to see TheGrio still being around twenty years from now. But I want to--for people to say, "Look, I always trusted TheGrio. There was someone who, you now, when we were thinking it, they were talking about it. When we were going through it, they covered it. When I wanted to know, they told me." I think if we are successful at doing that, I think we've done our jobs. And that's what I want. And I--we strive for that, not just twenty years from now, we strive for that today. And if we can continue that on and do a better job at it, you know, I--I hope then in twenty years they'll still be saying that. Story_ID: 657061 Speaker 1: I ask that question, not to play devil's advocate, but you were talking about, you know, Snoop Dogg and the western, you know--well, I call it gangster rap, but the, you know, West Coast rap. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Which is more the gangster rap, and you know, those being--you being influenced by it. You didn't talk about how you were, but that was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The music. It was entertainment. Speaker 1: It was entertainment you were listening. But people believe that then entertainment also has effects on society, too. Speaker 2: No. Yes, you're absolutely right. Speaker 1: So, so, so, I'm asking how--what, you know, because there's such a focus on celebrity right now. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How is this--where do you see or were you--let me ask you--I--okay. What are your hopes and concerns? Okay. I said for the black community. You said, black boys, black men. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But what do you--okay. And you explained what you thought is needed. I guess what I'm trying--I'm trying to juxtapose where we are right now, and what your, your generation is going to do. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: 'Cause somebody else--what are they--how are they viewed? What are the--how are they defined? Speaker 2: What's the age group--I think it's--you're messing me up with the age group, I forget. Are you (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay. But they're, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're younger, younger, younger-- Speaker 1: No. But what are you? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm generation-- Speaker 1: Are you an X? Speaker 2: I'm probably generation X, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So what is the--what is going to be the legacy of generation X? Speaker 2: I don't think a good one. No. Actually, I don't know what generation X will be. But I think millennials are actually in an interesting position, because I think millennials have the opportunity, and they have more power as individuals than any other generation. We now live in an age where somebody can send out a tweet from their grandmother's basement and it be seen by half the world. They can make a post on Facebook. They can make a video on YouTube, and it gets millions of views. And they wield the power as individuals that, you know, some networks didn't even have, you know, twenty, thirty years ago. So I think that they're going to have to wake up and, I think, really appreciate that. I always run into people who say, "I want to change so much and--," you know. I said, "Well, do you blog? Do you do all things? What are you doing right now? You have your own medium now. You have your own tools to make things work." And so I think that it's interesting, because I think that we are in this age of celebrity, where that's the, the most valuable thing. It's celebrity. Everyone wants to be a reality star. And I wonder where that is going. And it's a scary thing, because I also think that the real substance is being--is no longer the substance, and what someone does, and character, is no longer a virtue as it is--as much as it is to be how famous you can be and what you can do to--you know, reality TV scares me a lot, you know, because you have a lot of folks mimicking saying, "This is how you become famous. You do these things." But I think, again, they have the opportunity now. I think, there's going to have to be some sort of awakening where people realize that, okay, we, we're fed up. We really now want to start focusing on real issues. And I think the moment this generation wakes up, I think they're going to be a force to be reckoned with, if they ever do wake up, because they would have the ability to mobilize better than any other generation. The--it's incredible at the speed. It's incredible to think about the speed in which something could happen in one location and can spread information. How easily it is carried today. If that's ever used and leveraged for good and for a cause, a worthy cause, I think it's going to be highly effective. Can you imagine what it would have been like if the youth of the civil rights era and the youth in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s] had Twitter? I would imagine that the, you know, the Mall, you know, in D.C. [National Mall, Washington, D.C.] would have not seen two hundred thousand people, but 2 million. Think about it? I mean, it's like, the ability to mobilize is it's so much more convenient now and so much easier now. So I think, you know, it is a scary thing, but I am an optimist, and I believe that ultimately this celebrity, this sort of celebrity driven culture is going to get old, and everybody'll hit bottom. I think people are going to say, "You know what? I need a job, you know. Kim Kardashian is not paying my bills. And, by the way, this is not right. You know, and that's not right, and I need to actually get involved." Story_ID: 657062 Speaker 1: So, the last question I have is, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: What do I want my legacy to be? You know, I'm actually a big person on my legacy. When I started doing research for my documentary ['Meeting David Wilson'], I would go down and look some of these old archives and all these old census reports, and I would see names and names and names upon people who, no doubt, had an impact on this world, but we don't remember it, we don't know who they are unless you're--you know, it's just piles of names. And this world is--has been full of people who existed and had impact, obviously; had kids, and their offsprings are still, you know, walking around today. But even their offsprings don't know their name. I want to figure out how to change America--to leave an impact where someone says, "Wow. Because Dave [HistoryMaker David Wilson] existed and the TheGrio [thegrio.com] existed--because TheGrio existed, this happened. This changed for the better. My life is better." And for people to be saying that, not just while I'm here, but for people to say it 50 years, 100 years, 200 years from now. (Pause) You know, that's what I hope my legacy would be...