 Story_ID: 188477 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes. Standish Willis, S-T-A-N-D-I-S-H, middle initial E, for Earl. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there any particular significance to Standish Willis? Speaker 2: My mom [Plumie Willis] thought it up basically, although there is a historical figure in early colonial history by the name of Miles Standish. But that's not where my mom got it from. She just, in the South a lot of kids were named Stan or Stanley. And she didn't want me to have a common name like that, so she came up with her own version of it. And so, I got Standish. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. When you hear it, it elevates you to like a British-- Speaker 2: Almost a nobleman or something, yeah. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: No, my mom, she vowed to make sure all her kids had unusual names. So, I think most of us do. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Eight, sixteen, forty-one [August 16, 1941], here in Chicago [Illinois], Cook County Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: October 2, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at 1900 South on Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] at the HistoryMakers' office, or studio. Story_ID: 188478 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions I'm compelled to ask you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only deserve a short answer. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Most any kind of fish, most any kind of fish. I like salmon, perch, just any kind of fish. I'm a fish person. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think it varies with age. I used to like blues, but I like browns, various shades of browns now. So, I think maybe as I get older, my taste with colors has just changed. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, of the places that I've been, the one I think I enjoyed most was probably Hawaii, although I like New Mexico a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so, except for maybe "Stay strong." I end up saying that to a lot of my clients, because they are, you know, in the various prisons. So, when I--in my letters to them, I usually write "Stay strong." And I found that several of them have told me that that--just saying that is helpful to them. So, other than that, I don't have any favorite sayings. Story_ID: 188479 Speaker 1: Okay. I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side and your father's side. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But first, can you give us the full names of your parents and spell them for us, and give us their dates and places of birth? Speaker 2: Yeah, I could do that. But if we go beyond that, I might have some trouble. My mother's name is Plumie Willis, P-L-U-M-I-E. She was born in Arkansas, the state of Arkansas. And her birthdate is May 14, 1923. My dad, who's deceased now, was born in, also born in Arkansas. His name is Andrew Willis. He's Andrew Willis, Jr., and he was born in nineteen--January 17, 1913. And he passed in 1998. Story_ID: 188480 Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about your father's [Andrew Willis, Jr.] side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, I met my grandfather and I met--well, I met my paternal grandfather, and I met my grandmother on my father's side. And I met my great-grandmother on my father's side, who lived to be 103. And they were basically sharecroppers in the South. They worked on this large acre of land that was owned by an old white landowner. My grandfather was a minister, and he built and pastored his own church down in Arkansas. And my grandmother was, you know, a faithful church member, but she largely took care of the house and, you know, all the kids and the little small plot of land that they had, which wasn't very much. And that's, that's pretty much all I know about them. I stayed with them during some summers for, you know, a week or two here and there. But they---Grandfather was always, you know, in the fields, and that's kind of how it worked there. They would get up at six in the morning or earlier and go, you know, picking cotton or chopping cotton. So, you didn't get much time with Granddad. 'Cause when he came in, it was usually after dinnertime or around dinnertime. I mean that's the kind of days they had, not just my grandfather, but my cousins that were old enough to go to the fields. And then Grandmother was around the house doing the washing, doing the cooking, you know, taking care of the, you know, anything related to the household. She didn't go to the field. But the girls went to the field quite a bit, and did household work. So, you didn't get to know them. I mean, there were very few times where you would just kind of sit and, you know, chat about things--where you could really kind of say I got to know my grandfather. He was just too busy working in the fields, I would say at least six days a week. And of course on Sunday, then he had to tend to his flock at the church. You know, so he was off, and literally would be at church all day in various programs. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did they ever tell any stories or share any stories about your ancestors in the past, or about them growing up in Arkansas? Speaker 2: They, they, they, they did some. I don't remember a lot of them. But what I do remember, they didn't talk much about... kind of racial conditions in the South. I began to learn that later, because I began to ask more direct questions, and I was surprised to learn that they knew so much. But they--I get the impression that they felt they were shielding the kids from the horrors of the South, so they didn't talk about it. It wasn't something to be talked about. In the evening, very often they would, you know, they would kind of have prayer services and the like, and talk about what the kids were doing. But they didn't go back a lot, in terms of what was happening and how they grew up. That just wasn't their focus. So, I didn't learn a lot of history. You know, I didn't learn a lot through oral history about, you know, my family. I did later on. You know, I took on a project and started learning more later. Story_ID: 188481 Speaker 1: What kind of stuff did you learn later about their lives? Speaker 2: Well, I learned that they [paternal family] had migrated from the Tennessee area. They were in the Bolivar, Tennessee area. And they migrated to--which is not that far of a migration--it's probably more forty or fifty miles to the Forrest City, Arkansas area. Speaker 1: Tennessee, just north of Memphis [Tennessee]. Bolivar, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. And that my father's--my grandfather had, I think, eight brothers and no sisters. And that they--I didn't get much past that. And they were kind of spread out, you know, throughout the South. None of them ventured north during those days. And then I learned more about my dad, you know, his migration to Chicago [Illinois] and how he had to, you know, kind of hobo his way, as he would say, from the South, literally getting on a freight train and riding to the North and getting off someplace, not necessarily a particular destination. Because he ended up in Minnesota on occasions, and he remembers ending up in the St. Louis area in Missouri on occasions. And he was just literally doing that looking for work, and would get off, you know, and try to find work. And when they ended up in Chicago, it was, it was after one or two of the cousins came to Chicago and kind of settled down and started working. Then others would come, you know, migrating to the North. And this happened during the second World War [World War II], when there was another mass migration of black folks from the South. But they always had an anchor in the city. And that anchor in this instance was a cousin of mine named Ollie, Ollie Johnson [ph.]. And everybody knew once you get to Chicago you could stay with Ollie until you got a job, and then you moved out, you know, and got your own apartment. But she was like the lighthouse or the way station for my folks, on my daddy's side at least, and to some extent my mother's [Plumie Willis] side coming north. And I've learned that many black families functioned that way. They had somebody who came, you know, and rooted themselves in the northern community, and then they all knew that they could come and stay until they got, you know, economically situated. Story_ID: 188482 Speaker 1: Okay. What about your mother's [Plumie Willis] side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I didn't know, I didn't know my mother's--my mother's mother died before I was born. In fact, she died when my mom was twelve or thirteen. And her father apparently died when I was very young. I never met him, so I don't know that side very well. I know her sisters. I met them, and one brother. And I stayed with one of her sisters in Kentucky on a regular basis, my Aunt Ida [ph.]. So I got to know her very well, she and her husband. Uncle Jesse James Ware [ph.] was his name. He was a pastor in Paducah, Kentucky, Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Paducah, okay. Speaker 2: --and Mom would ship me off to them every summer. So, I got to know that side, but not as close as my father's [Andrew Willis, Jr.] side. I kind of grew around my father's people, you know, here in Chicago [Illinois]. And so, I feel like I know them a lot better. Speaker 1: Okay. Any stories from your mother's side that they tell about-- Speaker 2: About the history? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't remember very many stories on either side. Story_ID: 188483 Speaker 1: I remember a story going back to my dad's [Andrew Willis, Jr.] side about his sister, Ada [ph.], how she was beat up by a white man because she dare speak to him in front of his wife. And they apparently--She felt like she knew him pretty good, but the fact that she spoke to him in front of his wife, he beat her up. You know, because that was improper, for a black woman to speak to him in front of his white wife. And I remember my dad told me that story, you know, because that was a story that kind of lingered with them for a long period of time. Because she died before I was born, but he remembered his sister Ada getting beat up like that. I remember stories about various confrontations. Because my father was, well, what they used to call--was one of those "crazy niggers," and that has certain sociological meaning. And it meant that he was willing to fight white people if necessary, and maybe even fight them to the extent where he had to leave the South, which he did. But he didn't, he wasn't run out of the South, but he did have confrontations on occasions. And he wasn't willing to back down a lot. And I remember stories about how he protected, would protect his siblings, because he was the oldest boy. And he told me a story, he was telling of a story of how he had to go get his younger brother, Nathaniel [ph.]. Because there was threats some whites were making to him, and he just literally had to go down there and get him and kind of scare them off verbally, you know, and threaten them a little bit. But he had a reputation where they didn't bother him while he was in the South. And he survived the South to come to the North. But there weren't a lot of stories that, you know, I could, you know, pass on to my kids about how my folks grew up. I started learning the stories--not so much about my family, but black people in general. Because I became a history major later, you know, so I had a keen interest in history. So, I started studying and then asking some questions. But my people weren't oral historians. They just didn't, they didn't talk about it a lot. You know, even when you asked them they said, "Well, I don't remember that too well," or something, you know. So, I think it was painful really, you know, as I--in retrospect. You know, a lot of things happened that they knew or felt they couldn't do a lot about. And so, when they came north I think they just kind of left that behind them, you know, mentally left it behind them. So, they didn't pass on a lot of oral history to me. Story_ID: 188484 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father [Andrew Willis, Jr.]. What kind of person was he? You told us some already. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But you know, what did he do for a living? And-- Speaker 2: My daddy was-- Speaker 1: --when did he come to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, he came to Chicago probably in '39 [1939] or '40 [1940]. Because I was born in '41 [1941], and they had been here, you know, at least a year--so a year and a half, I think. He was, he worked in the steel mills. He worked at Chicago Sheet and Metals [ph.] for thirty-something years. So, he was just a steelworker, not very well educated. He probably didn't have more than a third grade education. And the reason for that is sharecroppers weren't, just weren't allowed to go to school. There was no time to go to school if you were a sharecropper. And I saw that when I did go down South. My cousins that were my contemporaries, they couldn't go to school, either. You know, you had to work in the fields. So, he wasn't educated. He read the Bible a lot; that was his source of reading. He didn't read the newspaper very much. He would watch it, you know, or listen to it on the radio. He was, he was, he was a strong family man. He was very good with his children, very generous, probably more generous than most, you know. I can remember him always having a full-time job, and always had what we call an extra job, or a hustle--a legal hustle, though. He had a pickup truck and he would, you know, move people. He would sometimes haul, you know, junk and sell it. And he had a little store in the neighborhood where he sold snowballs and watermelons, that kind of stuff. So, he always had to have--he had that kind of entrepreneurial spirit, but he wasn't a businessman at all, because he tended to give away all of what we would call a profit. So if you came down and you didn't have any money, it didn't matter. You know, if you wanted it, then he would give it away. And that's the way it was with him. And his reputation was that he was very generous, very protective of his kids. And I can remember two or three stories. Because I grew up in a very tough neighborhood on the West Side--a lot of, maybe the first generation of gangbangers, you know, where people would organize into teenage gangs, male and female. And you know, and having serious turf battles where sometimes kids got killed. I can remember incidents where he had to intervene, you know, to save me. So he was very, very protective. If he thought something was happening to one of his kids, he was there, regardless. But other than that, he just worked very hard. He wasn't--I often say he wasn't an 'Ozzie and Harriet' father. And that has no meaning now because, you know, that was during my day. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nobody knows what that is now. Speaker 2: Right. (Laughter). I mean, you know, he didn't take me to baseball games. He didn't take me fishing, you know, none of that. No Little League stuff, you know. But he, I knew he was there. You know, I had a weekly allowance, and most kids didn't in my neighborhood. Mom [Plumie Wilis] started back going to church probably when I was seven, eight, or nine--somewhere in there, you know. They had taken off from church for a period of time... neither one of my parents went to church. But when Mom started going back to church, then I had to go to church. And Dad went occasionally, but he was, he didn't go to church that much. But he studied the Bible, and he would make challenges to some of the local ministers, you know, who might come by the house. And he would challenge them, you know, with something he read in the Bible. And he was pretty, pretty--you know, pretty fierce about his challenges, you know, because he was a preacher's son, so he knew the Bible. And I think he, I think he thought about religious and theological questions a lot because he would, he would ask questions and challenge them. And very often, you know, they didn't have answers, so they didn't stay at my house very long when my dad would start his religious challenges-- Story_ID: 188485 Speaker 1: So, I think he [Willis's father, Andrew Willis, Jr.] was a pretty tough guy. He had a reputation. I would hear from other relatives that when he grew up, he was pretty quick to fight. You know, he didn't take any stuff. You know, I was telling you the story about how he had to go to get his younger brother. He had that reputation. He would fight on behalf of siblings and others, but mostly siblings. There was a story about how he literally jumped on a brother-in-law because his brother-in-law was abusive to his wife, which happened to be my father's sister. And he just didn't, he didn't tolerate that. And so, he was a pretty tough guy. He wasn't very big. He was probably 5'9", 5'10" and weighed usually 175 [pounds], 180 [pounds]. But he was very strong. I saw Dad... and it still amazes me. Because he was probably in his forties maybe, maybe even older, because my dad lived to be eighty-five. But he would--as I was telling you, he would--one of his little side hustles was moving people. And he had a little pickup truck. We never had a car when I grew up, we had a truck. Because you know, it was more practical for my dad. So, we had a family truck. And he would just, you know, if somebody was moving he would go and, you know, move the furniture. And he would literally pick a refrigerator up on his back and carry it up and down the stairs and, you know, move it. I mean, I literally saw him bring a refrigerator from the second or third floor, to bring it down to put it in his truck. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's strong. Speaker 1: And he would tell me, "Well, it's just all in the way you lift it." I said, "Yeah, okay, Dad." (Laughter). But he was so protective. Sometimes he would take me on moving jobs with him because he wanted to have a reason for giving me an increase in my allowance. So he would pay me to go, you know, and he might give me twenty bucks. But he wouldn't let me do anything, because he was afraid that I might strain myself if I carried something. So he might say, "Okay, you know, you can get that box over there." But it might be an empty box. But he would never let me, you know, really carry anything, because he was always, he was very protective in that way. And then he would pay me twenty dollars for helping him move. You know, and then brag about it, "Yeah, my son helped me move, and made himself some money." So, it was really kind of interesting how that worked out. He would junk--we called it junk--where he actually went down the alley sometime and picked up old--you know, an old stove here or an old piece of furniture there. And then he'd come back and sell it. But sometimes he'd come back and put these--if he thought it was a nice piece of furniture, he would come and put it in the house. So, you might leave one day going to school, and come back and you have a different couch than you had when you left, you know. This drove my mother [Plumie Willis] crazy. Because he was always, "Yeah, you know, I just got this nice chair, Plumie." You know, and she'd say "Oh my God, you know, so he's gone out and replaced the chair," you know. And that was his spirit. But he was very, he was really--in the extended family he was somebody that everybody just kind of counted on, especially if they were in need of help in any way, or if they needed money, you know. Because they'd know--you know, you can go and ask Andrew, you know, if you were a cousin, you know, especially in his generation. He was always on the lookout for others, because he had a pretty stable economic situation. Even though we lived in a kind of poor, working class community, both Mom and Dad worked. So, we probably had more than others, you know, in those communities. But he was always giving. I mean that was his--the thing that I think most people remember him by more than anything else, he was giving. He was kind of a no-nonsense person, but he was a giving person. Story_ID: 188486 Speaker 1: Now, what about your mother [Plumie Willis]? What is she like? Speaker 2: Mom was kind of--I would characterize her as being a little more middle class in her attitudes, even though she wasn't well educated. Because she grew up in the same environment that my dad [Andrew Willis, Jr.] did. She probably got, I don't know if she made it to high school. But she had an air of sophistication that my dad didn't have. For example, she didn't want to move to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. They started off on the South Side [of Chicago], because the West Side was a little too seedy for her, you know. She, for example, she would never sit out on the front porch and just kind of relax, like many other people did, you know, in the neighborhood. Mothers... you know, my friends' mothers might sit out in the evening, you know, with a glass of lemonade or whatever. But she would never do that, because that was too, too common or too seedy, to sit out on the front. She would go to work and she would come home, and she would go to church. But to sit out was something that was below her, in a sense. And so she had, she brought that, you know, to the household--this kind of air of sophistication, you know. Very well-dressed, very attractive woman, but very, very much a churchwoman. You know, she was one of the pillars of the little church in our community. And when we grew up, we were in a very fundamentalist Protestant church. We were in, they called it the Sanctified Church of God in Christ [The Original Church of God or Sanctified Church, General Body]. (Laughter). And they were very fundamental. We couldn't, we weren't allowed to go to theaters for a long time, because it was--you know, there was no good rationalization for a lot of it, but you just couldn't go, 'cause it was sinful. You'd be around sinful type people, you know. They, they relaxed that later, and they started letting us go to the movies if there was a biblical theme, you know, like some of the old 'Samson and Delilah...' something like... So, they relaxed... and then they relaxed-- Speaker 1: 'The Ten Commandments'? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. (Laughter). So, the kids would say "Well, you know, the people at 'Samson and Delilah' are the same people that are at Clark Gable movies, you know. I don't understand." So they, they hadn't worked out a lot of theological questions. They'd just say, "You can't do it." (Laughter). So, you know, but it was, it was a good church. She was very active in it. She was in the choir, had a pretty good voice. They had not only the church choir, but they had organized a group called "The Willis Group [ph.]." It was mostly Willises, and they would travel around to various churches singing. I think there were five of them. So that was, you know, that was something that I remember about her very early. And she worked as--very early, she worked as a seamstress. She worked in a little factory, literally making bags in this little Jewish-owned factory, who she got to know the family very well. And there were a group of them, and they just worked very hard, literally sewing bags. And I don't remember what the bags were used for. And she did that for years and years. And she left there and went to Illinois Research Hospital [later University of Illinois Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and worked as a, like a nurse's aide--you know, helping the patients, you know, and cleaning the bedpans and that kind of stuff. And then later my dad came over there, and he worked on the janitorial staff, you know, cleaning the floors and stuff. And that's where they both retired from, Illinois Research Hospital. But Mom was, you know, she was like most moms. She raised us--she reared us, rather. Not raised, you raise cattle. She reared us. She was the one that would tell us, "You don't eat with that hand," or "You put that fork over there," or you know. And she was the one that, you know, did the homework with us. And as I was growing up, taught, you know, taught me the ABC's, and all that stuff. You know, that was Mom's job. Dad never did that. Speaker 1: Did she have a chance to go very far in school? Speaker 2: She didn't get to high school. I think Mom probably got to seventh grade. People didn't get to school very much in those little communities. Speaker 1: Was she from Kentucky or Arkansas? Speaker 2: She was from Arkansas. Yeah, she grew up in Arkansas--she grew up in the same community with my dad. Story_ID: 188487 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: My dad [Andrew Willis, Jr.]--laughter) yeah, the story was their families knew each other. They were all, you know, kind of church families. And she [Willis's mother, Plumie Willis] was much younger than my dad probably during these times. I don't know if she was much younger during those times. When my dad and mom married, she was thirteen, he was twenty-three. You know, I thought that was pretty remarkable. (Laughter). But, you know, and they knew each other just being in the same community. And she asked--her mom had died, and she asked--my dad asked her father if he could marry, you know, his daughter. And he consented. He said, "But if you ever, if you ever put your hands on her--if you ever think you have to put your hands on her, just bring her back home." That's what--you know, my dad always, you know, conveyed that. And so, they got married. And my mom didn't have her first child until she was eighteen, and that was me. There was no birth control, so I don't know how that worked. But she didn't have her first child... And then she had a child every seven years for the first three children, almost like clockwork. Speaker 1: Every seven years? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm seven years older than my sister, and she's seven years older than my next brother. And then she slipped up and had one after three years. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 188488 Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up. Now, you grew up on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And what was the name of your neighborhood? Or did it have one? Speaker 2: It was, I don't know if it had a name. We call it now the Near West Side. It was 13th Street. Well, Roosevelt [Road] and Ashland [Avenue] would be the streets that are more familiar. Now, it has totally changed now. I mean, it doesn't even exist anymore, my neighborhood. It was in the area--we were blocks from where we used to refer to as "Jew Town," you know, the Maxwell [Street] area. We used to literally go down in that area to swim. There was a swimming pool down there in Stanford Park. And of course, we went down there to eat the hot dogs and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Those Polish sausages, I think they were called? Speaker 2: Yeah. And there was a little black community in that area. After the Jewish community moved out, the merchants stayed, but black folks moved in. And my first wife was born in that area and grew up in that area until she moved a little further west, you know, where I met her, around 13th and Ashland [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Now, this is a colorful area of town. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: I know that much about it, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 188489 Speaker 1: Can you give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [on the West Side, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was, it was a working-class community. And that section was African American, although when we moved in, there was a few white people that was, you know, on their way out. So, my first friend, my first neighbor, was a little white boy. And they stayed, you know, maybe a couple of years. You know, we became good friends; his name was Michael [ph.]. And then they moved out, and the only white folks in the neighborhood then would be, you know, the occasional insurance man or the--we had a furniture salesman who would come with catalogs and, you know, he had a mail order business from L. Fish [Furniture & Mattress] Company, which was downtown [Chicago, Illinois]. And, and then other that, you didn't see very many white people in the neighborhood, except police; you know, they were always there. There was, I would say everything in the neighborhood that you can imagine. It developed into a pretty tough, gang-ridden neighborhood after a while. When I grew up, I think when I was about twelve, the gangs had began to form. And we became, in my neighborhood, the Van Dykes. But there were gangs within the Van Dykes. Because what happened, you'd have a larger gang, but you have guys that just kind of hung out together and they sometimes would organize a sub-gang, but it was still the Van Dykes. So, I was in the Gents, which was guys I'd hung out with. And we played basketball together and we, you know, we decided to be the Gents. It had nothing to do with gangbanging. It had to do with, you know, having some kind of identification, social identification. And that was something we, I guess we felt we needed. We didn't have the YMCAs [Young Men's Christian Association] and the boys' clubs and all that other stuff. So, we had our, we developed our own. And it just happens that in that community, those social groups that were originally organized to be gang-related, turned out to be gang-related. So, we ended up getting in fights, you know, with other social groupings. But it was... I was on, I lived at 1736 West 13th [Street], which was between Paulina [Street] and Wood Street on 13th Street. One block east of me was a very, very popular blues club called the Zanzibar [Club Zanzibar]. And the Zanzibar--now, this is in the '50s [1950s] largely. The Zanzibar was a small club. Of course, I couldn't go in there, but I would look in there. I wasn't old enough to go in there. And I wasn't interested in going in there because it was a blues club. And when I grew up, the kids that I grew up with, around, weren't into the blues, because the blues was associated with the unsophisticated South. So, we called the blues "country music." So, we didn't have nothing to do with the blues. (Laughter). We were Motown kids. But that club had every blues artist you can imagine. We didn't realize it then, but it had [HM] B. B. King... Howlin' Wolf was a regular. You name it, they were all at the Zanzibar. And there was another club farther west, I understand, that attracted the same big stars. And they were big stars then in the black community. They just weren't known outside of the black community, but that's where they were. In fact, Muddy Waters's son lived a block from me. I don't think Muddy Waters lived there, but his son--his name was Charles [Morganfield]--at least that was the story. So, the blues was big. And it was big in my father [Andrew Willis, Jr.] and mother's [Plumie Willis] generation, you know, they liked the blues. But we liked Smokey Robinson, you know, anything out of Motown, that's what we were into. We weren't into no blues. So that was, that was a major institution in the community. And I can remember going and kind of standing outside of the door listening to the blues, only to mock it. And you could feel the heat coming out of there, because there were no air conditioners. And the only way they could kind of cool it off, they had these huge fans, you know, located in different places. And it just blew the heat around, you know. (Laughter). It was kind of funny. Story_ID: 188490 Speaker 1: The other things I guess were--we had, you know, athletes that were identified--like Marques Haynes either lived in the community or had relatives. And he was, of course, one of the famous [Harlem] Globetrotters. Speaker 2: The dribbling expert. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: He was the man. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in that neighborhood. And, you know, of course sports were very important to kids when I grew up. There was a Park District field house and field right at Ashland [Avenue] on 13th Street, called Clark Playground [ph.]. And we spent most of our day there, because they actually had organized sports. We didn't have a gym, so we had an outdoor basketball court. And they would have a huge field for baseball, so we played baseball. And in the shelter house there was a guy who was, you know, paid--a staff person who organized wrestling competition, table tennis competition. I mean, you could name... you name it... checkers. We didn't do chess. I didn't know what chess was. But there were all kind of activities that kept us--and we were always seeking an indoor gym. I remember there was the West Side Christian Parish [Chicago, Illinois], they tried to convert this garage into an indoor gym. And it was, it was small and it was dusty. You'd come out, you know, and you'd be spitting up all this dust. But it was inside. And in the wintertime, we didn't have anything, you know. We didn't have a gym, so we would go in there and play. It was kind of chilly; they didn't have real heat in there, because it was a garage. So, we didn't have... So, we literally would play basketball in the wintertime outside. We would just, you know, shovel the snow out of the way and run up and down. You know, that's how badly we wanted to play baseball and basketball in, you know, during the wintertime. Story_ID: 188491 Speaker 1: We didn't have--as I said, the gangs were emerging [on the West Side, Chicago, Illinois]. The drugs weren't emerging. There was--it wasn't like now, where there was trafficking and drugs, and young black men and women who were organizing themselves around trafficking. And they, we didn't have that. There were people that used drugs, but it wasn't business. So, there were no rivalries around drug trafficking. There were no drug houses, nothing like that. Speaker 2: What kind of drugs were they using? Speaker 1: Marijuana, maybe some cocaine. But mostly, marijuana. There were some serious drug addicts. I mean, we knew them and we just kind of stayed away from them. Speaker 2: Heroin addicts and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. And these guys were older guys. And I remember one or two of them were war veterans. And they just, you know, they were throwaways. They had been to the war, and they'd walk around talking crazy. And they were drug addicts, and we knew them. And people just kind of stayed away. It didn't filter down much. I mean, there were guys that would get, you know, a little marijuana and get high. We drank a lot. We were wine drinkers, you know, serious wine drinkers. I remember we would go to the basketball games with a, you know, fifth of wine and sit and drink wine and passing the bottle around. But we weren't, you know, wasn't into dope at that time. The gangs got, the rivalries got pretty intense. You literally couldn't leave your neighborhood after a while. When I was about fifteen or sixteen, I was kind of restricted to about a four by four block area, for the most part. Because there was another rival gang east of Ashland [Avenue], the Braves, and I just couldn't to go there. You know because if I did, there was a serious threat to my life. Because they, you know, they were pretty serious. Speaker 2: So, to get out of that area, did you have to drive or have a bunch of--group of people with you? Speaker 1: You didn't get out of the area. People literally stayed in the area. You know, there were kids that--and it's probably true now. We didn't go downtown hardly ever. We went to school, and that was out of the area. But that was kind of a safe ground, to go to Crane [Tech] High School [later, Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois]. But we stayed in the area. We went down to the Maxwell [Street] area, which we called "Jew Town," largely for swimming. And we would go around the more dangerous areas, just to get down there. And then we'd come back. But we stayed in the area, we didn't do much... The kids that left the area usually left when they went off to the military--when they really left the area. We didn't go south, you know, because there was this division between the South [Side] and West Side. People on the West Side wouldn't have nothing to do with the people on the South Side, and vice versa. So, you just didn't go south, and it was taken very seriously. And I didn't know nothing about the South... I didn't know Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], for example, existed. You know, so we just stayed in our little neighborhood. And if we went too far west, we would run into another series of gangs. And when I was about fourteen, I lost my, one of my best friends who was a little older--I think he was fifteen or sixteen--from a gang rivalry, he was shot to death. That was the first fatality, but they came after that. I mean, I remember two or three others after that while I was growing up. Story_ID: 188492 Speaker 1: How did it escalate from being, like, basically social identity groups to--? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think because we--there was a need to have some kind of social organization, some kind of sense of belonging to something. And we didn't have the Boy Scouts [of America], and we didn't have the social clubs. We didn't have the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. We didn't have the Little League [Baseball and Softball]. We didn't have any of that, so we did it on our own. And it just happened that once we did it, then we would end up having natural confrontations. Like playing baseball, you know, if you lose, you know, you're mad and you might start a fight. Then if you do that, then the other guys will fight back. And so, you get these escalating... probably just natural kind of contradictions that could have been resolved if we had had kind of adult supervisor to organize our activities, but we didn't. So, we would fight it out. It was always turf related. If we had a baseball game against some guys in another neighborhood, there's probably going to be a fight after the game, you know. So, it just emerged like that. And then guys started wearing the same kind of clothing. So, we had jackets alike, and we adopted a name. And then other kids started doing the same thing. But I think it just kind of grew naturally, because kids needed a way to identify, you know, with some other kids in kind of a group way. And it just kind of got out of hand, because it wasn't supervised. And it got pretty serious, got pretty violent. Like I said, you know, my friend, his name was Chance Puke [ph.], was shot to death. And then there were other kids that were seriously beaten, shot, you know, and it escalated. And there were guys in the neighborhood who started carrying guns. You know, we knew who they were. There weren't that many. But I knew there was the Carpenter brothers [ph.], they carried a gun. There was Ba Bro [ph.], we called him Ba Bro. His name was, his last name was Williams; I never knew his first name. He carried a gun. There were certain guys that carried guns, and they would shoot you, you know, we knew that. But most of the fighting was fist fights, bats, you know, just stuff you can pick up. And then later on people began to introduce, you know, guns into the rivalry, and people started getting killed. I remember an incident, I was probably fourteen or fifteen, where--this wasn't gang related, but it just kind of shows some of the dangers in a community that's kind of low-income and nobody cared much about. Somebody had left some barrels of oil in the back of a pickup truck in the alley. And we as kids were just kind of hanging out in the alley, and we went and we would stick pieces of a stick into this barrel and then go over to a lit garbage can. Because they used to burn garbage, you know, during those days. They picked up garbage, but they would burn garbage, too. You know, you literally would, you know, burn the garbage in the alley. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we would light these little things. And you know, they were torches, and we would just play with them. There were always little groups of kids that would follow us around. They were younger brothers of my friends. I didn't have younger brothers, but they did. And they would just kind of follow us and do what we did. They, we moved on to something else, and they started doing what we had been doing. And apparently one of the kids put one of those lit torches into the barrel, and it blew up. And I heard "Voom," and I looked around and these three kids were absorbed in flames running down the street, you know, coats burning, flesh burning. This was Howard [ph.], Jimmy [ph.] and Mamie [ph.]. Howard was burned on about ninety percent of his body. He stayed in the hospital over a year. Jimmy was burned, the side of his face was burned, you know, with third-degree burns. You know, and nothing happened. Eventually, they came and moved the barrels and nothing ever really happened--those kinds of things. Kids getting hit by cars were pretty common. There was a truck depot about two blocks down. And I don't know what they--you know, it was these, you know, these big trucks. And they hauled something, I don't know what they hauled. But when they would come down through the neighborhood, they would be going pretty fast. And this was a residential... kids all out in the street. And I remember at least two kids, three kids, getting hit by these trucks. And one was fatal, it ran over Lewis [ph.]. I remember Lewis, it ran over his head. So, it was a kind of a neglected community in that regard, you know, a kind of throw-away community. But, you know, the kids---other than that, kids went to school like everybody else and studied, and you know, tried to, you know, make something out of themselves-- Story_ID: 188493 Speaker 1: Now, what school did you go to, and how did you like it? Speaker 2: I went to William E. Gladstone [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], which is the only thing that exists in my neighborhood now. I drove through there within the last couple of months. I liked school pretty good. I was a pretty smart kid, you know, in grammar school even though I was--I can remember wondering if, how I was going to get home. Because this school was in another gang area. And so there was always--there was times when I was wondering if kids were going to be waiting for me after school to beat me up. So, I was always wondering which door would I go out of, you know, to avoid these other gang members. And so, obviously it was a distraction, because I'm sitting there wondering how am I going to get out of here, when the teacher's talking about mathematics or something. And I remember getting into one or two fights, you know, in and around the school area. But I managed pretty good, because I knew a lot of the kids, because we were students together, even though they were in different gangs. So, I did pretty good. I remember most of our teachers were white. And there was one teacher, Miss Izzo [ph.], who was like the disciplinarian. And she would scare you half to death. She would say, "I'm going to take you down into this boiler room, and there's a whipping machine down there." What it was, it was a boiler with the conveyor belts, but we didn't know that. And so she scared us half to death, you know to--, when she thought we needed to be disciplined. So, I didn't like her at all because of that. And she had a reputation for--kids who had been gone for, you know, a long time--they remember Miss Izzo. But I remember we didn't have that many black teachers. I remember Mr. Leonard Thomas [ph.], a good looking guy. He must have been in his thirties, a young guy. He was very, very good with us. My mom [Plumie Willis] was crazy about him, because she, you know, she would come up to school. And I think he, he would talk to her about, you know, what he thought my potential was, and she appreciated it. And he spent a lot of time with all the kids. But I remember he spent a lot of time with me. And I also remember he took the side of a ruler--he had this, this, disciplinary--his way of disciplining kids--he would take the side of a ruler and hit you in your hand. I remember he made my hand bleed, because he cut my hand with the side of the ruler. But I was still, I was crazy about him. And one of the reasons--I think I didn't see that many black teachers. They just didn't have that many black teachers. So, to see one, and one who's--you know, who was obviously very intelligent and caring, you know, it stood out in my mind. I never forgot him. But it was, it was, I guess it was like any other school. I mean you know, we, we, studied hard. I remember getting an award when I was in eighth grade, you know, kind of outstanding student or something, you know. Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in grade school? Speaker 2: Probably art related. You know, I wasn't a fan of mathematics. I thought I did okay, but mostly artistic kinds of things; I liked to draw. Yeah, I think art was it, although I didn't do much with it after grammar school. But I enjoyed it in elementary school. And of course, gym, you know, was always a favorite. We had, you know, we played basketball. We didn't do, we didn't do soccer. That didn't come into elementary school until I guess much later; we didn't have it in our school. I didn't know what soccer was, really. We did baseball, we did touch football, you know. And we wrestled, we did some wrestling. We did some boxing, because boxing was very popular when I grew up. Because we had--you know, during the fifties, you know, the declining years of Joe Louis, and Jersey Joe Walcott [Arnold Raymond Cream] and these guys, and Ezzard Charles. We, you know, our fathers watched them religiously, because they were on TV I think twice a week. The Gillette Company presented the boxing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, boxing was very important. And a number of kids did CYO [Catholic Youth Organization], you know, boxing... actually trained, you know, to box. I wasn't into that, but I boxed a lot. Story_ID: 188494 Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to Crane [Tech] High School [later, Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I started high school in 1956. We went to Cregier [Vocational] High School [Chicago, Illinois] for two years and then we transferred to Crane in our junior year, because Cregier was closer, and they had this... that's the way it was. If you lived that far south, you went to Cregier first, and then you went to Crane. Speaker 1: So you went... your freshman at-- Speaker 2: My sophomore was at Cregier. Speaker 1: At Cregier, okay. Speaker 2: And then you transferred to Crane. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember being totally unconcerned about high school. High school became almost all social to me. You know, I just kind of played around. I had my first child when I--after turning seventeen, about two weeks, my son was born. Speaker 1: So, that's in your senior year? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't even in my senior year. Speaker 1: You weren't even a senior? Speaker 2: I was probably a sophomore. I'm sixteen, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay. I thought you said seventeen. Speaker 2: Yeah, I turned seventeen. Reggie [Reginald, ph.] was born--I was turning seventeen on August sixteenth, and Reggie was born August thirtieth. So I was into, you know, chasing the girls, and not studying at all. I had no interest in school. You know, just kind of hanging out and playing ball. I discovered jazz when I was probably a sophomore in high school. So, there was a group of guys who, most of them were in the band, the high school band. And they discovered jazz, and kind of brought it to the campus. So, I was getting into [Julian Edwin] "Cannonball" Adderley and Miles Davis and John Coltrane and, you know, and the like. Story_ID: 188495 Speaker 1: And once I had my son [Reginald (ph.)], I started working, you know, after school. So-- Speaker 2: Now, how did your parents [Andrew Willis, Jr. and Plumie Willis] react to you being a father? Speaker 1: They told me I had to work. (Laughter). Very simple. You know, I mean, they didn't... they weren't happy about me, you know, becoming a father that early. But my mom was very clear, "You've got to work. You know, you've got to take care of this kid." So, I got a job. And I would leave school heading to work. I worked at a laundry, and I worked long hours; I worked on a Saturday. I would get sick on a Saturday, because my job on Saturday was to clean out the--they had a feather cleaner, you know, for the pillows, and I had to clean it out. And I didn't know at the time--I guess I was--I must have had--I have asthma. I didn't learn that until I was way into my adulthood, but I must have had some signs of it then, because I would get sick. But I worked Saturdays, so I looked forward to getting sick on Saturdays. And I would work until ten o'clock, sometimes as late as midnight at that little dry cleaning place on Roosevelt [Road] and Loomis [Street], you know, because I had a son. And so, you know I was--I was probably one of the few fathers, young fathers, who actually took it seriously and got a job and, you know, tried to provide for my kid at that very early age. Speaker 2: Okay. I mean did you... I mean did you... were you self-motivated, or was it just your parents making you do that? Speaker 1: I think it was mostly my parents, but I probably would have. I think they had taught me enough about responsibilities that I--even without my mom's mandate, I probably would have done it. But I'm not all the way sure of that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was very difficult giving up--you know, being able to leave school and go play ball and hang out, to go into a factory. That was very difficult for me. Speaker 2: Yeah, I can imagine being that age and having a kid (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. But I knew I didn't have no choice, so it didn't matter. Speaker 2: Now, what happened to the mother [Marcia, ph.]? Did you have to marry her or something? Or did they try to-- Speaker 1: I didn't have to marry her. We continued to date, and I went to the [U.S.] military right after high school. And we got married I think a year after I'd been in the military. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we stayed married, you know, through my military. And we got divorced I think in '67 [1967]. So, we stayed married probably seven years or so. We had another child. Story_ID: 188496 Speaker 1: So, when you graduated from high school [Crane Tech High School, later, Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois], did you have a sense of what you wanted to do with the rest of your life? Speaker 2: Not at all. I mean there was no role models, really. You know, we didn't have any professionals in the neighborhood [the West Side, Chicago, Illinois]. Many kids would go into the [U.S.] military, you know. And they brought back stories of travel and, you know, all of that. And so, that was an option. Some kids went off to college, not many. It wasn't, it wasn't expected. What was expected, and what was hoped, was that you would finish high school. After that, you know, you get a job someplace. But nobody talked about college. I don't think... I can't remember anybody in my family, immediate or extended family, who had gone to college or who had finished; maybe some had gone. But nobody went to college. Because most of my family in my parents' [Andrew Willis, Jr. and Plumie Willis] generation had just come up from the South. So, nobody had gone to college. And then in my generation, many kids were just getting jobs, you know, maybe not even finishing high school. Speaker 1: Now, was there--were there any teachers at Crane [Tech High School, later, Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] or any other people in the community that, like, saw potential in you, and told you about it? Speaker 2: If they did, nobody ever told me. (Laughter). Speaker 1: There was one teacher [Mr. Leonard Thomas] in grade school [William E. Gladstone Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] who saw it, you said. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he did. But I lost track of him. He was like fifth grade. I didn't see him anymore after that. But no, I don't remember any teachers that stand out in high school that I could say, "Yeah, this teacher encouraged me." Because I wasn't really doing anything. I had a strategy in high school, and that was not to do any work for the first three marking periods. As we approached the fourth marking period, I would go to the teacher, confess my wrongs--that I hadn't done very much, but I really want to pass this course, get extra credit, work very hard for, you know, two or three weeks to get through that fourth marking period, and work hard enough to pass the course. So, if you look at my course book you'll see "F, F, F, D" in a lot of courses. Because that was my strategy, because I didn't want to do anything else. So, as a result, I didn't learn very much in high school. It's terrible, but I have to admit it since I'm on... the camera's rolling. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Planned and everything, premeditated. Speaker 2: I had no plan. And then when I finished high school, I went to Crane [Junior] College [later Malcolm X College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Crane was in the same building as... Crane College was in the same building as Crane High School in that day. And so I enrolled in school, and it really was very tough for me, you know. So, I went to a few classes and then I just stopped going, and then I joined the military. I just, you know, I didn't have no interest after that. So, I was off to the war. Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you go in the military? Speaker 2: I joined the-- Speaker 1: What branch of the service? Speaker 2: I went into the [U.S.] Air Force. And I think I did that because a friend of mine had gone. A couple of friends had gone to the Air Force, and it seemed like the most attractive area. Speaker 1: It actually seems to be, you know, the most-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the best choice for people. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, at least during that time there were--I think more black youngsters were going to the Air Force. Because the Air Force had not been open, as open, you know, in the forties and fifties. So, I think maybe there was a sense that it was more open, you know, so black folks were going. Instead of just going to the [U.S.] Army, they were going into the Air Force. And so I went to, you know, Lackland Air Force Base [San Antonio, Texas] for training, and then I was shipped to Selfridge Air Force Base [Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Harrison Charter Township, Michigan]. Story_ID: 188624 Speaker 1: So, you ended up near Detroit [Michigan] at--what's the name of the base? Speaker 2: Selfridge [Air National Guard Base, Harrison Charter Township, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Selfridge. Speaker 2: I was in Detroit for two years. I had relatives in Detroit, so I just kind of hung out in Detroit a lot. I bought a little piece of car, and I could drive to Chicago [Illinois] on the weekends if I wanted to, you know. So it was, it was fun. But I didn't travel. I went in [to the U.S. Air Force] to travel. I thought I was going to Okinawa [Japan] and all these places where my friends had gone to. So, they had an obligation to send you overseas on your first tour. It's called Foreign Service Selective Date. You had to go overseas. So, they sent me to a place called Santa Rosa Island, which is right off the coast of California. It's a radar site, to satisfy my Foreign Service Selective criteria. Speaker 1: Foreign-- Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter). So, I was on this island. In fact, I have a picture of it. I was there for a year, you know, so I felt cheated. And then after I left there, I came back to Truax Air Force Base [Truax Field Air National Guard Base], which is right in Madison, Wisconsin. So for three out of the four years, I was right here at home, you know. Speaker 1: You were just four hours from Chicago. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Either way. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I felt cheated in terms of not being able to travel, you know, abroad. But it was a good experience. I mean, I met guys from all over the country. It was my first time, you know, being kind of on my own, because I was eighteen when I went into the [U.S.] military. So I kind of had to learn to kind of fend for myself in a different way in the military. I studied a little bit. I actually took some courses. I guess I was developing the need, you know, to at some point be in somebody's college. I had a very difficult time. I remember taking a French course at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] and got totally wiped out, you know. I mean, I just wasn't ready for that at all. But I didn't give up the college thing. I mean, I actually did get into college after I got out. But I took one or two courses. But it was fun. I mean, I just had a lot of fun in the military. I met, like I said, I met guys from all over. We partied a lot, I mean, that's what the military meant to me. We were going to parties seems like all the time, you know, and drinking. And guys were gambling a lot. I didn't gamble because I couldn't stand to lose money, but my friends were gambling a lot. And we made--you know, when we were in Detroit, you know, we would go to the clubs. I remember going to see Miles Davis and Gene Ammons and, you know. So, we did a lot of that. But it was, it was--and in the Air Force--I don't know how it was in the services--I was in Communications. So, we literally, it was like being in civilian life. You had a shift and you came to work. And after that, you just went wherever you wanted to go, generally. And then of course you had someplace to stay on the base, in the barracks. But there were no other restrictions. So we would get off from work at 4:30, like any other civilian job, and then we would head to Detroit and hang out, as long as we were back for work at 8:30 the next morning, or 9:00. So, it was pretty comfortable, you know. And we could kind of manipulate shifts sometimes, where we could get, you know, maybe an extra two or three days off if we changed shifts with somebody else. So, if I wanted to come home, you know, to Chicago, I might be able to squeeze a week out here or there, just because I was able to, you know, buddy up with somebody and change shifts. So, it was pretty, it was pretty cool. I never at any point thought I would reenlist; I didn't like it that well. I didn't like it at all, but I enjoyed the camaraderie of the guys I met, you know, and that was cool. Story_ID: 188625 Speaker 1: What happened when you got out [of the U.S. Air Force]? Speaker 2: I got out, tried to find a job. I ended up working for the Chicago Transit Authority [CTA] as a bus driver, which scared my mom [Plumie Willis] to death. Because she had all these visions of me being out and being robbed and, you know, crazy people on the bus. You know, and all that was true, but I was lucky. Speaker 1: What route did you drive? Speaker 2: I was on the West Side. I was at the Kedzie station. I drove Madison [Street], I drove Roosevelt [Road]--you know, all the West Side stations. Kedzie became known as the, kind of the radical station after a while. It became very politicized, and I was, you know, part of that radicalization I guess. Speaker 1: Now, did you know... There have been a lot of interesting black folks in Chicago [Illinois] that have been bus drivers. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: One was a brother of the family of the [African] Hebrew Israelites group on the West Side. Did you know him, Ben Carter [later Ben Ammi Ben-Israel], who founded--? Speaker 2: No. I knew, I had a good friend who was part of that group. His name was Moshe [ph.]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He still drives, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Yeah, Moshe of the Righteous Branch of the Hebrew Israelites [Righteous Branch of African Hebrews]. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was a very good friend of mine. We went to high school together, and then went to City College[s of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] together. In fact, he was one of the persons that kind of politicized me, because he was a Hebrewite. So, he had his own doctrine, you know. And he was telling me about, you know--black people were, you know, really the true Hebrews and, you know, and the whole explanation of that. And he introduced me to Malcolm [X], because he had all the recorded speeches of Malcolm. So, he really was one of the, I would say he was one of the major reasons I became more political during that time. This was like getting into... After the [U.S.] military, I started back to school. I'm driving the bus, and then I start back to school at Crane [Junior] College [later Malcolm X College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] again. And then during this time, I ran into him again, because he was also at Crane College. He wasn't driving a bus then. And then we started, you know, things started to become very political. And it hasn't changed. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: This is probably '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. Because by '67 [1967], everything was political. The schools all over were organizing. Black student groups were organizing just about on every campus. Story_ID: 188626 Speaker 1: --To the Civil Rights Movement when you were coming up at all? I mean, you know-- Speaker 2: I was paying attention to it, yeah--paying attention in the sense that I knew it was happening. You know, I knew what [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and others were doing--supportive, you know, in a kind of distant way. But I think largely because of Malcolm's [X] influence, we weren't really--we didn't identify with the Civil Rights Movement that closely. We started identifying with Black Nationalism. And Malcolm, as you know, at certain points in his development he was very critical of the Civil Rights Movement and its leaders. And we adopted Malcolm's view about that. So, we weren't really--we didn't see ourselves as Dr. King supporters. We were Malcolm supporters. Speaker 1: Even early on in the--even early on when Dr. King was in Montgomery [Alabama] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, even in-- Speaker 1: --when he had the March on Washington [D.C. for Jobs and Freedom, 1963]? Speaker 2: I would say at least by '65 [1965], I think it was '65 [1965]. I forget which march it was. Stokely [Carmichael, later Kwame Ture] became the leader of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. And Stokely radicalized SNCC, kind of pushed [HM] John Lewis out. John Lewis had been the leader of SNCC. And Stokely, in that leadership from SNCC, coined the phrase, "Black Power." And then black power became the cause celebre. And that was probably '65 [1965]. So '66 [1966], '67 [1967], everything for us in these urban schools was "black power." We weren't interested in the civil rights stuff. Speaker 1: Well, in view of... Was the civil rights stuff similar to the blues, in a sense that it seemed kind of country and-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that, just-- Speaker 1: --an archaic and old approach in dealing with the problem? Speaker 2: It was more like--Malcolm had analyzed, or criticized, the civil rights leaders. And his criticism was partially that he disagreed with non-violence. And he would say things like, "We can't have a non-violent philosophy, because these people are too violent. We're not speaking their language when we have non-violence. So, we've got to be able to defend ourselves." And we saw visible signs of that. We saw what was happening in the South, how vicious the white people were to the Civil Rights Movement. And we just couldn't see that as gaining very much. I mean in retrospect, we saw it that gained--you know, it gained a lot, obviously. It broke down apartheid in the South. But for us in these urban areas--because you know, in the urban areas, the response to some of the repression was rebellion. I mean, in Watts [Los Angeles, California], in Chicago [Illinois] later, you know. So, our response was different. And we didn't, we didn't have the same kind of view about changing society. I think we were thinking that, largely because of Malcolm, we began to look more international. Because at the same time that we were growing politically, Africa was fighting a desperate fight to gain independence. Because the first country to get independence obviously was Ghana in 1957. But there were, in 1960, it was called The Year of Africa. Because Nigeria and several other states got independence. Now, their independence was relatively peaceful. But the Portuguese colonies--largely because Portugal was so backwards itself--Portugal was not giving up these colonies. And so, Portugal forced Africans to engage in armed struggle in Angola and in Guinea-Bissau--and of course we know what's happening in South Africa- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Mozambique, yeah. Speaker 2: --So, we began to be identified with them and become a part of that. I mean, we joined the anti-apartheid movement; we were demonstrating. Story_ID: 188627 Speaker 1: Now just to go back a little bit earlier, though to Malcolm X. Did you hear Malcolm X speak in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, I just heard him by way of tapes. And I do remember him on TV once or twice, because he was in a debate situation. So, I knew about Malcolm-- Speaker 1: He was on somebody's show here in Chicago, I know, on television. Speaker 2: [Irv] Kupcinet ['Kup's Show'], maybe? One of those, I know he-- Speaker 1: Somebody, I know. Speaker 2: --we was on a lot of shows. Speaker 1: I've seen a clip of it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --that he was on. Speaker 2: He got around. I remember seeing this black man on... I thought he was amazing. I had no idea about the history or the Nation [of Islam], none of that. I just saw this black man that was very articulate, very clear, very black. I just thought it was amazing, because you didn't see that on TV. Speaker 1: When you... you said you weren't that much aware of the Nation of Islam, you know, prior to hearing about Malcolm X himself? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Let's see. Now, Malcolm is killed in '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Was there a presence in the Nation of Islam in Chicago, you think, prior to-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, there was a presence because the Honorable Elijah Muhammad was in Chicago. But I just wasn't that aware of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, if I had lived on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], maybe I would have been more aware of it. But being on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], I don't think there were any mosques on the West Side. So, we just weren't that aware of the nationalist currents that maybe the brothers and sisters on the South Side were more aware of. Because, you know, things happened on the South Side that didn't happen on the West Side. Most of the middle class developments and housing and that stuff--all the activities tended to happen on the South Side during the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], and probably into the '70s [1970s]. And most of the activism was on the South Side, not the West Side-- Story_ID: 188628 Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting topic, too--why they're so different. Coming from someplace else to Chicago [Illinois], you know, you hear about the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: They're almost like two separate cities in some way. Speaker 2: In some ways, yeah, yeah. Well, you know, we settled more on the South Side. So our middle class developed on the South Side, our intellectuals. You go to places like Chatham [Chicago, Illinois]. Chatham is an old traditional--that's where all the schoolteachers lived. Mahalia Jackson lived there. You know, so the South Side was where people--if you worked for a period of time and you knew you could pay your rent, you didn't stay on the West Side very long. You would move to the South Side, because it was just, there were more institutions. The nightclubs, all on the South Side. We had a few blues spots on the West Side, but the Club DeLisa, the Regal [Theater], you name it. It was all on the South Side. So, people that came into black Chicago--what do they call it now--the section that's on the rise again? Speaker 1: Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was South Side, that's all South Side stuff. So, the West Side was just working-class folks without any institutions, without any middle class, without any intellectuals, just working-class folks. And so, we got--you know, and people kind of realized--I think there was a little class stuff going on, you know. People realized that. And so black folks that weren't in that class that were more middle class, they couldn't identify with these, you know, kind of working-class poor folks, you know. And then us working-class poor folks couldn't identify with these uppity, black folks who think they're more than us. But it was kind of a class basis for that. Because it's just recently that black folks on the West Side began to have something like a middle-class enclave, and that's largely in Oak Park [Illinois]. But on the South Side, you had Lake Meadows [Apartments], you had Prairie Shores [Apartments]; you had, you know, established communities like Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] and Pill Hill [Chicago, Illinois], and on and on and on. We didn't have that on the West Side. There were no--I didn't know any school teachers on the West Side, they all lived on the South Side. Nobody... there was nothing on the West Side. There were no cultural institutions. [The] DuSable [Museum of African History] didn't start on the West Side, it started on the South Side. The, what is it, the Metropolitan Arts Center [The South Side Community Arts Center] that's been there a hundred years? All-- Speaker 1: The South Side Community Arts Center. Speaker 2: South Side, yeah, all that stuff's South Side. So, there was nothing on the West Side that would attract, you know, rising intellectual middle-class educated people. I mean educated people--probably like all educated people, they want to be around the museums and the clubs and, you know, things like that. We didn't have any of that on the West Side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was a big difference. There's a difference in the two. Story_ID: 188629 Speaker 1: The influence of Malcolm X, from what I'm understanding--and I do kind of understand this from my own experience--was largely vicarious through tapes and readings and other things. Because you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a lot of people didn't get a chance to meet him. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I mean we were fortunate that we had the tapes. But that's... you know, and his ideas. I mean, he articulated for us probably the first clear nationalist ideas, you know, which grew out of the Nation [of Islam] for sure. And I'm sure it grew out of the [Marcus] Garvey movement as well. But it was the idea that black folks should be looking after black folks. We should be developing our communities, we should be electing black folks to represent us. We should be buying from black folks, so we can have the economy to employ our people. You know, those were Black Nationalist concepts that were articulated, was articulated in the Nation. But the Nation didn't have a voice like Malcolm. So, when Malcolm articulated, we heard it, you know. And then when he left the Nation, of course, he began to identify with the liberation movements that were going on all over Africa. And we heard that, too. You know, he visited with Ben Bellows [ph.] and [Kwame] Nkrumah. You know, he met Dr. [W.E.B.] Du Bois's wife [Shirley Graham Du Bois] who was in Ghana in late '64 [1964]. So if you're listening to Malcolm, he provided--he gave us an international view. He helped us identify with Africa; he helped us identify with ourselves more than any of the leaders at that time were doing. You know, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] wasn't talking about that. So, that's what was very appealing to us, you know, this notion of nationalism. And of course, with the rise of Africa, you know, you couldn't ignore it. So, Malcolm gave a lot. I mean, even though he wasn't here and we didn't know him personally, I don't think that was that important, because people that followed [Vladimir] Lenin obviously didn't know Lenin, but they read his thoughts and began to accept his ideas. And I think we did the same thing. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 188630 Speaker 1: There's a brother--and I guess he--I don't know if he lived on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] or the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. But Brother [Anas] Luqman who's a good friend-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --of Malcolm X- Speaker 2: He was a friend of Malcolm X, right, I remember. Speaker 1: And he would always be the personal link to Malcolm. If nobody else talked about-- Speaker 2: The Black Hand Society. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Black Hand Society. Speaker 2: I remember. Speaker 1: He would talk about it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Crane Community College [Crane Junior College, later Malcolm X College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--you know, the more people we talked to, the more it seems like it was a very important place in the-- Speaker 2: It became a very, very, important place, yeah. Speaker 1: --mid-sixties, late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When [HM Edward] Buzz Palmer and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --[HM] Renault Robinson was there at one time. And you, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the whole... There were a lot of people around Crane-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Community College doing things. Speaker 2: The student movement that developed at Crane probably was the strongest in the city [Chicago, Illinois], I would say. There were other movements. I mean there were other black student groups, like at Wilson College, which is Kennedy-King [College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. The Loop [City] College, which is Harold Washington College [of the City Colleges, Chicago, Illinois] downtown. Southwest College [Southeast Junior College and Fenger Junior College] which is Olive-Harvey [College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. They all had black student groups. But Crane's black student group--I guess one of the differences... One, many of the leaders--and I was one of the leaders--were kind of mature adults by this time. I had been to the [U.S.] military. Robert Clay, you know, who was one of my... very close to me... he had been to the military. Rufus Walls, who we know as Chaka, had been to the military... Henry English. Then, you know, it attracted everybody. Because they, at some point they realized we were fighting to name the college Malcolm X, and I think that had a certain appeal. So, it attracted the Black Panther Party leadership. Fred Hampton, [HM] Bobby Rush, they all came to Malcolm in probably late '67 [1967]. You know, because it was emerging as probably the leader in these student communities, particularly in Chicago. And I was, you know, fortunate enough to be in that leadership, and was chairman of the Black Student Association at Malcolm X [College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] during that turbulent time. But I think that--and then it was on the West Side, you know, and I think that had some significance. I don't know if that would have had the kind of support in and around the community if it had been on the South Side someplace. Because we had people that were relating to the students-- like Doug[las] Andrews, who was at the Garfield Organization, who was a leader in his own right. Russ [Russell] Meeks, you know, who was not a student. He was an older guy, but he was a West Sider and he was an activist, you know. So, it attracted--and I was a bus driver during this time. You know, so I was a fairly mature guy, in my mid-twenties. So, the leadership that emerged I think was a little older, a little more sophisticated. And then to inject the nationalism in that, I think kind of gave us some kind of ideas about where we wanted to move and how we should be moving. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when did Charles Hurst become the president? Was that in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Charles [G.] Hurst came in--I left in '68 [1968]. I think he came in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's after you left. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he came in the year after I left. Speaker 1: Alright. Well, he became a big celebrity it seems like. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was--Dr. Hurst was very articulate. I think he understood where the students were trying to go, and he helped carry them there as the administrator. Because he was pushing for Malcolm X, you know, the name. You know, he had a certain militancy, you know. So he was, he was, he was just perfect for Malcolm X and the students. Because you know, he's the president of a college that wants to be named Malcolm, that is attracting young Black Panthers like Fred Hampton and some of the old student movement people like Henry English; African-American police people like Buzz Palmer; you know, Renault Robinson, all these folks. And not only that, it started attracting--like Phil Cohran ended up over there. And a lot of other folks that I can't remember now were attracted to that school. It was like a mecca, in a sense, you know, for young black militants, you know. Because, as you know, Phil Cohran was producing a music that had a certain kind of, you know, African content to it, you know. So it was, it was a place... So, it had to have... And the students were involved in the search because they had developed enough power--students--to do that. So they chose him, you know, among other candidates. And he was ripe and right for that school at that time-- Story_ID: 188631 Speaker 1: What were the issues when you were a student leader there [Crane Junior College, later Malcolm X College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? What were you doing, and what were the issues that you were the most concerned about? Speaker 2: Well, there were issues of not having enough black faculty. There were issues of not having any content, particularly in the social sciences. So, there was no black history. Blacks had not been included in the sociology. So in the social sciences, you know, there was always issues of, you know, including blacks. So we were doing a lot of work around that. There were the issues of black administrators, you know, there were no black administrators. Irving [B.] Slutsky was the president, acting president, and he became the Chancellor later. And he was, you know, he tried to work with us. He was a pretty good guy. But there were no black administrators, you know, that was the issue for us. And this was a black community and a black school at that time. It, you know, it has a fairly significant number of Latino students now, but it didn't then. It was a black school. And so, those were the issues. And those were the same issues that the students at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] were fighting around--black... you know, black faculty, black administrators, you know, and ultimately a black house. You know, they, their struggle went to that level. We didn't have that problem, because we didn't live on campus. But it was, it was those kinds of issues. It was an issue of identification. You know, we were learning through our nationalism that we had a history, you know. And we were finding out that that history wasn't reflected anyplace, and we wanted to make sure that it changed. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember Brother Hamarapi [ph.] and James Cage [ph.]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, very well. Hamarapi and James Cage very well. In fact, I went to his funeral when he passed, within the last couple of years. He was an activist on the West Side, yeah. We had a lot of folks over there that were not students, you know, but that supported the students. And you know, I think, again, the students came from these communities in and around the West Side. Some of them were from the South Side. And they were working people, so people could identify with them. I mean we could identify with the workers, too, you know. I mean, we were very attune to workers' issues, you know, at the school--you know, the janitorial staff, the people that worked in the library and stuff. So, it was a complete movement. I remember Betsy Russell [ph.], Barbara Slate [ph.]--these were all people that worked in the offices. But they identified with that movement because, you know, we related to them as well. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, you were at Crane until 19-- Speaker 2: I left there-- Speaker 1: --sixty eight? [1968]. Speaker 2: I left there, I got there in '65 [1965] and I left in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I finished my two years in that three-year period. Speaker 1: So, you got your associate's degree over there before you left? Speaker 2: Associate of Arts degree, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What did you major in? Speaker 2: You know, it changed a few times. I think I was in sociology at that moment. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I came to school to be an accountant, and that didn't work at all. Speaker 1: No, it didn't sound like it, (laughter) from what you just described. Speaker 2: But I thought it was a good way, you know, to make a lot of money, you know, so I could buy my mom [Plumie Willis] a house and all of that. But it didn't work for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I left there as a sociologist. Story_ID: 188632 Speaker 1: And what did you do next? School? Speaker 2: I went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], which was interesting. Because one of the professors there, Paul Kadoda [ph.], he was a Japanese advisor. He was an advisor, he was of Japanese descent. He suggested that I apply to the University of Chicago. And at the time, I had applied to the University of Illinois at Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And I told him, I said, "Well, I did already." Speaker 1: (Laughter.) Speaker 2: Because I thought they wanted... I didn't know--literally and honestly--I didn't know the University of Chicago existed. And there was no reason for me to know it, because nobody went to college. So, if you've got a prestigious university in Hyde Park, why would I know it exists? Nobody ever went there. And I didn't go to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], and Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] is on the South Side. So, when we said apply, I didn't really... After he explained that I had applied to the University of Illinois and that wasn't the same, I didn't know what he was talking about. But I applied, and I was accepted. And I, you know, and I went and moved to the South Side. And after a while, I thought I would be able to travel from my West Side [Chicago, Illinois] apartment to Hyde Park and study and come back, but that didn't work. I mean, because it was a competitive school, as you can imagine. It was very difficult that first year, you know. But I had met some black students the summer before I went there and they were activists, and they urged me to come. And they told me if I came, you know, they would do everything they could, you know, to make sure my transition was as smooth as possible. And I did. Speaker 1: Now, who were they? Were they anybody we would know? I mean-- Speaker 2: They were University of Chicago students. Some were from Chicago. The only one that you would know that I met during this time period was Bob [Robert] Rhodes. You may know Bob, I don't know that you would or not. But he was a student at the University of Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And during that time period when I did go over there, I met--I had them earlier--but I found out that Anderson Thompson was there, [HM] Barbara [A.] Sizemore was there, Bobby [E.] Wright was there. Speaker 1: Bobby Wright. Speaker 2: Yeah, so a lot of folks were there. And they were in graduate programs. So it was a good place to be, and it was my first... the students that I spent most of the time with... Bob Rhodes and others... [HM] Harold Rogers... It was my first introduction to, as we say, as we call it, the science. That is, socialist thought--you know, Marxism and Leninism--because that's what the students over there were studying, to a great extent. And so, that was my first introduction. It was, you know, it was good. Story_ID: 188594 Speaker 1: University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Now, you were talking about... off-camera we were talking about the development of "Communiversity." Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Which was an off-shoot of some of the activity--I mean the ideas that were generated from the people that you met at the University of Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, partly from the University of Chicago. But it really grew out of the Black Student Movement. The black students were, as I said, were demanding these classes on their campuses. And so, at some point when they--I guess when they came into contact with some of the people that were doing--teachers like Anderson Thompson--they were actually teaching, you know, at the high schools and stuff. That combination allowed us to begin to think about why don't we have something separate? You know, while we're waiting, you know, to get it at the Cranes [Crane Junior College, later Malcolm X College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and the Wilsons [Wilson Junior College, later Kennedy-King College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], why don't we teach our own classes? And we called it the "Communiversity." And so, we had classes in black psychology. You know, Bobby [E.] Wright taught one class in political economy, classes in African history. You know, we had a whole range of classes that weren't taught anyplace. And we had people that had studied, and were qualified to teach them. [HM] Harold Rogers, for example, was working on his PhD at the University of Chicago in African Studies. So, Harold was teaching a course in Africa. And we attracted, you know, just huge numbers of young people from the high schools and the colleges that studied there, you know, for--you know, it went on for a good period of time. So, it was exciting. I mean, it was a historical moment to be able to do that. And then I think it became a model for other--you know, other cities began to experiment with this kind of, you know, bringing together the education that was different from the established education that was part of the boards of education. And it was something that black folks organized and maintained. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's different from a lot of--I mean it was different in a sense that, you know--well, when you compare it to Black Studies courses on campuses, especially today-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --people are like flocking... and some are thirsty for it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And there was no credit for it. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, and nobody's getting credit. But nobody had to pay tuition, either, you know. So it was, it was, it was exciting, it was good. Speaker 1: And the classes were held over at the Abraham Lincoln Centre [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: At the Abraham Lincoln Centre. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) -Seven hundred East-- Speaker 2: And Bobby Wright, Anderson Thompson, [HM] Harold Pates, all those guys; and Harold Rogers, and Bob [Robert] Rhodes, Leef Mullens [ph.], this was a group out of the University of Chicago. So, it was a group of young blacks out of the University of Chicago. And then there was another group of young blacks from different parts of the community that became the--kind of the teachers. And they all had some different discipline, you know, that they brought to the table. And it was a great combination. Speaker 1: Now, this is about what year? Sixty-Nine, [1969], '70 [1970]? Speaker 2: This was probably '67 [1967], '68 [1968], in that area, yeah. Because it was, it started I think just before I went to the University of Chicago, but it continued, you know, during my early years at the University of Chicago. Because that's when I met, you know, Harold and Bob Rhodes, and those guys. Story_ID: 188595 Speaker 1: So, what did you major in at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: As I say, I started off in sociology. When I got there--I always had an interest in history. Because, you know, as a black nationalist, you're always studying history--African history, African American history--everybody's history, you know. That's what Malcolm [X] taught: you always study history--European history, you know, everybody's history. I became more interested in history because I was studying it all the time. And then in addition to that, [HM] John Hope Franklin was at the University of Chicago at the time, and I got the opportunity study under him, you know. And he was, you know, one of our premier historians. So, I shifted to history--American history with an emphasis on African American history. Because the University of Chicago didn't have an African American history curriculum. But you could emphasize or minor, I guess you could say, in African American history, and that's what I did. And then I got interested in Latin American history, Latin American studies. There was a young professor, John Coatsworth, a white professor, who was, you know, very, very analytical. And I started, I took some of his classes, and I became very interested in what he was doing in economic history. And, and when I went on to a PhD [degree], I actually was following his--studying under him. I went into Latin American studies as a Ph.D. candidate. Story_ID: 188596 Speaker 1: Can you backtrack a minute and tell us about [HM] John Hope Franklin--about, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --some of your recollections of him? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was, he was a father figure to the black students. We recognized--we didn't agree with him on a lot of things. Because you know, we were--our national views, nationalist views, conflicted with some of the things, some of the way he saw things. Speaker 1: I think in those days, he was... well, go ahead. Speaker 2: For example, he didn't like the term "black history," and that's what we were using. We weren't using "African American history" that much. And the reason he didn't--he said "Well, we are a part of American history. So, we shouldn't like carve out a separate history." Although he had written this great book that's probably in its twenty-fifth edition called 'The History of the Negro People,' ['From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans' or 'The Free Negro in North Carolina, 1790-1860'] something like that. But that was his view, and I understood his view. I understand it better now. His view was basically, "We're African people, but we always have to treat our history in the context of American history, because this is where we are, sort of." So, we had these kind of, you know, differences in approaching history, I think. But we recognized, you know, his commitment to the history. You know, because he had probably wrote the only book that was a comprehensive history of black people. Even now, there are very few. The only other one that I can think of that came close was [HM] Lerone Bennett's 'Before the Mayflower[: A History of Black America],' which came out during that time period. But Franklin's book was written I think in the fifties. And he was a scholar on the level probably of Carter G. Woodson. And you know, he was in that, he was a contemporary of Woodson. And he was just a very gracious, very caring person who was trying to, as a father figure, trying to figure out what the hell we were trying to do as youngsters. You know, that's kind of how he approached it. He would take you out to lunch and, you know, we'd talk about, you know, how things were going. You know, I met his family. He had a son who was studying. And so, that's kind of how... And there were other black professors on campus, you know. There was Dr. Charles Long, who was a theologian; he was very good with us. And James Bruce [ph.], he was in English. So we had a, you know, a few blacks there that were very supportive of the students. And then there was George [E.] Kent, who came a little later; he was a literary figure. But John Hope, of course, was more popular than all of them. And he was the chairman of the history department, the first black chairman of the history department, and had been chairman for a while. And he was a great scholar. I mean, I loved listening to his lectures. He reminded me of a Baptist preacher. He kind of leaned on the podium, you know, and he's talking, you know. And he was just a wonderful person. He was a wonderful, wonderful scholar and a friend. I saw him recently in the last couple of months. They did a, they honored him at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and I went down there and got a chance to, you know, chat with him a moment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was--you know, him being there, and my love of history, you know, I just automatically started searching for history courses. Story_ID: 188597 Speaker 1: So you were working on a Ph.D. [degree] in history [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I was, I came there as an undergraduate student. So, I was working on a B.A. [bachelor's degree] in history. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I did my bachelor, we had a bachelor's treatise--almost like a dissertation sort of. You know, of course, you know, it's the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]; they have to have something different. And he supervised my bachelor's treatise. And it had to be some primary research, you know, and some secondary research sources. So, I chose writing about the--what became the pretty well-known bus drivers' strike in '68 [1968], when the black bus drivers basically closed down the city for almost a whole summer. And the reason I wrote about that is because I was part of it. So, it was easy to get--(laughter)-easy to get primary resources. But he [HM John Hope Franklin] supervised it and gave me the kind of the intellectual, scholarly--you know, insights and input into it. You know, it turned out to be a pretty decent paper. But you know, it was, it was a way of me, you know, kind of analyzing the course of that radicalization of the labor movement with CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] that I helped organize. So, it was a great opportunity. Speaker 1: Okay, that's the best way to do it. Speaker 2: Yeah, and get a grade for it too. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And then I graduated, and I went into the graduate program in history, but I went into Latin American History. The University of Chicago had just started a Latin American committee within the history department. And this young professor, John Coatsworth--they had three professors I believe at the time. And only about eight or ten students--John Coatsworth, Friedrich Katz who was from Austria who was, you know, a renowned scholar on Mexico. He has done a lot of writing on the Aztec communities. And then [T.] Bentley Duncan was from Brazil and his, you know, area was Brazil, more modern-day Brazil. He actually had to leave the country because of the reactionary regime in Brazil. He was kind of a liberal scholar, so he had, he was basically ran out of the country. So, it was a good group of folks, but they were all kind of political and kind of analytical, kind of socialist in their orientation. So, it was where I thought I needed to be, you know. So I applied for it, and got accepted in the PhD program in Latin American Studies. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how did you do in that? Did you, was it--? Speaker 2: I did okay. I, I finished the master's program. I passed my language qualifying exams in Spanish, and I started trying to formulize my PhD topic. And I was interested in Cuba, but I couldn't get to Cuba. And the areas that I was most interested in, I just couldn't do it, 'cause I had--by this time, you know, I had my son--you know, who I had when I was seventeen, you know. So, I'm supporting him. And then my wife, Cynthia [Willis], who I met on campus, we had I think our first child and then we had another child. So, we had our first child in 1970, and then we had our next child in '73 [1973] or '74 [1974]. So, just to pick up and go off to Cuba for, you know, six months, you know, to study--as many students did--I couldn't do it. I mean I had to work all the time, you know, so I couldn't--I didn't have the luxury of being a scholar, I guess. So, my real interest in Cuba, I couldn't do it. I just couldn't go off and stay like that. And I couldn't--I found I couldn't go anyplace, really. You had to go and spend time, you know, in the archives and, you know, getting to know people. I couldn't do it. So after a while, I got pretty discouraged. And my wife and I agreed that if I didn't become a little more concrete about the program within the next year, I would take off and let her go to medical school, and I would take care of our daughters, and that's what I did. She went to medical school, and I just worked. I mean I worked teaching part-time here and driving cabs, just doing whatever I had to do, you know, and taking care of the girls. And then once she got in her last year, then I applied to law school. Story_ID: 188598 Speaker 1: Why did you decide to become a lawyer? Speaker 2: I, I, I believed at some point that lawyering was a good skill to have if you were a freedom fighter. Because I'd met, I had gotten introduced to labor law. Because my father [Andrew Willis, Jr.] lost his job, and one of my professors, John Coatsworth, introduced me to a labor lawyer. I didn't know that that existed. And so I said well, maybe I should go into law. I could do labor law, and I could help fight around some of these workers' issues, etc. And I applied for that reason, and that's what I wanted to do. But then when I got there, I became more interested in civil rights law--you know, suing police and the like. And so, I kind of moved into that direction. Speaker 1: Where did you go to law school? Speaker 2: I went to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology] Chicago-Kent [College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Downtown [Chicago, Illinois], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 188599 Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the teachers down there? And what were they--you know, how did you like Kent [Illinois Institute of Technology Chicago-Kent College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Kent was, Kent was good. You know, I had, I had been in school so long by this time, because I had gone to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]; I had gone into the PhD program. And what I didn't mention, I had taken a year off to go to UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to study economics in the graduate program, because I was interested in economic history. So I said, well, if I go there, I'll learn a lot more about the economics that would help me, you know, with my dissertation. And the other reason I went there, I heard they were giving away money. (Laughter). So, and they were. I got full fellowship for that. I think it was two years, actually. And I finished that program, and then it was, you know, time for me to, you know, take time off and take care of the girls. Kent was a good school, you know. I think the biggest gripe I had with them at the time, and still do, is they didn't have very many black professors, still don't. They didn't have that many black students. DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois] had a lot more. So, we were always struggling around that. So, the struggle just kind of moved--you know, it moved from arena to arena. You know, wherever you end up at, you're struggling around something, you know, to get some fairness out of these institutions. So at that school, I became part of BLSA, which is the Black Law School Association [later, Black Law Students Association]. And we started struggling around getting more black students in, but getting--not just getting them in, but getting money for them and trying to get more black professors on staff. You know, and I don't think we were that successful, I'll put it like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I remember one incident where they were saying, "Well, you know, we can't find any black professors." So, I said, "Okay, let me help you." So, I went and I started calling people that I knew that were practicing law. I said, "Look, you know, who's interested? Who would you recommend that would have the credentials to teach law." And I ended up with about ten or fifteen resumes, you know, just in the Chicago area. And I presented it to them, and they hired no one. I think they hired one guy as an adjunct for one semester, Raymond Barbosa. Raymond, for example, was at a major law firm; he was a tax lawyer. He had a master's degree in law, in tax law from New York--NYU [New York University, New York, New York], which is one of the better tax law schools in the country. But they didn't, you know, they didn't hire him. So they were just, you know, talking stuff, as we used to say in the neighborhood. Story_ID: 188600 Speaker 1: Who were some of the--were there any professors that stand out as being like mentors, or people that really were-- Speaker 2: I don't know if there are any mentors. You know, see, about time I get to law school [Illinois Institute of Technology Chicago-Kent College of Law, Chicago, Illinois], you know, all these other things are still going on. I mean, we're still having rallies around--you know, anti-apartheid rallies. We're organizing--you know, there's always--organizing is still going on. So by the time I get to law school, I'm a pretty mature person now. You know, I got--I'm married, I've got kids. I'm probably late thirties at least, maybe early forties when I get to law school. So, I don't have-- you know, I mean could get a mentor in that somebody's doing a particular area of law--you know, that I might just, you know, follow a little while or take their classes. But I'm a little too seasoned now to get a mentor in a broad sense, because I'm older and more experienced than most of the faculty members, you know, in a real sense. Speaker 1: Because your objective is to get this degree and-- Speaker 2: And then use it in the movement. That was my objective, to use it in the movement. I thought I would use it in the labor part of the movement. Because I had had this experience with CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], you know, in organizing workers and kind of understanding the issues around workers, as a worker. And then going to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and kind of hooking up with, you know, these sociologist types, you know, where workers' rights and workers were primary, in terms of the movement. So, I'm saying, this is the key. You know, as a lawyer, I could move the, you know, the workers' agenda along. But you know, I shifted, you know, and started doing the civil rights work-- Story_ID: 188601 Speaker 1: Did you know people back in the early '70s [1970s]--well, during the whole '70s, I guess--who were working on the Fred Hampton case, with People's Law Office? Speaker 2: That's where I went. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's where I went, yeah. I didn't know them. But when I, when I was in law school [Illinois Institute of Technology Chicago-Kent College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]--and I knew--I had met Fred, because as I say, he had come to Crane [Junior] College [later Malcolm X College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] probably in '67 [1967], so I met him. I knew [HM] Bobby Rush and all those guys. There was a guy from the People's Law Office who came and participated in a lecture. It was some program they had, and I was listening to it. And he was talking about, you know, civil rights law and police brutality, you know, stuff they were doing. And so, I talked to him after he finished, and asked him if I could... did they need any volunteers? And he invited me over. I went over and I met some of the guys, Flint [Taylor] and them. And I started doing some volunteer work at the office, probably my last year of law school. And after I finished school, they invited me to join the staff, and I did. So I became a member of, you know, the law office, the People's Law Office, and I stayed there many years. And that's where I learned my, you know, my trade. It was a good environment for me, probably better than any other, because it was a very political group of lawyers. They were all white lawyers, but they were into political, you know, kind of leftist things. Like, they were representing the FALN [Fuerzas Armadas de Liberacion Nacional, or Armed Forces of National Liberation], which is the more radical sector of the Puerto Rican community. They allowed me freedom to represent [Mayor] Harold Washington's re-election campaign. I coordinated "Lawyers for Washington." So, I had freedom to do things in my community that if I had gone anyplace else, I would never have that, because they would have been so conscious about billings and bookings and all that. You know, you could never do that. But our mission really at that office was to do civil rights work, which included a large amount of police brutality work. We were with the office that represented Jackie Wilson, the convicted murderer of one or two police, who was tortured by Jon Burge and his henchmen. We did the civil rights trial based on the torture. And that's where all this stuff about torture came out. And we learned that Jon Burge--because we started getting letters from the prisons. Jon Burge was, had his... in [Chicago Police Department] Area 2 [Violent Crimes Unit] were torturing our people. But that came out of the work we were doing. You know, and the office was, you know, they were into anti-apartheid work, you know, and they were into Puerto Rican independence work--you know, the same stuff that I was interested in. And they were good lawyers. You know, they were trial lawyers, they were doing criminal defense-- Speaker 1: Jeffrey Haas- Speaker 2: Jeffrey Haas, Flint Taylor, Michael [E.] Deutsch. You know, just excellent lawyers. So, I had great mentors there, people I could go to court with, could critique my legal stuff. They couldn't do much with my political stuff, because that was already developed. They weren't going to change that at all. And they, you know, and they lived with that, and it worked out fine. Because I had my views--and our views, you know, were the same on a lot of issues. But I was a black man, you know, so I had particular views about the development of my community. But it was the kind of office that, you know, I could have those views and they could grow, and I could use my legal skills to, you know, advance them without any real conflicts. So, it was an excellent place to end up at. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were at People's Law from-- Speaker 2: I got out of law school in '83 [1983], and I stayed there probably until '89 [1989] or '90 [1990]. Story_ID: 188602 Speaker 1: Now, was it... It was in the early '80s [1980s] that they finally resolved the Fred Hampton case. Speaker 2: Fred Hampton case, yeah. They resolved that-- Speaker 1: It had been in court for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a long-- Speaker 1: --ten or eleven years. Speaker 2: Yeah, they resolved it just before I got there. But the attorneys' fees part of it was even being disputed after I got there. So it was still not over, even after I got there [the People's Law Office]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, Fred Hampton's widow, Akua [Njeri], came and worked in the office for a period of time. So there was just a lot of, you know, good currents around being at that office, you know. And the ability to, you know, support the struggle was the primary one. Story_ID: 188603 Speaker 1: It seemed like, well, you came out kind of on the tide of the Harold Washington [mayoral] campaign, too, you know, I guess. Speaker 2: Harold was getting ready, was gearing up for the re-election when I got out of law school [Illinois Institute of Technology Chicago-Kent College of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. I wasn't involved hardly at all in the-- Speaker 1: In '83 [1983]? Speaker 2: --first election, because I was in law school. We did some stuff on campus, you know, speakers and stuff like that, and literature. But when I got out in '83 [1983], the campaign was gearing up for the re-election, and I got right in the middle of it. And I don't know how many... I spent so many hours on that campaign, because I was the coordinator. At a certain point--because I was very accustomed to organizing, you know, I was around enough and taking on the tasks enough to be--really to be considered the coordinator of the Lawyers Committee. You know, me and another guy, probably Steve Salzman [ph.], we probably had that responsibility after a while. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. This is in 1987? Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987], yeah, yeah, the re-election campaign, yeah, it must have been '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986], going into '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then Harold Washington dies in '87 [1987]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --as well. Speaker 2: And that's when I met, you know, Tim [Timothy] Evans and people that I probably wouldn't have met otherwise, because they were, you know, obviously part of the... Actually, the mayor had a political committee and a political office, and Tim was running that office. And so we did a lot of work out of that office, you know. Story_ID: 188604 Speaker 1: So, with the People's Law Office [Chicago, Illinois]--and I know you're part of a kind of a network of people that work on police brutality cases-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and justice issues-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which includes Mary Powers's group [Citizens Alert] and the National-- Speaker 2: The National... The Coalition Against Police Brutality [Chicago Alliance Against Racism and Political Repression], yeah-- Speaker 1: --Racism and Police Brutality. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And repression. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The African American Police League [earlier, Afro-American Patrolmen's League] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --out of, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess I'm part of several networks. I'm definitely part of that one, because of the kind of work I do. But I'm definitely part of the kind of Black Nationalist movement. So, I'm very much a part of the reparations, the current stage of that, the reparations movement. So, when I went to South Africa for the Race Conference [World Conference on Racism, WCAR, 2001], the purpose of that was to get the world community to basically declare the Atlantic Slave Trade a crime against humanity. Speaker 1: Is this "Durban 400?" Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was part of that group. Yeah, yeah, so I've always kind of stayed very close to issues related to the continent [Africa], you know, as much as possible. And then being a member of the National Conference of Black Lawyers [NCBL], you know, our membership is always kind of in the forefront on issues related to Africa and, you know, the issues related to African Americans as well. Speaker 1: Can you give us a description of the National Conference of Black Lawyers, and how that's different from the National Bar Association? Speaker 2: Yeah. The National Conference of Black Lawyers was organized in 1968. And the mission of the Conference, as stated then, was to be the legal arm of the black revolution. You know, because that's what was going on during that time, you know, here and abroad. And so, this group of lawyers organized for that purpose. It's not a trade association like most bar associations. That is, it's not there to advance the well-being of lawyers. And that's a credible reason for being there, for sure. But that's not why NCBL was organized. It was organized to advance the struggle. And so, what we tend to do is those things that we think advance the struggle. So, we do, you know, work around, you know, Africa. We do work around issues... police brutality is, you know, always key. But we've done work around environmental racism, stuff that people don't even know exists. We try and organize or try to, you know, raise the consciousness... We were one of the first groups to say no to Clarence Thomas, for example. So, we kind of stay on the cutting edge in our various communities. We don't have that many chapters in our group. Our organization is not that large, and they're very under-funded, I might add. But we've been in existence since '68 [1968]. And we were instrumental in organizing the Black Law Student Association, BLSA, was just about on every campus. And we also were instrumental in organizing "N'COBRA," the National Association for Reparations for Black Americans [sic. National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America] for black Americans. Because there aren't that many lawyers that will even entertain using their legal skills for reparations, particularly during that day. Might be a few more now. But we've always been around the reparations issue, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 188605 Speaker 1: This [Chicago, Illinois] is the torture center of the world, and nobody's doing anything about it. Speaker 2: Okay. I want to ask you about, we're rolling again. And I want to ask you about some of the cases that you're working on that are still pending. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: You've got, you're working the Jon Burge torture case for a long time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Tell us about that. Who is Jon Burge? Speaker 1: Jon Burge is a police officer, was a Chicago police officer, who worked out of Area 2 [Violent Crimes Unit] for many years and became the commander there in Area 2. And Area 2 is on the, kind of Southeast side of Chicago. Speaker 2: In Roseland [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. It's about... it's off of... it's east of Cottage Grove [Avenue] about eighty--something hundred, I guess, out that way. And-- Speaker 2: One hundred and Eleventh Street. Speaker 1: One hundred and Eleventh, is it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, that's right. Jon Burge--we learned largely through a civil rights lawsuit that we filed at the People's Law Office against, on behalf of one of the Wilson brothers. And the Wilson brothers were two brothers who engaged two police officers in a gun battle, and two police officers end up dead. And the Wilson brothers went to trial and were given death sentences. We learned--and then one of the Wilson brothers, I think it was Andrew [Wilson]--it may have been Jackie [Wilson], filed an appeal alleging torture. And the [Illinois] Supreme Court reversed his conviction and sent it back for a new trial, because they, you know, they believed he had been tortured. So, we kind of knew about it. And then somehow his case came to our attention [the People's Law Office], and he asked us to represent him in the civil rights case, based on him being tortured. And most offices, obviously, wouldn't take on a case like that, but we did. Because we--you know, even if, you know, he was guilty--and I think we all were convinced of that--there was no basis in the law for police to torture him. So, when we litigated that case and it went on trial in the federal district court we started getting notifications, phone calls, letters from prisoners in different parts of the system saying, "Yeah, I was tortured, too." So, it began to open up this whole can of worms, regarding torture. And so, then the movement began to press the Office of Professional Standards [later, the Independent Police Review Authority] to re-open, you know, the Wilson case, and began to investigate the torture. And after a lot of pressing--because they didn't want to do it--they finally re-opened it. And they finally determined that Jon Burge and others had engaged in systematic torture against civilians. I think at that time it was forty-six that they documented. Story_ID: 188606 Speaker 1: And then the movement began to try to get, you know, get [Jon] Burge fired from the job. And it took about ten years before he was actually fired. But he still gets his pension, I don't know how that works, but he did get fired. And he, and it's very interesting-- Speaker 2: From the police department [Chicago Police Department] right? Speaker 1: Yeah. It was very interesting that not only that he's getting his pension, but during the course of that struggle, the Fraternal Order of Police was always consistently supporting Jon Burge, even though he had this documented history of torture. They had rallies, huge rallies downtown [Chicago, Illinois] to raise money for a defense fund and all of this stuff. Speaker 2: Didn't they--during... a float during the St. Patrick's Day Parade-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they sure did. They sure did, yeah. So, you know, and it's kind of, it's hard to explain why they would take that position, except they're just a reactionary group of leaders in that organization, always have been. So we finally got him fired, but the unresolved part of the case was there were still people in prison. There were at least eleven or twelve on Death Row, including Aaron Patterson, and that had to be addressed. And Burge was not prosecuted. Speaker 2: Now, if you as a lawyer decided to torture your clients-- Speaker 1: I would be prosecuted for battery, attempted murder-- Speaker 2: You'd have to resign or something if you were found guilty. Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 2: But you wouldn't retire with a pension. Speaker 1: No, and you'd be prosecuted, no question about it. But we've always had this problem of the--prosecuting authorities, prosecuting police for crimes against the citizenry. That's been a traditional problem, particularly crimes against black citizens and Latino citizens, or people of color. And that explained, partly explains why people of color, blacks and Latinos especially, don't trust police. You know, which obviously makes it difficult for police to do police work if the citizenry don't trust them. But they don't seem to get that. Because they always, in a kneejerk way, always support these cops regardless of what they do. And Jon Burge is a striking example of that. They came out, they supported him... they took ten years. If they had not supported him--and being that force that was putting pressure on the superintendent and probably the mayor's office--we probably could have got rid of him, you know, in no time. They should have gotten rid of him right away, but they didn't. So, then we went into the phase of trying to figure out how to get him prosecuted. And that took another, probably another eight or ten years. Because the trial, the murder, took place I think in '81 [1981, sic, 1982], you know, the Wilson brothers' trial. And then I think we finally got rid of Burge probably in '92 [1992], '93 [1993] maybe. And then we finally get a special prosecutor appointed in 2002. Speaker 2: So, every step takes ten years. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. And so, the chief judge appoints a special prosecutor. So now, we're waiting. But we're not going to wait; we're going to, we're going to be vigilant and we're going to putting pressure on this unit that's supposed to be prosecuting Burge, to make sure that they don't try to sweep this case under the rug. So, I've been around to some of the churches talking to some of the church leadership and others. We'll start kind of a letter writing campaign directed at the special prosecutors, letting them know that we feel so strongly about this prosecution, that they dare not sweep it under the rug. Speaker 2: And all this time, Jon Burge himself has been in Florida fishing for marlin, is what I've heard, I don't know. Speaker 1: Well, I understand he's in Florida getting his pension and running a security agency that has a branch here in Chicago, they tell me, you know. And I'm sure we'll pay some attention to that, if he does have a branch in Chicago. Story_ID: 188607 Speaker 1: Now, the Aaron Patterson case is another celebrated case here in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that all the justice-concerned groups were involved in. What's that about? Speaker 2: Well, Aaron Patterson was the, one of the victims of Jon Burge. He was tortured into confessing to a double murder, and he got, you know, the death sentence. And, you know, we--you know, at a certain point we became convinced that he was a Burge victim, and was innocent. So people began to organize to try to free, specifically, Burge victims. You know, there's different layers of the movement. There are some layers--and I'm included in the abolitionist layers of the movement that want to abolish the death penalty. But within that, there were people that were specifically organizing to free these victims of police brutality, Burge victims. And as you know, you know, after a lot of work, Governor [George] Ryan pardoned Aaron and Madison Hobley, and one other brother; I can't think of his name now. But it wasn't just the goodness of the governor, although, you know, he should be commended. It had been a lot of work. The abolitionist movement has been, had been working around these issues for a number of years trying to fight to abolish it, and trying to educate people, and trying to make sure people supported the moratorium, you know, and all of that. And finally the governor did the right thing, and we were very happy that he did. Of course, Aaron is out, and he hit the ground running. I mean he's been trying to help some of the other brothers get out. In fact, he bonded one out on his own. He had some money coming from the--when you're wrongfully convicted, you get a pardon of innocence, then there's a formula that has been devised by the State [of Illinois] where you can get compensation from the State, unopposed. So he had money coming, so he took that as a lien and went to one of these loan sharks and they loaned him a $100,000. And he borrowed $100,000, paid enormous interest on it--like $20,000 on the money we was going to get--just to get one of his, one of the other brothers out on bond. You know, and that's kind of how Aaron is. You know, he's a very unusual person, to say the least--very committed. And now, we're representing Aaron in a civil rights lawsuit against Jon Burge and, you know, many of his henchmen. And that's going forward in the federal district court at this very moment. Story_ID: 188608 Speaker 1: Now, part of the activities of this coalition that works on these justice issues is--well, the Northwestern Law School [Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] I think started pushing the DNA testing and so forth? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Which has sort of resulted in the vindication of a number of men who were on Death Row. Speaker 2: Yeah. They have a wrongful conviction--I don't know if that's what they call it. I forget what they call it [The Center on Wrongful Convictions]. But they spend a considerable amount of time trying to free innocent people, you know, from prison. Speaker 1: The result has been--I don't know, it was fifteen the last time I heard. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's pretty amazing, yeah. Speaker 1: And I think it's growing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to people who simply didn't do it--based on the DNA evidence--that were on Death Row. Speaker 2: Yeah. There are a lot of people. We've focused on Death Row, at least the movement has, to a great extent because the abolitionist movement is trying to abolish the death penalty. But the focus, I guess, has been to try to at least free those on Death Row, because they're going to die. But there are many, many others in the general population who are in prison for crimes they didn't commit. So, we're going to have to try to find the resources to review some of those cases as well. I got, we have another case that we're representing, John Willis, who went to prison for eight and a half years. He didn't, he wasn't on Death Row, but he did eight and a half years. He got 150 years, accused and convicted of what became known as the "beauty shop rapes." They were on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], very well-publicized. This guy would come into the beauty shop, brandish a gun, herd the women into a back room, and keep one out and rape her. And it was going on mostly in the Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] community. And so, John Willis--somebody called the police and said they thought, you know, the person--they had devised a flyer with a likeness on it, and said they believed it was John. So, they arrested him. And at some point, this rapist had forced one of the women to engage in oral sex, and she had spit semen into a toilet paper wrapper. So then they take the toilet paper wrapper and they're able to a serology analysis, that is, determine his blood type. So now they've got the real rapist's blood type, and now they've got John Willis, who happens to be a first cousin of mine, locked up. And so they get his blood type, and this lab technician determines that John had an A and the rapist got a B, but she never told his lawyer. She suppressed her notes reflecting that. So, she goes to trial and testified that her results were inconclusive, and he goes down. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was, who was the State's Attorney when this happened? Speaker 2: A guy named Grimbark [ph.], the real villain, although he's being sued too, for another reason. Because he, we alleged that he destroyed or hid the rape kits, which prevented John from getting a DNA analysis, because there was no samples. The person in the lab, the serologist, her name is Pam Fish [Dr. Pamela Fisher], and she's also implicated in one or two other cases for doing similar kinds of maneuvers in the lab. So, she's obviously a defendant in the case as well. So, but the point is there are people in the system generally that are in the system that didn't commit crimes. But we focus on those on Death Row, you know, for obvious reasons. But we at some point have to also focus on, you know, people that are in the system that didn't commit crimes, and free them, like John Willis for example. Story_ID: 188609 Speaker 1: There is one, I guess, segment of the community--well, there's a lot of people in the black community especially--that unless they know somebody that's actually wrongfully convicted, seem to believe that, you know, it doesn't really hurt to arrest a whole lot of people and put them in jail. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because with the crime going on-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's right. Speaker 1: And you know, we have people in the community calling for repression, you know, in loud voices-- Speaker 2: It's ironic, yeah. Because we are, we are the victims of the criminal behavior from the police. We probably end up in prison more than anybody else for crimes we didn't commit. But we're also a community where there are probably more, proportionately more crimes being committed. And we don't feel like we can do anything about it, because the police are not there for us. The police-- we know the police know where the drug house is, but they don't ever bother the drug dealer. So, I think that's allowed for the development of the emergence of a certain conservativism around criminal justice, where black folks are not as anxious to fight around criminal justice issues. Because they, on one hand are kind of trying to, you know, walk through the gangways to get around the gangbangers and the drive-by shooters. So, they're not as anxious to, you know, jump in those waters and fight on behalf of people that are in prison. Because, like you say, many blacks unfortunately believe that they probably deserve to be there, you know, 'cause they're catching so much hell in these communities. Speaker 1: Does that make it difficult to get public support? Speaker 2: It does. You know, we saw an example of that--for example, I guess near the end of the '80s [1980s], there were these housing project sweeps. You may recall. It was the first time it happened in Chicago [Illinois], I think it was. And then it started spreading to other places. And it was a similar kind of irony... that people that lived in the projects... some of them were for the sweeps. Because they got tired of the gangbangers and the drive-by shooters and people in the hallway and all that. So, they say, "Yeah, come sweep them." But then there were others that were very strong advocates of the 1st Amendment and the 4th Amendment that rejected it and resisted it. Clearly, it was wrong to go in and just sweep. It was, it was contrary to established law, where you go in somebody's apartment without probable cause and search it. You have to have some articulated reason for going into somebody's... you can't do a mass search. That's contrary to American law, but that's what they did. And we as a community, the black community and the larger community, let it happen, and we didn't know what to about it. In the black community, you know, there was some in limbo, "Should we do it?" When some people say, "Yeah, we want it to happen," and they live in the projects. What right do we have to go--what right do we have waiving the 1st and 4th Amendment, and they live there? And then there were other people, and I fell on the side of the other people, saying "That's unfortunate, but we can't afford to let our brothers' and sisters' rights to be eroded in that way." And now we see as a result now, of nine one-one (September 11, 2001), the tide is turning against the general population in the erosion of rights, under the U.S.[A.] PATRIOT Act [Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001]. So, sometimes when you see something happening in one segment of the community, if you don't stop it, it's a lot easier to expand it to other segments of the community because we didn't resist it in the black community. Story_ID: 188610 Speaker 1: Are there features of the [U.S.A.] PATRIOT Act [Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001] that really scare you? Speaker 2: All of them, you name them. (Laughter). I mean, when you have an act... remember, that was passed without much thought--because it was passed when Americans were going through a period of fear, confusion, sadness, and they just kind of ran it through--no opposition, no discussion. And this act allows basically the total erosion of the Fourth Amendment, whereas now they can, for example, search your house. They call it "sneak and peek," and you not know they searched it, because they don't have to allow you--they don't have to give you notice of the search warrant. They can go and look at your library record and see what you're reading, and you'll not know about it. Because the law provides that the librarian can't notify the patron that the government is trying to see if you're reading something you shouldn't be reading. They have a provision-- Speaker 1: What shouldn't you be reading? Speaker 2: Probably anything that's radical, or that the people that are in power thinks is probably anti-American or too radical, or pro-terrorist. Who knows? When you have a censorship, that's a problem, you know. Who's going to decide what I should read? Or, you have a provision that defines a domestic terrorist. That's very scary. And it basically says that if you are involved in, basically protesting the government, and as a result of that protest some violent act occurs, you can be labeled as a domestic terrorist. And if you're a domestic terrorist, you get the treatment of any other terrorist. You could be arrested, you could be detained presumably without a lawyer, and all of that. So, it's scary. And then they have another one that hasn't passed, another version of it--that if you are defined as a terrorist, you could conceivably lose your citizenship. So if you look at the first provision of the U.S. Patriot Act--the work we did around South Africa, for example, would have been, we would have been labeled domestic terrorists because the ANC [African National Congress] was considered a terrorist organization by the South Africans and by the American government. Speaker 1: Yeah, they called them a communist organization over there, too. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, we would have been--the work you do around Cuba, you would be a domestic terrorist, because Cuba is considered a terrorist state. So a lot of the work we do around things that we believe in, in exercising the First Amendment, would outlawed, you know. And we have the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], all these agencies that used act separately--and the CIA confined itself to international kind of intrigues. Now, they're kind of combined, and you have the CIA, FBI, all these agencies, you know, looking at your library card, snooping around your house when you're not there, and all of that. And locking you up, when you may not have access to a lawyer. So, it's very scary. It's much worse... it is worse than the COINTELPRO [Counter Intelligence Program], that was enacted illegally, that destroyed the Civil Rights Movement and spied on [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and others, and probably had... was responsible for the assassination of Dr. King. But it's codified; that is, it's the law, and it's much worse. It's much worse than anything that happened during the [Joseph] McCarthy period. So it's something we have to resist. Speaker 1: It's not just policy; it's law. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's law. And so, when the [Chicago] City Council passed this--I guess it's an ordinance basically--you know, protesting and asking the U.S. Congress to repeal it, I think that was a very good sign. But that only came with struggle. Story_ID: 188611 Speaker 1: Well, it also seems counter to what the [Chicago] City Council--I mean the Mayor [Richard M. Daley], had been calling for the reinstitution of the Red Squad. Speaker 2: And it got reinstituted. Speaker 1: In the form of this thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. But that's even before nine-one-one [Nine-Eleven, or September 11, 2001], when he was asking for that. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's been asking for that since he was elected, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. We filed an amicus brief on that, yeah, he did. And the appellate court--when he asked for that, it went to the district court. [HM] Judge Ann Williams denied it. It went up to the appellate court and they reversed Judge Ann Williams, and said the Mayor has a right to have this, because things have changed. They're more dangers, and the police need more authority. And this was before 9/11. Speaker 1: Here we have a Democratic mayor calling for this kind of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Also, he's, he also stands accused by a lot of people of being the State's Attorney when a lot of these wrongful convictions-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --took place. He was the-- Speaker 2: He was the State's Attorney. He was the State's Attorney, and-- Speaker 1: He was charged with doing this before he started-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: He was the State's Attorney. And the present State's Attorney, [Richard] Devine, was one of the lawyers who represented Jon Burge in the civil suit, his law firm. And he actually appeared in court on behind of Jon Burge. So, there are a lot of contradictions in this law enforcement community around a lot of these issues. And I guess that explains why they don't prosecute anybody, any police. Speaker 1: Then we have the strange occurrence of the Republican governor [George Ryan] pardoning-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --people on Death Row who were innocent, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Which is something that you really never-- Speaker 2: You never would expect it, yeah. Speaker 1: It made national news. Speaker 2: Yeah. And Illinois right now is, is being looked at by other states, particularly abolitionist states, because they think Illinois might be taking over the leadership in terms of abolishing the--you know, as a large state, abolishing the death penalty. I don't know if that's going to happen right away, but there are very good signs that the abolitionist movement and the sentiment supporting the death penalty has a made a good reverse in the last several months. Because we've had, we've had more people who came off Death Row that were innocent than any other state. I mean, so that's, you know, concrete proof that the death penalty was indeed flawed. So, Illinois is pivotal, I think. And our legislatures, particularly some of the black legislatures, are really stepping up now. You know, [HM Constance] "Connie" Howard has always been there. But other black legislatures are stepping up. And we might abolish the death penalty if we keep doing the work in the communities--keep turning, you know, change the minds of our people about this death penalty-- Story_ID: 188612 Speaker 1: --Do you ever worry about your own safety? Because you seem to be--you have people who are in opposition to what you're doing who are powerful and have guns and things. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Well, I always worry about people with guns. I don't really--you know, I guess there are times when I worry about being in certain communities at night and being confronted by police. So, I try to avoid that--or gangbangers. But I think I worry about police more, because they have authority that gangbangers don't have. If a gangbanger confronts me, if I had a gun, or picked up a bottle and defend myself, I'll probably be okay. If the police confront me, if I defend myself I'm still in big trouble, you know. So, I worry about police. I've had cases, one in particular I think about, where a police--a public defender who worked for the County [Cook County, Illinois]--was working on a case getting ready to go to trial, and went into the community looking for witnesses and got into a confrontation with the police, verbal. Because the police rolled up and everybody ran except this public defender, he had no reason to run. So they asked him, "Why in the hell didn't you run?" And he goes back and forth, and they arrested him and put drugs in his pocket. You know, and he had to stand, he had to defend himself. So, I, you know, I would be nervous about that. And so I try to avoid areas that I know they're just, you know, they're running rampant, the police. I do know that they have me, I've been told they have me on the FOP [Fraternal Order of Police] website. I haven't seen it, but they say they don't speak too favorably of me. But I don't worry it, other than--you know, it doesn't keep me awake at night. But I'm cautious, 'cause I don't really trust police in those kind of situations. I think, you know, if they have an opportunity they might do something silly. Story_ID: 188613 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about reparations for a second. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You were saying that the National Congress of Black Lawyers formed N'COBRA [the National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. N'COBRA is a grassroots, you know, organization. We have a strong chapter here. Of course, NBUF [Natioal Black United Fund] is doing great work to bring about reparations. That's the National Black United Fund, under Conrad's [HM Conrad Walter Worrill] leadership. Ultimately, there will be lawsuits. There's a lawsuit here in Illinois. I'm not optimistic about its longevity, because the judge in that case is not the best judge. But there'll be other lawsuits. I think ultimately reparations will be a reality, as we keep educating people about it--you know, the justification for it. It's not new. You know, there have been other Americans that have gotten reparations. In fact, freed slaves, there was a discussion about giving reparations to free slaves. The radical Republicans, Thaddeus Stevens and Charles Sumner, you know, they talked about that; it just didn't happen. You know, there was a betrayal during that time, the "[President Rutherford Birchard] Hayes-[Samuel J.] Tilden Betrayal" ["The Great Betrayal" or the "Compromise of 1877"]. So, it's not new. And the Japanese, you know, rightly so, got reparations for the internments. Of course, the Jews, you know, got reparations for the Holocaust. So, it's not new. I think it will happen eventually. I think this is the century for it, and I don't think it's going to be at the end of the century. But we have to continue to educate our people about what it means, and why we should fight for it. It can't take up the whole agenda, because we got so many other things to fight around. I can't stop, you know, defending our people against police through litigation. But I can spend time, you know, going to Durban, South Africa to try to get their work done, and trying to prepare litigation that will survive early challenges in the court. But the real work will come in the street. Because it ultimately will be something that will come out of Congress because of the mass sentiments--you know, of not just black people, but a large number of white people as well, that know it's the right thing to do. It will take a while, but I think it's gonna happen. Story_ID: 188614 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, I'm very concerned about this, the mass incarceration of young black men. I think it... I think it has broad, far reaching consequences--some of them we haven't even anticipated. When you incarcerate... and I think incarcerations are unfair a lot of... at least the amount of time that's given for the incarcerations, as a result of the disparity in crack cocaine and white powder cocaine, and the mandatory minimums [mandatory minimum sentencing] that's part of the federal censors and guidelines. And it's become part of many state guidelines. I think that has caused a huge explosion in the prison population, and largely a great deal of that has been in the black and Latino community, including black women. So, when you start incarcerating large numbers of people in certain age groups--eighteen to twenty-eight roughly--for long periods of time, I think you're getting very close to having a genocidal policy. Because these people are at the age where they're, one, most productive, in any community. So, you're stopping that. Secondly, you're keeping people locked up and taking them away from the community. So, whatever stabilizing effect that the men would have in the community--that no longer exists. The women population, black women population, has increased, you know, over a hundred percent in the last ten or twelve years. So, you're taking women away. And many of these women, a good proportion of them, were mothers when they were arrested and convicted and sent off to prison. Another percentage of those had babies while they were in prison, because they were pregnant when they were arrested. So, you're disrupting the lives of people at an age where they're raising children, they're having children. They are the future of these communities, and you're putting them away for... You know, in the federal system I've had clients go away for life, and not... you know, and it's not that unusual, based on drug cases--not violence, they didn't murder anybody. But the guidelines, the sentencing guidelines which governs sentencing in the federal court-- if you are involved in... by yourself... or a conspiracy in trafficking a kilo and a half of crack cocaine, you could be subject to life. A kilo and a half is not a lot of cocaine, when you think about a conspiracy. You know, like, take the-- some gang and they're doing drugs, they'll do that in a couple of weeks, quite frankly. And you could go to prison very easily and be there the rest of your life. And it's just so fundamentally unfair. I think the [U.S.] Supreme Court Justice [Anthony] Kennedy spoke out on it at the American Bar Association recently. And if he's speaking out on it that means it's a serious problem, if he's speaking out on something that affects black folks. So, it has those kinds of consequences. But it also has these kind of unintended kind of consequences, for those that are locked up for long period of times that are taken away. When they get out, in a real sense, they are so disabled. You know, not just physically, but there are jobs they can't work on. In some states, they can't vote. So, it erodes the political power of those black communities. So, as a citizen, as a working person, they are disabled for the rest of their lives in many ways. So you get the recidivism almost built in, because you're letting somebody out that's not prepared to be out. There's no training in prisons now, it's all punitive. And then once you let them out, you're saying you still have the "scarlet letter" in a sense, where you can't work. And not only on jobs that you can't work on, even the jobs that you can work on. If they know you've done prison time, you're not going to get the job. So, it's a real problem. And I think that's why the expungement bill [Illinois House Bill 300] that [HM Constance] "Connie" Howard's working on... I know [HM] Danny [K.] Davis is working on one [Second Chance Act, H.R. 1593], is very important; they need to be broadened. And I can understand them keeping them fairly narrow at this very early stage of trying to get support. But we need to find a way, one, of stopping the imprisonment of black men and women around this drug stuff. Drugs is a illness, and we need to start treating it as an illness. People that are strung out or suffering from the illness, they need to be treated, and there needs to be a drug sentence for them. We should stop criminalizing the use of drugs. People get strung out on drugs and then we send them to prison, it doesn't make a lot of sense. Most of the recent convictions over the last ten or fifteen years, most of them have been related to drugs, not violence. When we hear about drive-bys, those are the exceptions. There are people out there dealing drugs and going to prison for drugs that have never been in a drive-by, never had a gun, but they're going to prison for long periods of time. So, I think that's a critical issue. So, I'd like to see us address that. We talked about the kind of conservative irony of that in the black community. But I think it's critical-- Story_ID: 188615 Speaker 1: Then of course reparations and, you know, these other burning issues I think we need to address. And then of course, police brutality. And then we have more broader issues. You know, they're not just issues that directly affect the black community, but indirectly, like the U.S.[A.] PATRIOT Act [Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001]. You know, we have to appeal it, there's no question about it. And we have to get people like [President George Walker] Bush out of office. You know, there has to be a mandate. Even, you know, brothers and sisters that don't buy into the electoral process that much, I think we have to use those vehicles to advance our movement, or to help our people survive. So, we have to get rid of Bush, you know. So, those kinds of things I'm very concerned about. Because I don't think we can afford four more years of Bush and Condoleezza Rice, and that whole cabal. You know, they're there illegally as far as I'm concerned; they were never elected. So, we have those kinds of issues. And then not last, and certainly not least, we have to begin to pay more attention to Africa, you know, our mother country. We have to pay attention to the AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome] crisis, you know. I think thirty million people died of AIDS, and most of them are on the continent. We have to pay attention on truly liberating Africa--African states that are independent--but where the Western states have a stranglehold around the economies through the debt system. We have to fight to, for these forgiveness of debts. We have to pay attention to countries like Zimbabwe. Zimbabwe is moving in a direction where Africans will be taking their land back. And they're doing it in Zimbabwe, they're doing it in South Africa. They will be doing it in Mozambique, they'll be doing it in Namibia. We have to be prepared to support that, because this government will be sending troops over there to kill Africans because they're trying to take their land back. So, we have to always keep these international concerns, particularly Africa, you know, on the front burner while we're fighting these domestic acts of repression. Story_ID: 188616 Speaker 1: You mentioned reparations. I just wanted to ask you a question about that again. What, what, form do you see reparations taking? And do you see a, do you have a preferred form that you've thought about? Speaker 2: I haven't really. And this, you know, it comes up periodically. I don't know what form it will take. I know it won't be, you know, people getting... you know, $20,000 each and that ends it. I think it's going to take--for the form that we talked about and I think we kind of agree on--we have to have a form of reparations internally, because we have to do some cleaning, you know, as we move towards reparations externally. But it has to be a form that affects the large numbers of black people. So it might be--one form might be to have free education at all levels. Because reparation is to repair. And so, when we look at the destruction that has been done since we've been here, it has been in all arenas--you know, from health care to jobs to, you know, the prison population. Reparations might mean reviewing, you know, many of the cases, you know, and freeing people that have been, you know, sent to prison wrongfully. So, it will be more of a substantive way of getting at the real roots of problems. And it might be, you know, granting of land someplace. It certainly will involve Africa. It certainly will involve getting that stranglehold away from around the continent--the debt stranglehold--and that's reparations. Africa can't survive if it's paying all of its gross national product to Western European capitalists. So, it would be broad enough to encompass all of those things to try to put us on par. And it's going to be tremendous, and it's going to be vigorously opposed, obviously. Because it's due. I mean, we built this country, there's no question about it, no question about it. It was free labor for two hundred years that allowed the accumulation of capital in this country and the accumulation of capital in Western Europe that allowed for the development of capitalism. Eric Williams has a wonderful book ['Capitalism and Slavery'] on that. So, we built this country, it was our labor. Not, you know, not even dealing with the fact that we were brought here to work the land that was taken from the Native Americans. So, we're owed, and we're gonna get paid. And I don't know what form it's gonna take, but it's going to be something that's gonna repair the damage. Story_ID: 188617 Speaker 1: What would you see at this stage as your legacy? You're still fairly young, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. You know, I would hope that my legacy would be one of continuing struggle, you know, when people go back to look at the work that I've done, you know. I hope to continue the struggle. I try to maintain--you know, I'm pretty health conscious--so that I will continue to have, you know, the strength. And I think if, if, if, that's the legacy--that struggle is always necessary until this job gets done. Then, wherever you find yourself, you will engage in organizing our people in struggling--whether you find yourself on the buses [the Chicago Transit Authority] or find yourself at the City Colleges [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], or find yourself, you know, fighting around criminal justice issues, you know, with your legal skills--wherever you find yourself. You know, I think we have an obligation to struggle. Because until we do that consistently, we're not going to solve any of the problems. We won't give the vital support to allies that are fighting on our behalf. So, I think that, you know, if there's a legacy, it would be one of--once I got involved in the movement in the mid-'60s [1960s], I haven't stopped. Story_ID: 188618 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently? Speaker 2: I don't know. You know, I guess I would--I probably wouldn't have had children so early. You know, when you're a young man and you're raising a son, if you're conscientious, you can't do all the things that you, you know, would want to do in terms of being able to travel. And, you know, like we were talking about the PhD program--I couldn't go off and do a PhD program, because I had to, you know, I've got to support my son. You know, I'm glad to do it, but it could have waited. You know, it could have waited until I'd done some of these other things. So, I definitely would do that differently I think. In terms of the overall struggle, I don't think so. I think, you know, you make tactical mistakes, but I don't, that doesn't bother me. You know, you may have--you know, for example, we probably should be doing more work to develop and deepen our relationship with segments of the Latino community. We have, you know, we've done that from time to time. I think that's important. You know, we have some of the same issues. Many Latinos are African, for example, you know. That's not the only reason, but we have some of the same issues--you know, we're catching the same kind of hell. When you see the prisons exploding, they're exploding with Latino kids and black kids. So, those kinds of things, those are strategic things that the movement I think needs to address, you know, in trying to make sure that we are developing allies. You know, and we could be doing that. Story_ID: 188619 Speaker 1: Did, did your father [Andrew Willis, Jr.] get a chance to see you become a lawyer? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, he did. He, he just passed in 1998, so he saw me as a lawyer. You know, he was very proud. You know, I could tell he was proud. Because, you know, he wasn't that well-educated, but I could tell he was proud, because he would brag on me with his friends, you know. So I said, it's okay, if dad is bragging on me. Yeah, he was proud about it. And my mom [Plumie Willis], you know, of course, she's still living, so she's proud. She often tells me, "Yeah, I got all these calls today. Somebody said you were on TV." I said, "Yeah, okay, mom." You know, so it's good. Story_ID: 188620 Speaker 1: Okay. And one last question. This is similar to legacy, but slightly different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: It depends. It depends on who's doing the remembering. (Laughter). For my kids, I would like for them to remember me as a father who, you know, was very much involved in their lives, very concerned about them, and did everything I can to make sure that they advanced--you know, and all of that. That's how I want to be remembered by my kids. And I think similarly with my, with my mom [Plumie Willis] and my sister and my brother. Well, with more of my allies, you know, my comrades--I think I'd want them to remember me as somebody who, you know, fought along beside them, was true to my word, didn't give up a struggle--you know, those kind of things. And I guess to my community, you know, I would like to be thought of it that way. So, it just depends. To the FOP [Fraternal Order of Police], you know, I don't care how I'm remembered, you know. Maybe as somebody that they're glad is on his way, made his transition, you know. So, it really depends. Story_ID: 188621 Speaker 1: Because we were, you know, we were becoming black nationalists--the editor of the paper [for Crane Junior College, later Malcolm X College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], the faculty editor was an elderly white lady, and she didn't understand. She thought that it was an anti-white movement. And you know, so those were the kinds of issues... I was being attacked in the paper fairly regularly. Speaker 2: "Standish Willis leading professors and students in Orangeburg protest." And what's the date on that? Speaker 1: It must have been-- Speaker 2: March 18, '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Right, right, '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, this is historical, partly historical. This was the high tide in the Vietnam War. Things were really getting heated up. The protest movements were expanding and this, in fact, Orangeburg was a black college. They had a black college [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] in Orangeburg, North Carolina [South Carolina]. And some of the students had been protesting. And the [U.S.] National Guards came and shot in the windows actually, and killed I think two students [the Orangeburg Massacre, 1968]. And, you know, that's why we were protesting the deaths of those students, two black students. And of course, you know, the guards moved around to Kent [State University] in [Kent] Ohio, you know, and killed students [the Kent State massacre, 1970]. They were... because the campuses were very strongly anti U.S. involvement in Vietnam after a while. So, I think they thought if they could break the spirit on the campuses, they could continue their kind of imperialist approach. Speaker 2: Okay, tell us about this. Speaker 1: This is a picture and a story that was done, I think in '87 [1987]. Looks like it's June 17, 1987, which was published in the [Chicago] Sun-Times on the People's Law Office. One of the writers thought the office was an interesting office, and the kind of work that we did. And so, they came down and did a story. And then, you know, this is a picture; I think everybody's in this picture. So at the time, I guess we had eight members. Jan Susler, who's very active around the, trying to free the Puerto Rican political prisoners. And of course Jeff [Jeffrey] Haas. Peter Schmiedel is at the Guardian office now, as a deputy I think. [Charles] "Chick" Hoffman in the back, he's with the Illinois State Appellate Defender doing capital cases. Janine [L.] Hoff, and John [L.] Stainthorp, and Flint Taylor are still at People's Law Office. Speaker 2: Alright. And what is the occasion for this photograph? Speaker 1: I think this is a graduation picture from high school. I was eighteen, coming out of Crane High School [Crane Tech High School, later, Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And that's the, that's the only relevance. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's mom [Plumie Willis]. I don't know how old she was then, probably in her thirties I imagine. Speaker 2: Was that portrait for any occasion? Speaker 1: No, I don't... it was just in our family album. I don't know what the occasion was. Probably no occasion. People took a lot of pictures in those days. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's my mom and my dad [Andrew Willis, Jr.] on the, on our left-hand side, with two other family members. And they were at a club, probably Club DeLisa, one of the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] clubs. You know, as I was saying, you know, they didn't have any clubs on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], so they went to the South Side. It was two or three very popular clubs on the South Side that people would go to--Club DeLisa, the Sullivan [ph.], the Parkway Ballroom, I think. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is... I'm one of the leaders of the march. And that's my son, Amilcar [Boddie-Willis], next to me in the blue shorts. This was a march organized by the African American Committee to Free Mumia Abu-Jamal and Aaron Patterson. And the purpose of the march, we decided that we needed to come into the black community to raise the issue around Mumia and Aaron. So we decided to have this Saturday march down, I think we marched down Cottage Grove [Avenue] over to Avalon Park [Chicago, Illinois]. So, we kind of took over the streets and went to, ended up in the park and had a rally that lasted, you know a couple of hours. Speaker 2: Okay, ready. Speaker 1: Okay, this is my, one of the--well, probably one of the first pictures I took as an airman. So, I'm probably eighteen or nineteen years old, a member of the United States Air Force. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: I was probably, I'm sure this was before I went to the [U.S.] military. I was probably seventeen or eighteen, I imagine. And the kid that's cutting my hair is still my barber, although I don't go the barbershop now, since I've been twisting my hair. But his name is, his name then was Tommie Williams. His family had a barbershop. His name is Haji now, and he has a barbershop on 83rd Street, a very good one, at that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is my graduation from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. I'm sure it's the bachelor's, because I don't think I went to the graduation for the master's degree. I wasn't real keen on graduations. I just went because my mom and dad, you know, I thought they deserved it. But I wasn't into graduations. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. This is just a picture of a family member. And this is during my bus driving days. I actually have on my bus driving uniform. And so, this is probably '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. This is actually my first wife's niece. This is the early bus driving days. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me I think when I was about five maybe, four or five. And then the other picture is an organizing picture. We were at a conference when I was the chairman of the student government at Malcolm X College-Crane College, which became Malcolm X College. And we used to have these conferences with all the college--they were kind of multi-college conferences. And they took a bunch of pictures, and this is one of those. This is, this is my former wife, Cynthia, the one I mentioned to you all, that went to medical school and I stayed home and took care of these two daughters. The little guy in the middle wasn't born during the time that we discussed. But the little guy in the middle is my son [Amilcar Boddie Willis], the one that you saw in the rally picture. He was probably about seven, six or seven. Speaker 2: What are everybody's names? Speaker 1: The young lady in the blue is Akiza [Boddie Willis]. Akiza just finished her master's degree at Rutgers University [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey] in Biomedical Engineering. She was in a PhD program and she didn't like it, so she finished her master's and came home. So, she's staying with me. Then there's Amilcar, the little guy. I'm in the back. Aisha [Boddie Willis], who's just gotten into nursing school, and then Cynthia. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's the picture related to the Chicago magazine article, 'The 30 Toughest Lawyers.' They had a reception to honor the thirty toughest lawyers at one of the, one of the big stores downtown. And I went, and I invited a friend of mine, Parquee [sp.], in the red dress. She's a friend of mine, but she also was a student of mine years ago when I used to teach at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], and we've maintained contact all these years. She's a performer and a teacher. And then my sister, Wynette [ph.], who came to accompany me to this event. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Mom and Dad in the twilight of their years, probably a couple of years before my dad passed. He had become ill with some kind of dementia, like Alzheimer's, where he was losing his faculties. So, we had to take care of him. And we decided to keep him at home, so we had to make those kind of adjustments. It was a tough, tough period, taking care of an ailing family member that you don't want to put in a nursing home. But we got through it, and we did it. Story_ID: 188622 Speaker 1: Yeah, that's another graduation, high school graduation [Crane Tech High School, later Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] picture, '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty [1960]? Speaker 1: Yeah, January '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: Who's that, is that you? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's me. I'm just trying to see who is that with me? I can't tell. It's a friend of mine, but I don't know what the circumstance is. I know it's during my bus driving days, but I don't remember what... the significance. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, this is my first family. This is Reginald [ph.]. This is the child I had when I was just turning seventeen, and his mother, Marcia [ph.], my wife. And me, and then our daughter, Vesta [ph.]. So, those are my two oldest children. And then I re-married to Cynthia [Boddie-Willis] and had Akiza [Boddie-Willis], Aisha [Boddie Willis], and Amilcar [Boddie Willis]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's Amilcar and me, probably fairly recently; probably the last three years anyway. And I don't know what he's... I think I brought it because I was trying to bring, make sure my family... so my family got into this. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: College now. This is a picture of when we were in Ghana. I think this is the [W.E.B.] Du Bois--they got a Du Bois Institute [Du Bois Centre for Pan African Culture, Accra, Ghana]; I think this is the Du Bois Institute. I think that's the bust of Dr. Du Bois. And that's me and Harriet Parker, who recently was the president of the Cook County Bar [Association]. Her tenure was just over I guess in June... and her brother. We were, we had a little delegation that went to Ghana in route to South Africa. So, we stayed, we made arrangements to go to Ghana for I think three days. And there were, I think about twelve of us. And then after we stayed in Ghana, we headed to South Africa for close to two weeks for the conference [World Conference on Racism, WCAR, 2001]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This picture was when I was head of the student government at Malcolm X College. That's Mr. Lee [ph.], who was our activities director. We were conferring on something at a conference. Story_ID: 188623 Speaker 1: Okay, what's going on in this photo? Speaker 2: That's the one that's, I'm chairing the, probably the African American study group. This is probably '67 [1967]. In '68 [1968], I became chairman of the student government of [Crane Junior College, later Malcolm X College of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and I presided over the student government until I graduated in that year, in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay, a different look here. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know what year that is. It's obviously me. Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s]? Speaker 2: Maybe. Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s] or '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Maybe, I don't know. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: As an airman... this is very early. This is probably while I was in basic training [U.S. Air Force]. Because they had these little things, you know, that you could stand in front of, a model, and send it back home like you were, like you're a real airman, you know. (Laughter). And I don't think I wore those Bermuda shorts after I left basic training. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is when I got off the plane in Ghana. I don't know, but my instinct was to kiss the ground, so that's what I was doing. I really felt good being in Ghana, I like Ghana a lot. Speaker 2: What year is that? Speaker 1: This is 2001, this is on the way to the World Conference on Racism [WCAR]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The same thing here. That's the Ghana Airlines right behind us. We went over on Ghana Airlines, and they had at that time I think four planes in their fleet, and they left out of New York [New York]. I don't think they have any now. I think they, they, they just couldn't keep it going. Speaker 2: That's sad, because they ought to have the money, you know, as rich as Ghana is in minerals and stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of those countries are rich in minerals, but they don't--you know, somebody else is taking the money. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is, oh, I'm speaking at the rally at the end of the demonstration on behalf of Mumia [Abu-Jamal] and Aaron [Patterson]. We ended up in Avalon Park [Chicago, Illinois], and I'm speaking to the group. Speaker 2: Okay, next. This is your bus driving days? Speaker 1: Bus driving days, yeah. That's my little girl, Vesta. She's probably--when my wife [Marcia, ph.] and I got divorced, I think Vesta was probably four or five years old, something like that. So, she was a little child. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. That's Vesta? Speaker 1: That's Vesta, yeah. Yeah, that's Vesta. When we got divorced, I would get my kids. You know, I kept them a lot. Just about any time I was off, I would grab them. When we had the strike, the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] strike, I used to get the kids and take them to the picket line. Speaker 2: Did they like that? Speaker 1: You know, they liked being with their dad. You know, so wherever I took them was okay. They didn't know I was politicizing them. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is the delegation that went to Ghana. We're in one of the slave castles now. That's the group, a good group of folks. We had a great time. We didn't know--well, I knew some of the folks, but some of us didn't know each other. But it turned out very good. That's Samora [ph.], I call her Samora, and my son Amilcar [Boddie Willis] in the green shirt. Demetrius [Evans]... you know Demetrius, don't you? She practiced law with me for a couple of years, Demetrius Evans. Speaker 2: With the bag? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and her daughter, Ashley [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a slave castle. Slave castles-- Speaker 2: Which one is that? Speaker 1: Elmina [Castle, Elmina, Ghana], I think, yeah. Speaker 2: They're pointing those guns towards the sea. Speaker 1: Well, they had to keep other, the interlopers, from raiding the slave castles, to protect the slaves. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: This was one of the slave castles, and this was showing--they would put women in these little dungeon areas underground. And I think this is one where they--if they were--I think this is the one where they would have sex with the slave women. But before they would have sex, they would put them down in these little tanks to clean them up. And they basically just dumped them down there and they are, you know, in this water. And then they would send them off to, you know, one of the shipmasters or whoever, you know, was awaiting their services. But it was pretty--a pretty horrendous kind of legacy. Speaker 2: This one? Speaker 1: And that's me. My mom [Plumie Willis] said I was six. I talked to her about it last night. She said, "I've been looking for that picture. I'm not sure it's in there, but it's the one where you tried to tie your own tie. You'd know it when you saw it." So, when I saw it, I knew it. (Laughter). I look like a young Sidney Poitier, don't I? (Laughter). Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I'm telling you. (Laughter). (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Is that your tattoo? Speaker 2: (Laughter). I don't know why they chose that-- Speaker 1: Okay, when was this taken? Speaker 2: I guess last year--I can't see the date. But I'm sure it was spring, March of 2002, I guess. And I'm in... the Chicago magazine did this article on what they thought was the 'Chicago's Toughest Lawyers [The 30 Toughest Lawyers],' based on what kind of, I guess kind of work people were doing. And when the guy approached me with it... it was this one writer. He said... because I was skeptical, you know. I said, "Well, I don't know if I want to do that." He said, "Well, I met you when I was at The Chicago Reporter and, you know, we did some work with you." So I said, "Okay." Speaker 1: Since it was The Chicago Reporter? Speaker 2: Yeah. I said, "Since it's The Chicago Reporter, you know, okay." So he came over and we took-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, what about this one on the top, the one that's still perched-- Speaker 2: That's [Tracey] Bradley, what's her name? This young lady's two children were kidnapped a couple of years ago. Speaker 1: Minerals, or something like that? Diamond [Bradley]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Diamond was one, and I forget the other [Tionda Bradley]. But that's a picture of her. And we were having a press conference, because the police... I had just started representing her. She didn't have a lawyer, and she was being harassed by the police. They would go pick her up and take her to the station and question her for hours, you know, without any notice and without anybody to take care of the kids. So, I think this was the time when they had basically snatched her off the street and took her down to talk to somebody. And we didn't... you know, we said, "Well, you know, you can't do that." So, we had a press conference. I went down and retrieved her and told them, you know, you couldn't... In fact, we filed a complaint against the officer. So, this is at Reverend [Paul] Jakes's church. We had a press conference, and the [Chicago] Tribune did this picture, along with a story. And I liked the picture, so I ordered it. I'm going to frame it one day. I've got several pictures just sitting on the floor, that I say I'm going to frame. I've got a picture of Patrice Lumumba that was given to me by his nephew [Tukumbi Lumumba-Kasongo] years ago when we were at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Patrice Lumumba? Speaker 2: Yeah, Kasongo is his name. When we were studying at the University of Chicago, he gave me this picture of his uncle. And I never really had it framed, I just kept it with me all the time. So, I've got a lot of framing to do. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: We had a heated contest the first time I ever ran for office. It's funny. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Who did you run against? Speaker 2: I don't remember, I think a guy named Charles something. Speaker 1: Is this him? I don't trust him. Speaker 2: No, not him. It was another Charles, and I beat him real good. I don't know what ever happened to those three at the bottom. I keep in touch with Henry [English] pretty good, because he's head of the Black United Fund [BUF] now...