 Story_ID: 640568 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Thomas Jefferson. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Dori, D-O-R-I; Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October 15th [1943]. Winona, Mississippi. Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A long time ago. Speaker 1: Oh, go ahead. You can--what were you gonna say? Speaker 2: Long time ago. Speaker 1: Long time--okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, October 15th, a long time ago. Speaker 1: Ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an entrepreneur. I'm in the public relations business. I have a firm, Dori Wilson Public Relations [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you are retired as a runway model as well, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So we should--yeah. That's important. Speaker 2: Well, that was part of my history. It isn't what I do now and it's not anything that I did full time, but I did work a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay, now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: May 25th, 2010. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the office of The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue], Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 640569 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Food (laughter). I love hamburgers and French fries, it's awful at my age, but that's what I like. I'm trying to do better. I could say salads, but I wouldn't be telling the truth. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Changes from time to time, currently its bright colors. I'm into the oranges and bright blues, bright colors. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring, right before it gets too hot, when the flowers are beginning to stick their heads up. I just love that transition time, but I appreciate all seasons. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I seem to enjoy anyplace I happened to end up, whether that's Hattiesburg, Mississippi, or Cancun, Mexico, or whatever. Speaker 1: All right. The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Changes, depending upon the timing; right now it's, I'm just saying, or, just saying. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sometimes it's, whatever, sometimes it's, it is what it is. None of those are brilliant, but they're my sayings. Story_ID: 640570 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history, and I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Laura, L-A-U-R-A; Mae, M-A-E; Brown [Fannie Brown Wilson], born in Winona, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mom has a sister--had a sister. Her name is Dorothy Jane Brown [Dorothy Brown Simpson (ph.)]. And it was those two girls. It's my understanding, or rather I know that my mom's father who was killed when they were both very young, did have another child, so--a half sister, and her name was Mary Lee [ph.], perhaps Brown, and she lived in California, he was never close to her, but I understand she just she just died a week or so ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there any--are there any stories about the history of your mother's family, I mean, how far back can you trace the Browns or any other of her other relatives? Speaker 2: Well, my mom's father, I know, was supposedly, when the girls--when my mom and her sister were very young, evidently the father was a bit of a womanizer. You know what, let me not say he was a bit of a womanizer, but the accusation is that he smiled inappropriately, what was perceived at the time as being inappropriately, at a white woman, and it's my understanding that he was taken out of the house and killed. My mother's mother died at an early age of pneumonia, and so my mother and her sister, Dorothy, were raised by grandparents, by my grandma, we called her grandma, but she was really, I guess, a great-great-grandma [sic. great-grandmother, Bettie Brown], but my grandma, raised by the family. You know it takes a village, and in this case, and in the South where we were, the family all came around to raise, and I remember that we had a cousin, Molly [ph.], and she was also instrumental in the raising of my mom. Speaker 1: Was there any coverage of your father's [sic. Wilson's maternal grandfather] murder? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. That's an excellent question, and one that I need to check, I don't know. Speaker 1: Some were covered and written about in The Crisis and other, you know, in the black papers, and some were not, depending on, you know, but I don't think we'll ever know how many people suffered that fate. Speaker 2: Oh, I think you're right. And I don't know. I know that my Aunt Dorothy--my mom has two daughters and a son [William Wilson, Jr.], and my Aunt Dorothy, my mom's sister, they were very close, and my Aunt Dorothy has two daughters as well. One of her daughters Mary [Mary E. Hunt] has started chronicling the family history, but I don't know that--the answer to that question, very good thing to find out. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So that kind of disrupted life for your mother growing up? Did she, did she have stories about growing up that she shared with you? Speaker 2: She didn't share a lot of them. I think it was an unpleasant time for her, and my mom didn't like to talk about things. I know that she and my Aunt Dorothy were separated for a while, while my Aunt Dorothy went away to some school in St. Louis [Missouri], that was a school at the time, and my mother worked at an early age, and I think worked very hard for very little money, and she didn't like to talk about it. It was very unpleasant memories to her, because I think they suffered as children growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. So she did grow up in Winona, Mississippi and? Speaker 2: Yes. Uh-huh. Winona and around the Delta [Mississippi Delta] area. Speaker 1: Okay. And when she came to Chicago [Illinois], she was grown? Or did she, or did she-- Speaker 2: Yes. She came to Chicago to find my father. My mother had two children by my dad, and we were mys- Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson] and--me, and my sister, Mamie [Mamie Wilson], and when we became--I was seven, maybe six at the time, mom decided that she was going to come up north and find my dad, Willie Wilson [William Wilson, Sr.]. And she came up and they got together and got married and became official. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then came back to get us. So I know I was seven when I came here. Story_ID: 640571 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: William Wilson [William Wilson, Sr.]. W-I-L-S-O-N. Speaker 1: All right. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It's September 6th, I believe it was 1916. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: And--maybe it was 1913. And my dad was born in Arkansas, but he moved as a very young child. And he moved, and as he would say, "We traveled around." My father was half Indian [Native American], half Blackfoot Indian, very handsome man. I do have pictures, a picture. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my father had sisters, one of whom Sara, migrated and moved to, I believe it was St. Louis [Missouri] and interestingly enough, she as well died a couple of weeks ago, and her name started as Sara Brown [sic. Sara Wilson], but I believe her married name was Sara Jones [ph.], and then he had a sister that lived in New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Also deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any stories about your father's family, his side of the family and about, you know, how they got to Arkansas or what--the Civil war or life in Mississippi--or in Arkansas? Speaker 2: My dad--neither of my parents talked a lot about their history and perhaps I wasn't inquisitive enough to ask. My father just talked about working, and working at a very early age from when he was fifteen and he was very committed to working and remained that until his death. Just that he worked very hard, didn't say a lot about his mother, seems that he knew his dad, but I really don't know a lot about my family history, I'm ashamed to say. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we had a very small family, so there isn't anyone that I can go and get that history. Speaker 1: Now was, did your dad have a chance to go to school down there? Speaker 2: He did go to school, I think eighth grade. But my father loved to read and could sit down and chat about anything, particularly politics, and he really loved talking about things that he had gone through, the work process, the work, you know, from the '30s [1930s], the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration], and how he worked on this railroad and this straight--and loved talking about those times? Speaker 1: Okay. Did he serve in World War II [WWII]? Speaker 2: He did not. Speaker 1: Okay. But he did work in the WPA. Any projects he mentioned in specific? Speaker 2: Just talked about working on the highways and the railroads and generally doing whatever kind of pickup work he could get. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But one of the things that I loved about him is that he was never afraid to work. And when we came up north and became a family, my father worked two jobs for over thirty years, close to forty years, to make sure that we would be a family and that my mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] would not have to work again. My mother, when she came up north and got a job, answered an ad in the paper, and got a job working for a very liberal family in Highland Park, Illinois, Mary Lou Guckenheimer [ph.], who had two daughters, and upon finding that my mom had two daughters in the South sent for us [Wilson and her sister, Mamie Wilson], and so we came from living on this one room shack in Winona, Mississippi, the property of Mr. and Mrs. Burns [ph.], to a mansion at 354, I believe it was Ridgewood Drive in Highland Park, where we were told that we were equal, and I said, "This'll work for me, this is okay." Story_ID: 640572 Speaker 1: I'm gonna explore that in a second, but can you tell us is there a story about how your parents met, and you know, fell in love, that sort of thing? Speaker 2: It's not a story that I really--from what I understand, my mom [Fannie Brown Wilson] had a good friend whose name was Zelma [Zelma Palmer], and my dad at some point married--and I think they went to school together. But Zelma was married to my dad, to William Wilson [William Wilson, Sr.], and Zelma and my father had a daughter whose name was Georgia [Georgia Jones] who is my half sister. And they lived upon the hill and what I always heard described as a big house. They were the kind of wealthy blacks. Her maiden name was Luster [ph.], and I think there's a history of them in Winona [Mississippi]. But for whatever reason, Zelma and my father went their separate ways, though I don't know that they were officially divorced when he took up with my mom. Speaker 1: Okay. And you said earlier that he lef- he moved to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: He moved to Chicago before I was born, but interestingly enough I found a letter, after my mom died, she had this little--literally a little box of mementoes and one of the things in that box was a letter from my father and the date of it was something like October 1st, and I was born on the 15th. But in that letter he said that he was looking forward to the child, and I hope it's a girl and--which was kind of nice to read. Speaker 1: Okay. So well, when he moved--so your mother, you said, went to Chicago to find him or to reconnect with him and-- Speaker 2: To reconnect, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, uh-huh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. So then it worked out? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And obviously--well, I shouldn't say, yeah, obviously it had been some time, because at that time, when she left, I must have been six, and he left before I was born, so--but fortunately, they did reconnect and my father did say, let's--and it's my understanding that when she called my dad about coming up to get together, obviously, they'd kept in touch as you said. But I think it was something about the girls were growing up and they need a family, and they need to be a family. And so my father did the proper thing and they got married and remained so for a lot of years. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So-- Speaker 2: And had a son, by the way. They did have a son, my brother, I have a brother who's nine years younger. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, your brother and sister, you have a brother-- Speaker 2: I have an older sister, Mamie [Mamie Wilson], and then there's Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], I'm the middle child, and then I have a brother whose name is William [William Wilson, Jr.], but we call him Bill. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's-- Speaker 2: Wilson, yeah. Speaker 1: And that's the whole family? Speaker 2: That's the whole family. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a small family. Story_ID: 640573 Speaker 1: So, when you think about your parents' personalities and their talents, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My mom [Fannie Brown Wilson]. On the other hand, I think I take my work ethic from my father [William Wilson, Sr.], because I too am a hard worker and will work as long as I have to work. My mother said that by the time she became married that she had worked so hard in her life for some ridiculous amount of money like eighty cents a week until she was really tired of it, but my father was a very hard worker, and I think I take that ethic from him. On the other hand, I think I take the kindness from my mom. Story_ID: 640574 Speaker 1: So when your mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] came up by herself and you all were still in Mississippi, to reconnect with your father [William Wilson, Sr.], how--did she talk about how she got this job with the Guckenheimers. Speaker 2: Yes, she answered an ad in the paper. And it was Mary Lou, she was not married, she was Mary Lou Guckenheimer [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who had two daughters, Nell [ph.] and Cherry [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And--okay, so this was out in Highland Park [Illinois], which is out in the suburbs of Chicago [Illinois]. So she had--did she live with the Guckenheimers out there? Speaker 2: Yes, she took a job as a live in help, and Mary Lou was very active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and those liberal organizations at the time. And she had to be to determine that she was going to take these two girls [Wilson and her sister, Mamie Wilson] from Mississippi and into her house with her children and we went to Lincoln school [Lincoln Elementary School], albeit, for a short period of time in Highland Park. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting, so she was in the NAACP and CORE? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was my understanding she was active in those, very liberal Jewish woman, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, what was your father doing in Chicago? Speaker 2: My father was working at Libby, McNeill and Libby's [Libby, McNeill and Libby; Libby's], and I remember that the train stopped very close across the way from where--from this wonderful house that we lived in in Highland Park. And my mom would certainly go in to visit my father on weekends, and it was from those weekend visits that she subsequently became pregnant with my brother, Bill [William Wilson, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But Mary Lou, at that time, around that time, decided to relocate to Ossining, New York. And so we moved to Ossining, New York, and went to school in Ossining for a very short period of time, because when it became time for my brother to be born, my mother wanted to come back, so we went from this really nice, what I called nice life to back to Chicago, and we lived at 5174 Indiana [Avenue], and we lived in a kitchenette apartment. You know, we had more than one--I remember that the kitchen was here and the--and then we had two rooms, and I remember that we would wash my brother's diapers in the, in the bathroom that was down the hall, because in those days, they were the washable diapers. And we went to Farren school [John Farren Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], F-A-R-R-E-N, was the name of the school. Speaker 1: Here on State Street, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I don't recall that we lived there for a very long time, and then we moved to 4374 Indiana, excuse me, I'm sorry, 4374 Oakenwald [Avenue], so we moved all the way east, and really remained at that side of town, went to Shakespeare elementary school [Shakespeare School, Chicago, Illinois], both my sister [Mamie Wilson] and I and then to Hyde Park High [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 640575 Speaker 1: Now, you have three--four different ven- four or maybe more different venues to talk about growing up. And we always ask this question, so answer the best you can. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I remember the smell of the Wonder Bread bakery, or something that's over on 51st. See, I know that there was--I remember the smell of that bakery, I remember the sounds of the water hydrants in the summertime on the street. I remember lots of people congregating on corners. I know that we used to go and shop and buy the excess Hostess CupCakes and Twinkies and things from that Wonder Bread, what do you call those, the resale shops. I remember that from when we lived around the 51st Street area. I remember going swimming in the summers at the outdoor park at Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Then when we moved east to 43rd [Street] and Oakenwald [Avenue], it was a place that's right by the lake [Lake Michigan], and I remember that there was an overpass where you can--it's still there--where you can walk and go directly to the lake. The sights and the smells. I remember the smell of barbecue, of things cooking, barbecue cooking, I remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because there were lots of those grills, big--not formal grills but grills where people--makeshift grills and the food cooking. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the smell of my mom's kitchen was always wonderful. There was always something in the kitchen to eat, and we woke up to the wonderful smells of bacon, and my mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] could make a certain kind of toast, and I remember that we would go in the kitchen, and our food was always there, and came home from school and it was always something wonderfully smelling in the kitchen, that, I really remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I miss that, too. Story_ID: 640576 Speaker 1: Did you start school in Highland Park [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Was it Lincoln school [Lincoln Elementary School, Highland Park, Illinois] you said? Speaker 2: Lincoln school. Speaker 1: Lincoln school, okay. Now, I guess you had to be one of the few black students? Speaker 2: There had never been one before, and no there had not been. And I think the same was--we weren't there very long, maybe six months. And the same was true when we moved to Ossining, New York, there had been no--Ossining, New York, above the Hudson River, I remember that. Speaker 1: What kind of reception did you get in school? Speaker 2: You know, it's vague, I really don't remember. I don't remember anything negative. I remember walking down the way to the school, but I don't have any--my sister [Mamie Wilson] is much better--I don't remember anything about the school. I mean I remember that it was a white school. When you think of it, it's amazing how we were able to segue from the life that we had in the South to the life in Highland Park, and I don't remember that being challenging, I remember that it was just what it was, it's what we did. I don't think that we realized that there was anything unusual about that until we came back to Chicago [Illinois] and lived at 5174 Indiana [Avenue], as I mentioned, and went to Farren school [John Farren Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] where we were really not treated very well. We were accused of being, quote, "You think you're white because you don't talk like--," we didn't at that point speak like the other kids. Even though we'd come from the South, evidently at that age, one picks up the--you know, from the year and a half or whatever we spent with Mary Lou Guckenheimer [ph.] and her family, we obviously picked up a way of speaking that was different to the ears of the kids when we came back to Chicago and living in the community in which we were living. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so my mom [Fannie Brown Wilson] had to come to school every day to pick us up, because there was violence or threats of violence, we're going to beat you up, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had to deal with bullying in that school? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did, we did a lot of that, both at Farren school and at Shakespeare School [Chicago, Illinois] we encountered a lot of bullying. Didn't think of it at that time as bullying, but that's what it is, yeah; afraid to go outside. Speaker 1: Okay. At Shakespeare now, did you finish grammar school at Shakespeare? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, I guess you had to--did you finally make some kind of adjustment with the attitudes of the students? Speaker 2: Well yes, but it never--it didn't cease, I mean even to this day, people say you don't speak the way we think you should speak, but it's just the way we speak. The whole family speaks this way. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So when you were in school, did you--I mean what subject matter did you gravitate towards, what did you like? Speaker 2: I liked tumbling. I don't remember any particular subject that I liked, but I did like going to tumbling class, and I was on the tumbling team. I do remember that, and I loved double dutch, so clearly I am not a scholar (laughter). I loved recess (laughter), and I loved the tumbling team, I remember that. Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or administrators, or people in the community that kind of, you know, had--took an interest in you? Speaker 2: I remember a wonderful teacher at Shakespeare and I thought his name was Mr. Simpson [ph.], or rather I think his name--I'm not sure, but I remember, I remember that he was--that's in grammar school--I remember that he was very positive, and I remember singing songs, "Good Morning Mr. Zip, Zip, Zip, with your hair--with your hat put on as cute as mine," or something like that. I remember, "Good Morning Mr. Zip, Zip, Zip," and I remember that it came from that room, from that--from that experience at Shakespeare elementary. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you--what kind of things did you like to do in the community, I mean at Shakespeare? Speaker 2: I mentioned to you that I've always worked, I've always had a work ethic, and I've worked since I was nine or ten. I had a cousin who came to live--for some reason I knew how to do hair, and so I would do hair for the neighborhood ladies from the time I was nine and ten and when I was fourteen I lied about my age and I got a job working in the Woolworth store [F.W. Woolworth Company] on 43rd Street and I worked there all through high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. So I wasn't very involved in high school activities because school was out at 3:15 and my bus was at 3:21, I do remember that, so I really didn't have a lot of time. I had to rush from school to get my bus, and I worked in Woolworths and I worked in the toy department and I worked on the cash register and I sold rugs and I loved it. Story_ID: 640577 Speaker 1: So where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Hyde Park. Speaker 1: Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], all right. Now, what was Hyde Park like then? Now it's an all-black school, of course, and really in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was not an all-black school at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember that there was also lots of color distinctions there. The African Americans who went there were upscale African Americans who I guess had grown up in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And though we lived at 43rd [Street] and Ellis [Avenue] and subsequent we moved from Oakenwald [Avenue] to Ellis. We were always kind of upgrading a little bit, and I remember that one of my jobs was to look in the paper to find the new places that we were going to live, or I would determine where we were going to live. And so I found this place at 4218 Ellis, a third floor walkup, which had a balcony, and so we lived there for part of my high school--I know that we lived there when I graduated Shakespeare [Shakespeare School, Chicago, Illinois], and we lived there, I believe, through most of my--through high school as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Through high school as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your father [William Wilson, Sr.] live with you? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. I'm sorry when I say we I always mean the family (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. I know, I guess he wasn't in New York or in Highland Park [Illinois] but he, so you all finally-- Speaker 2: No, but we saw him because he stayed in Chicago [Illinois] to do his job-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --because he had to stay where the work was. And he worked for Libby, McNeill and Libby's [Libby, McNeill and Libby; Libby's], that was his job. And then somewhere along the line, he took a test and got a job working for the Department of Streets and Sanitation [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation], and he worked there for, I believe forty years. But he had the two jobs, he would work the city job during the day and his job was putting asphalt in the street, and he didn't ever let his second job go because the asphalt was a seasonal kind of work. When it was--when it was snowing, when the weather was bad, he couldn't do that. So he always had his night job, and certainly, through the years, always, I was involved with helping to fix my dad's lunch, very aware that my mom's job was to fix his lunch, and he had a very short time span from the time he came from one job until he rested just a couple of hours and got up and had breakfast and went to the second, and he did that for an enormous amount of years. Speaker 1: Okay. Was your mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] still working? Speaker 2: My mother never worked once my folks became married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother became a fulltime housekeeper. And the whole reason that my father worked was to keep my mom from--worked as he did, was because he wanted us to be a family and he wanted mom to be home with the three kids. Story_ID: 640578 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject at Hyde Park? Speaker 2: Well, at Hyde Park my focus was--my sister [Mamie Wilson] was the smart one. My focus was, at the time, taking typing and shorthand and I took sewing. We had those home ec [home economics] classes, and I remembered that I liked those, a lot. And therefore when I got out of school, I was able to get a job using my typing and shorthand. And on my first job, I was able to make my clothes, because I had learned that during my years at Hyde Park. I wasn't a scholar by any means, I mean I don't remember any course that I particularly liked, I mean that I particularly focused on. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. You seem smart enough to me, but I admit, you know--now were you considered particularly pretty? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. I wasn't welcome--I didn't ever felt--I never felt welcomed at Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I felt--I mean was, as I am, I'm a color that was not in in those years. The lighter kids were the ones that were in all the clubs. It seems--I remember a lot of them were very light with good hair and braces, and the Jewish--the Jewish kids (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And by good hair you mean? Speaker 2: By good hair means--what we call good hair, a lot of hair and straight hair. And there were lots--there was a heavy Jewish contingent at the school and they all had braces, and I remember that--because a certain age that seemed to be the thing to do. And I remember that an awful lot of the African American or black or colored, whatever they were called at the time, they didn't talk to me at all, actually. I wasn't--well, high school was not a good experience for me. I couldn't wait to get out, because I didn't feel a part of it, and I felt ashamed that I didn't look like they looked, and they were not welcoming to me. Speaker 1: Okay. It seems interesting because you know, you have made a career, I mean the first part of your career was because of good looks, among other things, and you weren't considered particularly good looking in school? Speaker 2: No. No, no, no, no, nor did I have any thought of that. It wasn't until later in my life and from another part of society that I was given the confidence that you, you look great and you're a good size, and you can use that to your advantage, but it wasn't with no encouragement from my own community at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my folks [Fannie Brown Wilson and William Wilson, Sr.] never were thrilled about it either, you know, the attitude was, you know, "I saw Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson] in the paper today, but, did you miss work?" (Laughter) That sort of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. But you were involved in beauty culture in a sense because you were doing hair? Speaker 2: Yeah, you could look at it that way (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were working on people's hair, so you were concerned with that aspect of life? Speaker 2: Yes, I knew how to press and curl as it were. I knew how to do that, and I would do it for the ladies in the neighborhood and make my little money and give that to the family. And from Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], it was great because I was able to impact the look of the house. If rugs were on sale, I was able to get them, you know, whatever was--whatever was--I contributed a lot to the house in those days, and I always did that, actually. Speaker 1: Do you think you had any natural proclivity for dressing yourself? Speaker 2: I think so. I think I looked at magazines. I think my mother was stylish. You know, African American women are stylish. And I think that I probably learned a bit of that from her and then perhaps learned a bit from magazines or whatever it was I was looking at in those time and just--and I think I was creative enough to figure if I can't buy it, perhaps I can try to make it. So I remember going to fabric shows, I mean fabric stores and looking in the pattern books and actually figuring out how to make suits. I had a particularly wonderful suit, a yellow suit, that I think I wore for a couple of interviews and-- Speaker 1: That you made yourself? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well that's something. Not all high school girls are making their own clothes, you know. Speaker 2: Well, but I made them on my first job. You know I made them to--because I wanted to look and dress a certain way, because my job was working in the accounts payable department at Goldblatt brothers [Goldblatts] on State Street, and once I got there and saw how people dressed, if we couldn't afford it, of course I figured out we could--figured out how to make it. Story_ID: 640579 Speaker 1: So we got to take you back to high school for a minute, because we always ask this question. So when you were--I know you weren't really into high school that much, but when you were a senior in high school [at Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], what were your career aspirations at that time and what did you think you were going to do next when you graduated? Speaker 2: I must not think a lot about--I must not think a lot about future planning, because my focus was getting a job--my focus was getting a job and helping my--helping my dad [William Wilson, Sr.] out. My focus was not on going to college, and I don't know why, whether it's because I didn't have anybody around who inspired me, but it was really on work. You know I'd worked all the way through high school, and it was on, what can I do to get a job, so that's what I did. Immediately after high school I answered an ad and I got a job because of the skills that I had learned in high school. On the other hand my sister [Mamie Wilson] was very focused and went to Wright College [Wilbur Wright Junior College; Wilber Wright College, Chicago, Illinois] and then went to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] from which she graduated and went on to get her master's [degree]. So it's just--wasn't my focus. Speaker 1: So you had clerical skills, though, from-- Speaker 2: Clerical skills, yeah. Speaker 1: --high school, okay. So was your first job a clerical? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Yes. In the accounts payable department at Goldblatts on State Street, which was in their executive offices, it was clerical. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so-- Speaker 2: And--go ahead. Speaker 1: Well, go ahead. Speaker 2: And then in my second job at Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi], which is how I got in the advertising business, it was as an executive secretary, so it was--it was those skills that I learned. Speaker 1: Did the modeling start--well when--how did the modeling start? Speaker 2: Well, let me go back to how I got into advertising, because advertising was a field which I had not heard of. But when I was working at Com- at Goldblatts, there was a wonderful girl whose name was Inga [ph.], German girl, who came to work there and it seems to me that I'd been there two years and Inga said, "Oh, you're much too good for this place," I'm not going to state this--I mean, very German, I'm doing the wrong accent. But Inga got a job in the advertising business and when she went, she said to them, "I've got a girlfriend who needs a job too." And she asked them if they were interested in talking to me and I remembered that I interviewed with Erica Lori [ph.] at Compton Advertising, which was on 111 East Jackson [Boulevard]. I had never heard of the advertising business, had no idea what it meant and I went and I took a job and by this point I had two years of experience, plus I had my typing and shorthand and I got a job for Shepp Chartok [ph.], who was the executive TV producer. And I subsequently learned that Erica Lori had sent out a memo to the staff at Compton Advertising, and it was about three hundred people there saying, we're hiring and this--this, I think the name was black. "Doris Wilson is going to be joining us and it's black," and that's my name, D-O-R-I-S. And it was Barry Pfouts at Compton Advertising, who one day came by my cell--my desk and he says, "You're not a Doris, you're a Dori." And that's how I became Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't born Dori? Speaker 2: No. I was born Doris. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just drop the S, very easy. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So they told everybody that you were coming? Speaker 2: Yes, as my--I learned later that they sent out a memo saying we have this black person starting. So everybody was very friendly. I don't recall encountering anything negative at all. Story_ID: 640580 Speaker 1: But on this job I was working for Shepp Chartok [ph.], who was the executive TV producer. And Shepp was, again, a very wonderful liberal Jewish fellow and liked me and saw something in me and I said to him, "I want to learn what you do," because I knew that he was always going on photo shoots and on filming shoots and so it was--it was Shepp Chartok who took me on, on some of his filming for commercials. And I remember that we were at Reyeye Studio, R-E-Y-E-Y-E studio in Evanston, Illinois, and we were--because one of the accounts that I worked on, that my boss worked on at Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi] was Alberto Culver [Alberto Culver Company; Unilever]. And during those years Alberto Culver did lots and lots of TV commercials and they were for what was called (unclear) testing, so we did hundreds of commercials and the ones that would hit the air would be the ones that tested properly. But we were always in casting sessions for models with great hair. So it was on one of these pre-shooting, pre-filming casting sessions, Shirley Hamilton was there, who was a large agent in town, and Shirley Hamilton saw that I was tall and thin and said to my boss, "I'd like to send her on an audition," and I remember my boss saying at the time, "Well, let's just hope she gets it." So, I did and that's how I started in that. Speaker 2: Okay. Were you excited about that? Speaker 1: I think it was a job and it was a chance of getting more money and I'm--I'm sure that I was somewhat excited about that, and I'm not sure whether at this time Shepp Chartok was my boss because Shepp subsequently left or whether it was Jack Davis who was at this boss--my boss at that point. But I remember that I would get off from work at four o'clock, run outside and catch the bus in order to be on the--the first audition that I had was for the auto show [Chicago Auto Show]--the first job that I had was for the auto show. And so I would work to be on the floor and I'd work the five to eleven [o'clock] shift at the auto show. And because I could speak, you know, our backgrounds came in handy, I was talking about Chevrolet cars, I remember that. And during the intermissions, when we were having our breaks, I met lots of other models who said you should be doing runway work, and I did not really know what runway work meant, but I subsequently learned. And I went and auditioned, I was at 111 East Jackson [Boulevard], as I said, which was very close to State Street and Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company Building, Chicago, Illinois] was holding auditions every month for the models to do there, at that time weekly, they were called tea room shows that were in the Narcissus Room on the seventh floor of Marshall Field's. And I went on those auditions for a year before I finally got a chance to do the work, but I became involved in other things in the city that gave me the visibility to do other work. Speaker 2: Now, let me ask you, in these early days, were you the only black model out there doing these things at the auto show, for instance, were you the only black model there? Speaker 1: No, I wouldn't say I was the only black model, there were a few, because remember some of them--some of the models traveled. And certainly I wasn't--so there were other models, there weren't very many, and there weren't very many who were aggressive to want to take it to the next step, because I didn't want to do just the auto show, I wanted to do the other things that I heard about. And I remembered that there was a model, and I don't know whether or not you know her, whose name is Ann Jones, who is just extraordinary; very short, but with wonderful hair and very chiseled features. I think maybe half Indian [Native American]. And so Ann Jones was the photo model at that time because that was the look that was in for models that you couldn't really tell quite what they were. In the runway business, however, I was accepted for being different and for being tall and for being skinny and for being dark because fashion guys create--love that, you know it makes--a dark skin is better for showcasing their clothes. So what had been considered a liability for me when I was growing up became an asset. Though I will say that when I started modeling, I sent my picture to one of the major traveling shows, and they sent my picture back to me because I did not look like the look that they were--were looking for. On the other hand when the designers came in from Paris [France], I was what they were looking for. Story_ID: 640581 Speaker 1: So you started about--what year was it when you started modeling? Speaker 2: I'm thinking it was '66 [1966] or '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right-- Speaker 2: Because I started at--I started at Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi], I think, in '64 [1964] or '65 [1965], so it was--I'd been around doing what I was doing for a while. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But during that time I also became involved with another element that heavily influenced my life. Let me also say that--that while I was at Compton Advertising, and I remember this very well, there was a show called 'The Dating Game,' and we would watch the show in our house on weekends, we would all gather around the TV to watch 'The Ed Sullivan Show' and then on Saturdays, we would watch shows as well. And there was a show called 'The Dating Game,' and sitting at my desk one day, when I think my boss--I do remember that my boss was at the time Jack Davis, and Jack Davis was out of town on a photo shoot, I mean, on a commercial shoot for maybe Cap'n Crunch, or something, so that I was left in Chicago [Illinois]. And so I was sitting at my desk with nothing to do, probably had things to do, but I decided that I was going to apply for a job to be on 'The Dating Game.' And the reason that I wanted to be on 'The Dating Game' is because it would be an opportunity for me to go to Europe. If you did 'The Dating Game' shows during the week, you got a trip to San Francisco [California]. If you made 'The Dating Game' show on the weekend, you got a trip to Europe. So I sent them my picture because at this time I had pictures. And I sent them my picture and told them that I wanted to do the show and they immediately called me and asked me to come out and do one of the daytime shows, and I said, "I don't want to do a daytime show, because then I'm only going to get a trip to San Francisco. I want to do a weekend show because I want a chance to go to Europe." And so they did, they let me come out and I did the show, and I was one of three girls. And I remember that I wore this miniskirt, a suede miniskirt and black tights and clothes from a shop called Paraphernalia [ph.], which was the shop at that time. And it seems to me that the fellow asked me to describe myself, and I sang, "Tall and tan and lean and lovely," from 'The Girl from Ipanema.' Subsequently, he was smart enough to pick me. However, when I saw him I was horrified, and said, "(Makes noise) I'm not going anywhere with him." Speaker 1: Who was he (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I do know, but I shouldn't say it-- Speaker 1: I mean, what did he look like? Speaker 2: But he was--his name was [HistoryMaker] H. B. Barnum, and he was a music director, and he was short and stocky, but he did choose me. And at that time celebrities would do the nighttime show because it gave them publicity exposure, so he didn't need the trip to Europe, I needed the trip to Europe and it's my understanding that he said something to the effect, "Give the blank blank the tickets." So I got to go to Europe with a chaperone and so I came back to town and was busy trying to find somebody that could take up--pick up and go to Europe with me. And the chaperone was younger than me, I think the chaperone was--I guess she had to be twenty-one, but she was younger than me. So I went to New York [New York] and then boarded a ship and traveled across the sea and went to Rome [Italy] and then went to England and it was a wonderful experience, so it was my trip to Europe. Speaker 1: Okay. So this was the first time you were ever out of the country? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Might have been the first time that I'd been on a plane, certainly the time I'd cross the ocean on a ship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was, it was, you know, the creativity that made me apply for the show, or the aggressiveness or whatever, and I think I've kind of applied that kind of aggressiveness in life. If there's something that I want to do, I'm not shy about going after it, because I feel I can only be told no. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so when you were over in Europe, did you pay any particular interest to the fashion scene over there-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at all? Speaker 2: No, just seeing what was arranged for me. I don't remem- no, sightseeing is what I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're really not thinking of yourself as being a career model at that point, you're just having a good time? Speaker 2: No. I mean, I was involved in the scene. Let me say that though I worked an awful lot, I was never a full time model. I mean, I was dressed well on this trip. I remember there was a model whom I had met at Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company Building, Chicago, Illinois] whose name was Kathleen Tracy [ph.], a wealthy socialite, but who modeled. And Kathleen gave me my clothes to wear, because every night on the ship you'd sit at the captain's table and you'd have to wear a formal gown, and I didn't have any formal gowns. So Kathleen gave me gowns to wear. It was a wonderful experience. And everyone was very kind and very inclusive because again, I was probably attractive and they were perhaps curious and why not. Story_ID: 640582 Speaker 1: Now there was a certain point in the '60s [1960s] where it became, the media decided that dark skinned black women were going to be beautiful for some reason or held up as such and Judy Pace [HistoryMaker Judy Pace-Flood] started getting work, other people-- Speaker 2: Naomi Sims out of New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. So can you kind or just tell us how that--do you have any idea how that happened or what? Speaker 2: I think it probably all started with the black is beautiful movement. I think it started with the whole Civil Rights Movement and people becoming a little bit proud of what they were as opposed to ashamed of themselves if they didn't look like the images that were projected before us. And remember, all that we saw on TV, because there was no integration in commercials, we only saw the--we only saw the person with the white skin and the straight hair, and when there was a little bit of diversity, we saw the very light skinned girl, we couldn't tell what she was; the high yellow girl, again, with straight hair. So somewhere along with that (background noise) black is beautiful movement-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Somewhere along with that black is beautiful movement probably became, became the opening for giving a dark skinned girl the chance. And again, it's my belief that it was the white community that started this, and the African American communities went along. Speaker 1: Okay. It's a complicated kind of--I actually know some of the history of this, but I have to share it with you later, I'm not going to try to tell you a story. But were you, were you--how did you feel about the Black Arts Movement, or were you aware of it in, I guess, about '65 [1965] until-- Speaker 2: Black Arts Movement? Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Chicago [Illinois], there was quite a lot of activity around then, you know, with the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois] and projecting of a lot of black images and stuff that hadn't been projected before. This is what you, I think, you're referring to, but I don't--you probably weren't--where you used to live on Oakenwald [Avenue], that's where they had the Oakenwald theater [Oakland Square Theater, Chicago, Illinois] was, Afro-Arts Theater, and for a couple of years they did all kinds of things to promote, you know, natural hair and black you know aesthetic and that sort of thing. But at any rate that's what was, you know, kind of going on with the artists, the dancers, a lot of people-- Speaker 2: And I think that my life was really more in the mainstream community. And it was in the mainstream community because the African American community was not welcoming to me, ever, you know, not in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], not when I started modeling, because as I said when I did, and I sent my picture to Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] to do the Ebony Fashion Fair, but if you look back at the models in those days, it was only one African American model, I remember her name--looking black model. I think her name was something Springer [Terri Springer]. Otherwise, they were the very high yellow models, because again, that's--if you looked at the African American magazines, they used models that did not look as they do today. Speaker 1: Yeah, similar to the chorus line of the Cotton Club [New York, New York] or something, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. In fact, interesting, that you say that, because I just saw a movie the other day with Lena Horne back during those days, and it was the same thing, you couldn't tell what they were. In fact my nephew was watching with me and he said, "Well, they look like they're white," because I was saying, "Travis [Travis Wilson], you need to see this, this is history." One of the first full African American films, and he didn't get it. Speaker 1: Okay. I guess I was trying to make a point that the black is beautiful movement actually came out of black community. But ironically it didn't necessarily affect directly what you were doing, though it had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm aware that the black is beautiful movement came out of the African American community but I got the impression that that movement came because they were trying to get people to have--African Americans to have pride in themselves. I think there was--I don't know that that movement is what got in the African American models, I don't know. I was also the prototype for the first African American mannequin that was at Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company Building, Chicago, Illinois], which was done by the firm of Judy Niedermaier [Judith E. Niedermaier], who was subsequently a friend of mine, but I was a model brought in to--from what, you know, the images were made for those first mannequins. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a time-- Speaker 2: I think it was the whole mood of the country. Speaker 1: There was a time when all the mannequins in the stores were white. I remember that. Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Well, they were until this time (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, tell us about this. This is a very--how did that happen? How did you get to be the prototype? Speaker 2: You know I had a composite and I was chosen to do it, that's all that I can say. What happened to make Marshall Field's decide to do this, to say, we're going to have an African American mannequin, I don't know. I don't know that. I mean for me it was work and it was--and it was a job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And much of the work that I did, yes, I was the only African American doing--working there at the time. Then Judy Ross [ph.] came along as well, but Judy Ross was a different look than me. She was not dark; she was light with light eyes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 640583 Speaker 1: Well, when you came back from Europe. I guess we didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sorry. Speaker 1: --didn't get you back here, but what happened when you came back from Europe? Speaker 2: I went back to my job. I mean I took a week or ten days off to go do that. I always had a job. I was always in the advertising business. And though I worked for companies that were very kind and that they let me do my work, though I got a lot of publicity for my work, during that time fashion shows were held at noon, and they were also held at 5:30 and which was afterwards, the cocktail parties in the stores, and again, I'm talking Michigan Avenue, North Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. And so I was able to just leave work a little bit early and do those. Most of those shows were also centered around fundraisers for charitable events, and they were attended by the socialites of the city, which is why I came to know so many of the socialites of the city because they knew me as this model and certainly I stood out at the time because I didn't look like anybody else that was doing the work. That was considered glitzy and glamorous but also I think it's what started me in my community involvement. Speaker 1: Okay. Well what did you-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Pause for a second. You know I'm just concerned that it's going to become a distraction to have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I forgot I was doing it, and I'm sorry. I don't even remember when I started it. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I don't want you to be uncomfortable. Speaker 1: I forgot. I should put this--here. I don't even remember at what point I started it. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Not too long ago. Okay, thanks. Carry on. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, had you started attending Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] at this time? Speaker 2: When I was at Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi], I went to Roosevelt University, but I will tell you that I only went for a semester and at night. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were talking about your community involvement. What did you start--what did you do? Speaker 2: From the fashion shows I became involved with the movers and also from my modeling, certainly, I became involved with the movers and shakers of this--of the town. Victor Skrebneski who's a world known fashion photographer, used me for his ads, and I think it was through Victor Skrebneski and through going to a big club at the time called Maxim's [Chicago, Illinois] that I met Michael Kutza from the film festival, so I became on the board of the Chicago International Film Festival, very active in that. I remain an emeritus member today. But I also became enrolled in causes because the people whom I knew were very involved in trying to make the city a better place. People like Marge Markin who were involved in something called Focus [ph.], which was a group that had to do with the integration of life. And so I became involved for a little while with Focus. I became involved with the women's board of the--of the, I think it was the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], but it was a really long time ago, not the same Urban League that we have today. I mean it was a little bit different. So I became involved with working on charity boards. Speaker 1: In what sense, I mean, what characterized what the Urban League was doing in those days? How would you characterize it? Speaker 2: Well, I remember the luncheons and the fundraisers that I would go through. I think it was all about the integration and getting different kinds of people together is what I remember. If you have a list there of my involvements, do you have that list? That's going to tell you if I'm talking about the Urban League or somewhere there's a long list of my not for profit activities, and I remember that I kept it on there. Do you have that list? Speaker 1: I don't have it in front of me. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: But it wouldn't matter if I did because I want you to talk it. Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to make sure that I said the right thing. I believe it was the Urban League, or I think it was the Urban League. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But again, and I remember it was with [HistoryMaker] Isobel Neal and Dori Zollar and ladies--and those ladies, and I remember that we would go to meetings and then we would do something that would be a fundraiser to heighten awareness and I would--whether it'd be a fashion show or cocktail party or whatever. Speaker 1: Okay. So [HistoryMaker] Doris Zollar and Isobel Neal are always involved-- Speaker 2: And Audrey Tuggle and, and they'd been involved for as long as I can remember. I appreciate that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So-- Speaker 2: But there were as many liberal whites involved as well, that got the whole thing going. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you ever see, oh, the lady that you all lived with, what was her name? Speaker 2: Mary Lou Guckenheimer [ph.], yes. Speaker 1: Guckenheimer. Did she come back to Chicago [Illinois], or did she stay? Speaker 2: We--my family stayed in touch until her death. Story_ID: 640584 Speaker 1: How long did you work for-- Speaker 2: Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi]? Speaker 1: Yeah, Compton. Speaker 2: I worked for Compton until, I know that it was 1968. And actually it was an ad that was done--I mean, not an ad, it was an article that was done on me in the paper because remember that society--the circles in which I was traveling had not met anybody like me, and so it became newsworthy. If I would go to the events, I would be photographed because society as we know it didn't have anybody who looked like me, and I think that it was appreciated because they knew that I had worked on my on, I wasn't anybody's daughter, I didn't marry the proper person, whatever I've done, I've done on my own, which is why I think I have the recognition that I have today. But, what was your question, it was something about? Speaker 1: Oh, I was asking you how--you know when, I guess about the transition from Compton to-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh, I'm sorry. And so there was an article in the paper written on [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson and my work with the Chicago International Film Festival and the other projects with which I was involved in town, and actually, it was Al Weisman [Albert P. Weisman], who was the PR [public relations] man with Foote, Cone and Belding advertising at the time who called up and who said to me, and remember I was working quite a bit then as a model, and I had pretty much decided that I was going to move to New York [New York] to be the next big black model. I was going to follow in the steps of Naomi Sims. And Al Weisman called up and said, "We want to talk to you about coming to work for Foote, Cone and Belding." I'd not--I mean I knew that Foote, Cone and Belding was a big agency, but I said, "I don't want to do that. I'm going to be--I'm going to be a model full time." And he said, "So just, just I want you to have breakfast with somebody, I mean, when can you get together?" I think I could only get together at breakfast, because remember on my lunch hour I was doing my fashion shows, so I remembered going in to meet, who was the president of the company whose name was John O'Toole, and I remember at that time we would carry around wig boxes, you know, our wigs were in wig boxes, and I remember I had on my double eyelashes, double meaning tops and then bottoms and make up and my--and my wig case, and I went to have breakfast with John O'Toole, and he said, "You've got--at this point," he said, "I'm going to be very honest with you, you've got four years of experience in the advertising business and you're a black female and we don't have anybody like you, and certainly not anybody who's been doing this for four years." I told him that I didn't want to do--and I had TV production experience, and he said to me, "Do you want to accomplish something and really make a difference or do you want to be just another black face?" And I was just irritated by that statement. And so I took the job. And as a caveat it was said to me, "However, we will still let you model as long as you don't do anything that's conflicting to what we have." But I didn't understand that they had everything in the world, every product that I can imagine, it was one of the top five agencies in the world. So there was very little that I could do that was not a conflict except my fashion work, my runway work was not a conflict, which is why I did more and more runway work. I did get in trouble one time. Victor Skrebneski called up and asked me to do an ad--I mean I was booked for an ad through the agent and it was for Skrebneski and it was for Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.]. Well, my job at Foote, Cone and Belding, and the reason that they wanted me was that, A, I had the fashion experience and I had the TV experience, I mean that working for an ad agency, and they had a huge amount of business in Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.]. And so we formed this unit, or Foote, Cone formed a unit of us, was a writer, two producers, two TV producers, Dori, who was in charge of doing all of the casting and the fashion to make sure that the commercials looked great, and we traveled all around the country. In the winter we'd go to Florida or California, in the summer we'd shoot in Chicago [Illinois] doing commercials for Sears. So clearly I should not have been doing anything for Spiegel because that was a conflict. And I figured it's a lingerie ad and it's for Spiegel, who's going to find out. Well, it was picked up in Time magazine as being innovative and they chose my picture, and so I got called in by the chairman of the board. I said, "It's not me," and he said, "But it is you, it has your name," and I went, "(Makes noise) Okay." So, you know, I managed to get myself in little things like that. Foote, Cone was very generous to me, but they realized that my being out there was also good for them, and so I worked an awful lot, but it was really Dori Wilson of Foote, Cone and Belding. Speaker 1: Okay. What was your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was there for fourteen years, and my job was associate TV producer and casting director on the--I mean for the Sears spots, it was associate producer and casting director, and when we lost Sears over X amount of years, I don't remember how much, but I remember that--I mean how many years before we lost Sears or cut back considerably with the kinds of commercials or the volume of commercials that we were doing, I was named casting and fashion director for the agency, working on everything. Speaker 1: Okay. So you started with them in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And I left in '81 [1981] to form my own business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now when were you made casting and--was it casting and-- Speaker 2: Casting and fashion director. Speaker 1: And fashion director? Speaker 2: Oh, I can check the articles, but I would say that I had been there four years before, before I--it was probably four years after starting in '68 [1968]. Story_ID: 640585 Speaker 1: Now, I also have here that you gave fashion advice in the pages of the Chicago Defender too? Speaker 2: I did? Speaker 1: Yes (laughter). Speaker 2: That's on--who said that? Speaker 1: It was written here. Here's the advice (laughter), right here it's written. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah, from '69 [1969]. (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh. Well, somebody probably called up and asked. I wasn't doing any columns. Probably someone called up and asked an opinion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that would be guess. But also during those years, I decided that I wanted to do something on TV, and so coming from my secretarial background, I had tried calling the, the head of NBC 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois], and I don't know why I decided to do it at NBC 5, but I remembered that I called and called and I could never to the secretary, but being an old secretary myself, I knew to wait until after hours, and so I called at a certain time, five minutes after six [o'clock], or something like that, and he picked up the phone, and I said, "Hey, it's [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson, I'd love to come over and meet you," and he says, "What do you want to do?" And I said, "Well, I want to have a talk show, I want to be the next Barbara Walters," and he said, "Oh, okay." So I met with him, and his name was Sve Schubin [ph.], and I ended up with my own talk show ['Memorandum'], which was a general audience show, though it was indeed labeled community affairs but it ran on Sunday mornings on NBC, and I had fun with that for a couple of years. And then when I was offered--and Foote, Cone [Foote, Cone and Belding] gave me an afternoon off a week to film or a day off a week, I remember I filmed on Wednesdays. But somewhere else during in there, I don't remember where, but somewhere in there, again, it was based on an article that was done on me, Dori Wilson, runway model or whatever, CBS called and asked if I wanted to take--to be the sub host or the guest host for Lee Phillip [Lee Phillip Bell], who was a big name in our town who had an afternoon, sort of, you know, a little variety show ['The Lee Phillip Show'], and I got my TV experience on camera work, I mean, on camera hosting that show for two weeks while she went on vacation. Speaker 1: Now was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's now Lee Phillip--Lee Bell. Speaker 1: Was that like--was your NBC show finished at this point? Speaker 2: I believe that was before the NBC show. Speaker 1: Before the NBC show? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you already-- Speaker 2: The NBC show was in the mid-'70s [1970s], and I believe that--that I had done my guest host before that. Story_ID: 640586 Speaker 1: On WBBM [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] you were like a sub host for 'The Lee Phillip Show,' we talked about that. What happened (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I remember one of the guests was Mel Torme, I remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember who else, but I do remember Mel Torme was a guest. Speaker 1: So you would, would you fill in when she [Lee Phillip Bell] wasn't there? Did you have a regular spot on the show? Speaker 2: No. I did it for two weeks, when she was on vacation (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, for two weeks while she was on vacation, okay. So the NBC TV show was your own show? Speaker 2: Called 'Memorandum.' Speaker 1: Okay. 'Memorandum.' And who was on that show? (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went around town [Chicago, Illinois] doing things that were of interest. I remember going to the county jail [Cook County Jail, Chicago, Illinois] to do a show on the--we did lots of community organizations. As I said it was a general audience show, it wasn't all about having to do with the black community, it was Hispanics and everybody, anything that would be considered community service, you know, the not for profits. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And it was studio and sometimes location as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any particular shows that stand out now that you remember, that you--were favorite shows? Speaker 2: I can't remember that. I have some tapes, but I don't remember any main favorite. Again, it was a job, it was something that I did. My folks [Fannie Brown Wilson and William Wilson, Sr.] enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Let's see, well, now, you're doing this in the mid-'70s [1970s], right? (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Story_ID: 640587 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about starting your own business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I decided that--and I think that I had read all of the literature or propaganda that it was really easy to go to the SBA [Small Business Administration] and get a loan and start one's own business. Al Weisman [Albert P. Weisman] who is one of the all time leaders in the--in the public relations business, as I mentioned, the same one who had recruited me to come join Foote, Cone, had said, "Dori, you know everybody, you're at all of these events, you know everybody, you should go into PR [public relations]." And that was really about all that I knew about PR. And so I decided that that's what Al did and I wanted to open up a PR agency. And I remember that I applied to the SBA, learned kind of how that pro- that package was supposed to be put together, found a lady whose name was Mrs. Allen [Willia Allen] to put it together, and the only thing that I had to show them about any credibility, since I had no particular amount of money saved up, because in those days we had all the glamour, but we didn't--we weren't getting the money that Naomi Campbell and those people get today. But I got the SBA loan based on my clippings. I had a stack of clippings, and they gave it to me based on that, a little money to start my business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I did. And I started the business with really no understanding of what business was about. I thought that all of the people who encouraged me to go into business would indeed give me business. And I learned that's it's a little bit different when one does not have the Foote, Cone and Belding label underneath one's name, when it's just [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson on her own and the one--the first thing that I learned, I remember Jerry Davis [Jerry C. Davis], who was a business writer with the Chicago Sun-Times, and Jerry Davis said to me, "Dori, how could you open up a PR business, you're not Jewish." All of the big people in this town who had opened a business, and I was not going after minority work, I was not a Barbara Proctor [Barbara Gardner Proctor], I was going after the kind of work that I had been doing for all of my adult life, which was mainstream work. And so I thought those would be the people that would hire me, but unfortunately, for the most part, they would say, well we don't have any work for African Americans. And I mean that subsequently changed because my client base is not an African American base. Because, again, you know, I went with who hired me to do what I do. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was difficult to get jobs from what you're saying. How did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was difficult--it was difficult to get started because I guess one really, if one were going to be smart, one would open a business with business, but I didn't do that. Somehow I just thought that if I hung out my shingles and people knew that I knew what I was doing that I could get the work. I don't remember what my first assignment was, interestingly enough, if you're going to ask me that. I really don't remember what my first assignment was. I'll have to go back-- Speaker 1: Yeah, because-- Speaker 2: --I'll have to go back and check. Speaker 1: --I have to think like somebody took a chance-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --you know, despite the opinion of most of their colleagues? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I wouldn't say that most of the people. I think that I, that I talked to people whom I knew at the time, or the first people whom I talked to were not very encouraging, but clearly, that changed, I've maintained to keep my doors open since that time when lots of others have closed and gone by the wayside, and I'm still here. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So is there any particular kind of clientele that you have that you? Speaker 2: I have a general audience clientele. And I didn't want to open my business specializing in just restaurants or just fashion or whatever. I wanted to make sure that I had an eclectic range that would keep me interested and keep me on my--on my toes, and so it's been an eclectic range of clients. If someone were to come to me and say, "I want to take a stock public," I probably wouldn't take it. I don't--finance is not an area of mine, not a strong area. So what I say to people is if you're interested in getting the word out, if you let me know what you need to do, I could probably figure out a way to accomplish that objective. I'm not afraid, because I've also worked behind the cameras as well, so I'm very comfortable talking to media people, and I understand that a job has to be presented so that it makes them look good, and one has to do one's homework and tell the story well, represent the client well and hopefully we do that. Story_ID: 640588 Speaker 1: You've been involved with a number of big galas and events for years, right. So, this is exciting to people I know, so can you tell us a little bit about some of these? Now, I have one note here from 1971 that you presided over an event for the Mannequins Guild at the Playboy Mansion [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Oh, my god (laughter)! Yeah, I did. It was actually the first time that Hefner had let--I would go to Hefner's--to Hugh Hefner's mansion on State Parkway for brunch, Sunday brunch and movies, and I had friends who worked for the organization. And so I requested that he open up his house for a private event, and he'd not done that before. And so he opened it up for the Mannequins Guild of Chicago [Illinois], and it ended up being just a swell party. And though it was for the Mannequins Guild, which was the name of the modeling organization at that time, the girls who specialized in runway work. And the money that we raised went to the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago [Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, Illinois]. And so I do have my silver plate for raising a lot of money. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Playboy [Playboy Enterprises, Inc.] had a TV show at one time. Were you ever a-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --a guest on the TV show? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They had something called 'Playboy After Dark,' they do jazz-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And that was, I think, more Playmates. I was a Playmate once in an ad, and I remembered they had to put in an awful lot of bunny tails in my bosoms to try to make them--to try to fill out that bunny thing, but I was never--been a real life playboy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just that I knew Mr. Hefner and still do. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. What other events and stuff, you've been involved in some big ones? Speaker 2: I have been involved in big ones having to do with the Chicago International Film Festival. I did the premier of 'The Color Purple' for Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], which was kind of fun to--because I called up Oprah when she first came to town, and we became friends. One of the pictures I have is of that. We became friends and just to--always been a strong admirer of hers, but whatever the clients want me to do then that's, that's what we do. I mean, if indeed a client wants me for events, we do events, whether it be galas or whether it be the opening of medical offices for Quentin Young, which we were hired to do for Humana hospital [Humana Inc.]. Whatever it is that we're--I even did a grocery store opening for Dominick's [Dominick's Finer Foods]. So we do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had the famous Dr. Quentin Young, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. We do what we have to do that have to do with getting some word of--the word out in the community of what one's doing; lots of boutique openings we've handled. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The opening of--the reopening of the Carson Pirie Scott [Carson Pirie Scott and Co.; Carson's] in the Evergreen store [Evergreen Plaza, Evergreen Park, Illinois], we were hired to do that. And in order to do that we came up with the concept of bringing in a celebrity. And so we did bring in a celebrity whose name is Ann Jillian and another one whose name is Arlene Dahl. I wanted people who were fashionable and recognizable, and we wanted to do something that would tie in with the community, so we did the opening in conjunction with the Little Christ Hospital [Christ Community Hospital; Advocate Christ Medical Center, Oak Lawn, Illinois] and Little Mary hospital [Little Company of Mary Hospital and Health Care Centers, Evergreen Park, Illinois], both of which are out in the audience stirv- served by the Carson Pirie Scott in the Evergreen community, which was very big at the time we did it, you know that community has--the store is not the same as it was, but it was a big deal at the time. And that's what we seem to do. We seem to do things that are a big deal at the time and so it's very creative and innovative. Speaker 1: Is there-- Speaker 2: All of that changes with time. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there a biggest event that you can think of that you were involved in? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Or the most exciting event? Speaker 2: I consider each of them exciting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Certainly things having to do--I mean Oprah was exciting because of all of the people who came in. And Oprah is exciting, certainly. But we've done lots of them. I might not have them immediately to thought, but we've done a lot of them. Story_ID: 640589 Speaker 1: You say you reached out to Oprah when she came to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And gave her a call, that's about 1983, I guess or '82 [1982], '83 [1983]? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: I guess. I think so. Yeah, because it was an 'A.M. Chicago' show when she came-- Speaker 2: She came here to do the 'A.M. Chicago' show, and I called her up to welcome her, and we subsequently became friends, and I remember at the first luncheon that I had with her, which was at a place called Crickets in the Tremont Hotel [Tremont Chicago Hotel, Chicago, Illinois], we had spoken on the phone, but I was in for lunch one day and Jon Anderson from the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] was in for lunch and he was lunching at the next table with Oprah, and he said, "Oprah, do you know Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson]?" And she goes, "Dori," and I go, "Oprah, we've chatted on the phone but we've not met." So we subsequently set up a lunch and at that first lunch, she said to me, which is in Kitty Kelley's new book ['Oprah: A Biography'], "I need an agent, do you have somebody whom you want to recommend?" And I recommended Jeff Jacobs [Jeffrey D. Jacobs] and called Crickets to bring over a phone that day and called him right on the spot saying, "I want you to meet my friend Oprah." She went over to meet him that day and the rest is history. They had a longtime relationship that made them both extremely wealthy. Speaker 1: Okay. I'll say. So, now, you were interviewed by Kitty Kelley for the book, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any insights on Oprah Winfrey you can share with us that people might not be familiar with. I know she has a show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] and everybody seems like they know her, but what do you know-- Speaker 2: I don't know that I know anything that hasn't been written or hasn't been said. I will tell you something that impressed me. I knew Oprah, we would go laughing together, we'd go to exercise class together, when doing our exercises, we'd just snicker and have a good time. I remember one day Oprah asked if I want to--she was doing a speech at Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], and she had not been in town that long, and she picked me up in a car and she was putting on her panty hose as she was in the car, her stockings, whatever, just very casual and relaxed and we were chit chatting and gossiping and we get to Operation PUSH, and I go sit someplace in the middle of the room and Oprah gets up and starts talking and I remember I was so stunned because her ability to speak publicly was just fascinating to me. She came out with this different voice and then when she finished, she'd say "Yeah, girl, let's get--," you know, it's back to girly chit chat. I was so impressed with her ability, and I remember her words saying to me, "Oh, yeah, you know, it's nothing," she says, "I really feel I'm destined for greatness." And I remember that because she took it as though it was just something that was going to be. It was going to happen and she was just going to live with it. Very unimpressed with--I remember one day she had a check in her purse which she had forgotten to put in the bank, and I think she'd had it for a number--for a while, it was three hundred thousand dollars, and she just, "Oh, well, I guess I should put this in the bank." I was impressed with that. Very smart, very aware of what's going on. She--Oprah had wanted to go someplace to exercise and I had called up a friend of mine who owns a spa in Chicago called the Heartland [Heartland Spa, Gilman, Illinois] or right outside Chicago, and Oprah had wanted to go and exercise someplace, but she also had had some talk at the studio about somebody wanting her show. I won't say who it was, but somebody who really wanted the show, it was a husband and wife team at the time, and they sort of felt that there was going to be a morning show, they really should have had the morning show, and management brought in Oprah for the show, so they were not very pleased, a very visible couple. And the talk--the suggestion had been made when Oprah goes on vacation, perhaps this couple would sit in on her show. And I remember suggesting to her, "I wouldn't have that couple sit in on your show because you know they really want your audience. Why don't you have them tape your shows so that if you're not there you can just tape your shows?" She thought it was a great idea and she went back and said to them, "I want to tape my shows while I'm away." Well, it was while she was away at the Heartland that [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones was in town, tuned into 'A.M. America'--saw--'Chicago' ['A.M. Chicago'], saw one of her reruns and that's how she got to audition for 'The Color Purple.' That was--I felt good about that. Story_ID: 640590 Speaker 1: Now, have you ever considered acting at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay, all right. Speaker 2: You know what I've not considered anything that's going to kind of take me out of my space. So let's go back to the NBC thing. When I did my little show, my weekly show ['Memorandum'], that I taped one afternoon, NBC offered me to go to another market and get training, because you know to--because I was not a journalist, and you normally start off in smaller markets before you come--like Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] came from the Carolinas or whatever, and I didn't want to do that because my parents [Fannie Brown Wilson and William Wilson, Sr.] were here, my whole history was here and I didn't want to go to--I didn't want to start fresh. So I haven't--I didn't want to do what one would have to do to pay one's dues. Speaker 1: Okay. To be actually a personality on-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --on TV, okay. All right. Speaker 2: In retrospect it would have been a smart thing to do, but I was already settled here, and just--had a job that I liked and, known in the community and involved in the community and just didn't--just didn't want to take a risk. I'd have gone to Keokuk, or someplace like that. I'm being silly when I say Keokuk. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So-- Speaker 2: That's in Iowa. Speaker 1: Okay. I didn't know where it was (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Well, you know what, and I didn't really know, but Johnny Carson used to always talk about, "Oh, where are you from, Keokuk?" He would--anyway it's a little joke that I'm obviously making only to myself. But I should say that I wasn't comfortable going into a small market where I was not--where I didn't know anybody, had no roots. Story_ID: 640591 Speaker 1: You've basically been in this--in the public relations business for a long time? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, since 1981, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. It says here one--that you acted as Beverly Heard's publicist in Chicago [Illinois]--in Mel Reynolds trial or something, is that true? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was it-- Speaker 2: She was simply a client. A lawyer called up and asked if, if I had heard about the, Beverly Heard and certainly it was very big on the news and would I want to represent her, you know, as a client, and so I go--it's like a lawyer, I took the case and got on the 'Larry King' ['Larry King Live'] and got her on 'Oprah' show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] and got her a lot of publicity and then didn't wish to speak with her anymore. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But I did the job of getting her side of the story out. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's an aspect of public relations I think a lot of people don't think about necessarily, that someone is in a controversy, you know, needs to be shepherded through, I guess, public appearances? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Any other people that you can think of that you, you know, performed their service for that you can tell us about? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. A lot, sometimes I don't tell the names, let's just put it that way. Sometimes I don't. You know, our job is behind the scenes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And yes, there have been other high profile things with which I've been involved, but for the most part, I don't--I don't want to talk about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any other aspects in public relations that we may not think about that you do, even though you don't tell us for who, but just-- Speaker 2: Well, I think that people--that hopefully most people know that for many of the high profile things that you read about in the paper, there really is somebody behind it. Hopefully, directing, certainly steering the person. And I think that public relations has become a very popular thing for people as well as companies. One thinks about it in terms of companies, but now there is a publicist behind an awful lot of high profile people attempting to direct the image that's put out there. And sometimes one has to be hired to deflect a negative image as well. If there's a negative image then we will come in and deflect that image. Speaker 1: Okay. I often wondered when I watch television when I hear a story, is this really news or is this, you know, or is it. You know, is it really something that's really that newsworthy or how did it get on the news, you know? Speaker 2: Well it gets on the news by somebody determining that this is newsworthy, and newsworthy does not mean that it's serious news in terms of a bridge is falling, it means newsworthy is that somebody that would catch someone's interest or that people would like to know about. Is there something in this story that people would like to know about, that they'd like to be aware of. Yeah. Speaker 1: Human interest stories and such, okay. Speaker 2: However, I will say to you that some of them I see on TV and I wonder why is this of interest to me? There's one in Chicago about, you know, the Drew Peterson, I think that that received much, much, much--too much publicity, in my opinion, because I got tired of hearing about it. But obviously somebody felt that it was newsworthy. It's not a case that I would handle. I couldn't handle anything if I totally was opposed to what I'm publicizing. Speaker 1: Okay. He's a police officer that killed his wife [Kathleen Savio] suppos- was accused of-- Speaker 2: He's accused of it. Speaker 1: And has a kind of suspicious history of other wives being-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --you know, disappearing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. And he seems to have thought that his opening a door should be on the news and putting a motorcycle on eBay should be on the news. It's not of interest to me, but maybe it's of interest to someone, or at least those people making the decisions as to what should be on the news thought it might have been. People have become celebrity these days for the strangest things, you know, like the Kardashians and Paris Hilton, with whom I've worked, by the way, Paris Hilton, and I found her to be just adorable. But-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I would-- Speaker 2: --but celebrities are not necessarily celebrities anymore because they've done anything great. Sometimes they just become celebrities by doing things that are outrageous or by using the media, you know, being at a lot of places. And the Internet has made it possible for one to build a celebrity name, as well. Speaker 1: Yeah, just last night someone was commenting that they--I didn't know who the Kardashians were, and they said, well, they're famous for being famous. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I still don't know who they are, but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Well, their father [Robert Kardashian] was a Kardashian in the O.J. murder case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]. Their father was the lawyer. The stepfather is Bruce Jenner [Caitlyn Jenner], the Olympic, you know the Olympic guy. But, again, you know, when I've read their stories, it seems to be that they became famous because out with Paris Hilton and got their pictures taken and they're very attractive girls. Story_ID: 640592 Speaker 1: Now have you ever worked for any candidates, political candidates? Speaker 2: No, not as a paid person, no, not at all. Speaker 1: Okay, but as a volunteer? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Were you involved in the Harold Washington campaign back in the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Not for pay, but certainly I was for him. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I wondered? Speaker 2: Yeah. Certainly, I was for him and worked with him once he became in office because he knew that I was for him, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, I was wondering if you did anything significant to help him, you know, or-- Speaker 2: I don't remember other than supporting him personally and, you know, and giving money. I never did an event for him. I did an event for Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], I've done multiple events, personal events for Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] and will probably do one for Governor Quinn [Pat Quinn], but not as paid, it's Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson] doing them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Breakfasts, sponsoring events. Speaker 1: As a professional, like looking at say the Harold Washington's image and stuff, would you have--do you think he managed his image well? Speaker 2: I think some of the things that happened at the time were not necessarily the best for him, but I don't recall it being the managing of his image. I think that when Harold Washington came in office and there was all of this groundswell from all of the African American politicians, this is our turn. And I remember them saying to Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak], we're going to cut your legs off. I don't think that one announces to the enemy what one is going to do. I think that there were an awful lot of smart people who were around at the time who subsequently fell really quickly because they didn't play the game as I think they should of. It was so much that we felt were entitled as opposed to we're going to be strategic in our thinking and we're going to go from here to here can't make that jump. I wouldn't have recommended that they do it the way they did, but then nobody asked me. Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems to be some tension nowadays, I know, there was a conflict between Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] and [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley as to whether Barack Obama needs to announce a black agenda. Was that similar to what you're talking about? Speaker 2: I don't know because I don't know exactly what, what--I'm not really up on--I know that Obama has taken some heat, but--I don't know about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just have trouble with the whole, with the whole entitlement. I think that we're all entitled to an equal opportunity, a fair chance, but I don't think that we're entitled to something just because we're black other than the opportunity to compete openly for that work. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, what are you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black, let me say, black or Latin or Hispanic or Asian, or whatever. I just think that the opportunity is what we need. And then we can prove ourselves. But I think that's true of whites too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They need to prove themselves as well as opposed to just getting it because they're entitled. Story_ID: 640593 Speaker 1: What are you working on now and, or can you talk about what you're working on now and what are your plans for your organization [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois], do you plan to--are there other plans for it continuity beyond your directorship of the, or your agency? Speaker 2: I think about that but I really have made no plans. Mine is a very small company, and I keep it that way with only two other people, and then I hire freelancers as need be, because I don't want to be stuck with overhead, and I don't want to be responsible for someone else's life, if indeed something happens. I run my business so that I have a lot of smaller accounts as opposed to one huge account so that if something happens to that account, heads are going to roll because I experienced that in the advertising business. I've watched other PR [public relations] firms spend all of their emphasis in one account--on one account, and if something happens their gone. I don't want to be in that position. I know that I should think about what's going to happen when I pass on, but I haven't gone that far. With regards to the future and what I want to do, I want to continue to do the best I can and continue to be aggressive and going after work. One has to constantly sell oneself. I found that people forget, even though there is an impressive body of work that I've done, one has to always remind people, this is what I do. Certainly, I've made a couple of mistakes in my life. There's only one really big one that I can think about, and I think that it was really in working with The HistoryMakers. It was not handled as I would like to have it--been handled, but there were some things that happened that were out of the control of all of us at the time. But in retrospect that's probably the only big mistake that I can think of. Speaker 1: What was it (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, I think that it was the concept that was new, and I think that at the last minute an awful lot of people were invited to attend the opening event, which was at the prestigious Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And they came at the last minute, and it was a larger number than we knew was going to be coming, and so it was more people than we had space or that we were anticipating. But I guess it was because people were thrilled about the concept of The HistoryMakers, though not able to afford the ticket price, but once indeed they were invited to come as guests of The HistoryMakers, and everybody came and they didn't necessarily let those of us who were running it know that they were coming. So, that's what I mean. But certainly the concept has always been one that is of interest to me and Julieanna's [Julieanna Richardson] work, I've worked with Julieanna in her film capacity before. And she had worked on something that I did for the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] that was one of the events held at the opening of the Harold Washington Library [Harold Washington Library Center, Chicago, Illinois]. I was on the board of the library for ten years. And so I was familiar with Julieanna's work and her filmmaking abilities. And I was thrilled that she called me in to work on this concept. But it was one of those things that kind of just got out of control because the community wanted it but didn't let us know. Speaker 1: Okay. I suppose that would happen every now and then. I know I was at one event where Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] showed up kind of impromptu. We didn't know he was coming. Speaker 2: Well, Jesse Jackson is one person. When you have three or four hundred showing up impromptu it becomes a problem. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what I mean. Speaker 1: All right. That's one of the questions we normally ask. If you look back over everything you've done to date, what would you do differently, but that's--in that instance, there was something you could have done to have prevented that, you're saying? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know that I could have, because I think, I mean, I'm sure that there is something that I could have done, though I don't exactly know quite at the moment what. Yeah, yeah, I think that, you're probably right. I think when we--when I arrived at the event and saw that there were three or four people--hundred people other than we anticipated, I should have just opened the doors and invited everybody to come in. Instead, I think that the people who were working for me, that my direction was not appropriate, my direction was, well, we have to make sure that their name is on the list and if we--well, we should have just forgotten about the list and just said for people to go in. The problem was that we had people who had paid for seating and who we had to assign seats to. And then we have a large contingent who had been invited complimentary who wanted to sit where they wanted to sit and so it was a problem. Story_ID: 640594 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too. When you think about this community that you grew up in, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I'm very concerned about the community that--the young community that's, that's in some of the Chicago [Illinois] African American neighborhoods that appear to not see a way out of those neighborhoods. I'm concerned when I drive through communities and I see just throngs of young men on the corners with their pants hanging down so low. I'm concerned at the dropout rate that is in Chicago Public Schools, and I don't know what is going to inspire a change, but I think that some directive should be given. When I was in school, we had something called truant officers who would go around and sort of make sure. When I was in school it seems to me that this whole idea of it takes a village was a little more active than it is now. I think that now the, the drugs and the guns and the violence that's coming out of our community is horrific, and I think that it makes people not want to get involved and not want to help. And I cannot for the life of me figure out how we can get a stealth, is the word stealth missile to go in a doorway over in Iraq or Iran and we can't stop the drug problem, I can't understand it. Story_ID: 640595 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done at this point and you're still working and you're, you probably--do you intend to work--keep on working as long as you can? Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm a work in progress. Speaker 1: Okay. Not a--you're not saying, well, I'm going to retire at this age? Speaker 2: People ask me that all the time, "When are you going to retire?" Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who says I have to? I work for myself. I'm not working for a corporation that says at a certain age--as long as I feel that I can still keep my clients happy, as long as they're paying me and they feel I'm able to do my job then I want to work. I cannot imagine myself just sitting home eating bonbons or whatever it is that one does. I just couldn't do that. And as involved as I am in my business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois], I am in the community as well. So, and I maintain that. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite cause in the community right now that you--which you hold the dearest? Speaker 2: The Harris Theater for Music and Dance [Joan W. and Irving B. Harris Theater for Music and Dance, Chicago, Illinois] is probably one of the causes that I hold dear to me because I think that there's an awful lot of education that comes through the arts, you know, through music and dance, and I love what the Harris--the potential for the Harris Theater and what it's done so far, you know, I like that. Story_ID: 640596 Speaker 1: What today, when you look back on what you've done would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: In terms of work I guess. My legacy, I'm hoping is going to be--I didn't tell you, but I'm raising a nephew who's sixteen, and hopefully, that's going to be my legacy. I hope my legacy will be that, that I did a good job for a lot of people, and I did it well. I mean, I'm known for the ability to work hard and get a job done. And I don't know quite what the legacy would be. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what you were saying about your concerns for the community, I mean, how does that translate to your, you know, nurturing of your nephew? Speaker 2: Travis [Travis Wilson] has been with me since he was ten. He just had his sixteenth birthday party and I do everything that I can to expose him to a different kind of life than he experienced before he came to live with me. I am his legal guardian. And I try to stress on him some things that I think are important, do what you say you're going to do when you say you're going to do it, be on time, work hard, do your best, nobody owes you anything, that sort of, you know, you're not entitled to anything other than a fair chance. Speaker 1: Okay. What's he interested in right now? Speaker 2: He's interested in girls, he's interested in soccer, I mean, he's interested in sports. He's inquisitive, he likes to read, but he likes to read what he likes to read. This morning it was a book on snakes as opposed to maybe what I would like for him to read like his math book. Story_ID: 640597 Speaker 1: Your parents are no longer with us, correct? Speaker 2: No, no. My mom [Fannie Brown Wilson], my mom died, I think it's been fourteen years ago, and my dad [William Wilson, Jr.] died ten years ago. Speaker 1: Now, did they--well, they had a chance to see you, you know, reach a level of success. How did they feel about your career? Speaker 2: Well, I was always Doris at home. I was never Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson]. I was always Doris. And I, you know, I was simply their daughter who came home on weekends and worked in the garden or did the laundry or did whatever, what had to be done. But I think that they were proud--though my father always said to me, "I can't understand why you quit a job to go work for yourself," because my father's ethic was, you stay with a job, you get the benefits, and he's probably right in that, because one doesn't have the same benefits, I mean, I don't have benefits like he had when he retired from the Department of Streets and San [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation]. You know, he knew how to take care of himself well, probably better than I. Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets about starting your own business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No. I have regrets about some of the--I have regrets that I didn't--you know, it's that old if I knew then what I know now sort of thing, so. It's called life, I guess. Story_ID: 640598 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that I need to ask you that, that we haven't covered today? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I'm comfortable with it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, one last quick question and that is, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson] was good and kind and did her best to help others. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much for sharing. Speaker 2: Thank you, I appreciate it. Story_ID: 640599 Speaker 1: We're at a party at the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois]. That's my mom in the center in the red, my mom, Fannie Wilson [Fannie Brown Wilson], and her sister, my Aunt Dorothy, Dorothy Simpson [Dorothy Brown Simpson (ph.)] to the left. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my nephew, Travis [Travis Wilson], who is--I've been his guardian since he was ten. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That's me with Scottie Pippen, a client at the time and a wonderful fellow. Speaker 2: Great ballplayer. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That's my dad, William Wilson [William Wilson, Sr.], my dad. Handsome fellow. Speaker 2: Do you know when that was taken? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: I'm not sure when. I think it was in the '80s [1980s]. It was somebody's graduation. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sideways. Whatever it is, Tom [Thomas Jefferson], you look at the dimensions and you take whichever dimension is greater and put that horizontally. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: That's my brother, Bill Wilson [William Wilson, Jr.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And also, it's very, very helpful in the process that you put them in the center each time. You don't switch like one's left to center, the next one's right of center. Speaker 2: So just lined with those two things. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Whatever reference point you want to use. Speaker 2: Bill Wilson. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's with my mom at a big fashion show that I did, and she was thrilled that she was able to see the fashion show. I wasn't in the show. I produced the show for a client. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Take it off that paper. Speaker 2: Yeah, take it off the paper. Or at least fold it up from the bottom, fold it up. Oh, I don't know. Speaker 1: That's Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson] and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]. Speaker 2: About what year, do you know? Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I don't recall the year. Do you want me to check the back? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Dori with my mom--I'm sorry, forgive me, my mom at a fashion show that I had produced and she came. She was a proud mommy. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: That's Dori with--the one with his hand on me is Graziano who's from a restaurant here in Chicago [Illinois]. Next is the world famous Victor Skrebneski, with the glasses and to the long hair is-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You can keep talking. Speaker 1: Okay. Michael Kutza, founder and director of the International Film--Chicago International Film Festival. Want me to start over? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Your description is somewhat independent of the process of me snapping the photo, so as long as it's on tape that's fine. Go ahead, next. Speaker 1: Well, I sort of slurred it. Oh, that's just a picture of the--that's just of me fishing. I love to go fishing, and I love to go fishing on the lake [Lake Michigan]. So I was fishing one day for lake perch, sitting on 67th [Street] and the lake. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Have you gotten your nephew interested in fishing at all? Speaker 1: Well, he's now decided that it's violent (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh. Put it back up. I'm not done yet. Speaker 1: That it hurts the fish. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Did you catch anything? Speaker 2: Yeah, little lake perch. Nothing much. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: That's with Senator Kennedy, his sister, Caroline, I mean, Caroline Kennedy. Let me start over. Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], Caroline Kennedy, my friend Martin (unclear) [ph.], who's in the back, Dori and Mrs. Ted Kennedy [Victoria Reggie Kennedy]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: I believe that's in the late '60s [1960s] and that's Dori at a fashion show where I was asked to escort Mayor Daley down the aisle and that one was picked up in Time magazine. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: And that's Dori and Michael Kutza with our--from the film festival with our current mayor, Richard M. Daley. The other was Richard J. Daley. I don't know whether I said that, but I should of. Speaker 1: Well, they'll know, one's got hair and one doesn't. (Laughter) We're going to have Richard W. Daley in there. Speaker 2: Yeah. And that's a picture from Winona, Mississippi, and we were on the property of--Mr. and Mrs. Burns' [ph.] property. We had a little one room shack there with an outdoor bathroom. That's where I lived. And that's the taller one is my sister, Mamie [Mamie Wilson], the other one's me. Speaker 1: Out in the Piney Woods [sic.]. Speaker 2: Yep. And I think we're going to get into a series of modeling shots now. Just a photo shoot. I know it was done by Richard Krueger, K-R-U-E-G-E-R. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: What particular ad? Speaker 1: I don't remember, unless they gave me copies. I don't remember what it was for. Sorry. Speaker 2: I know it was from--it was by Skrebneski, but I don't know what it was for. I don't think it's from the Virginia Slims shoot, but I'm not sure. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: Not sure. We would do photo shoots and then we would be given copies of them, and I don't remember what it's from. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Got it. Next. Speaker 2: I know it's by Skrebneski, don't know what. That's probably enough. Story_ID: 640600 Speaker 1: My name is [HistoryMaker] Gwendolyn Quinn. I'm the interviewer today for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers]. The videographer is Scott Stearns and over--observing today is Courtney Shareef. We're gonna do some basic warm up questions that we did before. Can you state your full name and spell it out, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson, D-O-R-I, W-I-L-S-O-N. Speaker 1: What is your date of birth? Speaker 2: October 15th [1943]. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Owner of a public relations firm [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois], entrepreneur, I guess. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: July 16th, 2017. Speaker 1: Okay, where are we at this present time? Speaker 2: In the office of Julieanna Richardson at 1900 S. Michigan [Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 640601 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Probably French fries, I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I do, interestingly enough. Either purple or green. I have two. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Well, I think I appreciate all of them. I guess spring would be my favorite (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Love Cancun [Mexico] and Jamaica. Speaker 1: Do you have a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So maybe the answer to that is, no. (Laughter) I like a lot. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: We can do that, seems to be what I say a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or, let's try it. Story_ID: 640602 Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna go into your family history. We're just gonna focus first on your mother's side of the family. So what is your mother's full name, and can you spell it out, please? Speaker 2: Fannie, F-A-N-N-I-E, Laura, L-A-U-R-A, Mae, M-A-E, Brown [Fannie Brown Wilson]. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your mother's date of birth? Speaker 2: August 18th--no, August 19th, I'm sorry, August 19th, 1918. Speaker 1: Where was your--where was your mother born? Speaker 2: Well, I think she was born in the Delta [Mississippi Delta], outside Winona, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, where did she grow up? Speaker 2: In Winona, Mississippi. Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: Lovely, kind, gentle, soft. Speaker 1: What was your mother's occupation? Speaker 2: A homemaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a--she worked as household help when we were in the South, and when she worked, though, once she did get a job at Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], and she was so excited that she got a job working at the counter at Woolworths, which was right down the street from my office. But her occupation would certainly be housekeeper, homemaker. Speaker 1: Okay, how far back can you trace your ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Not very far. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you know about your mother growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I know that her father was hanged, and--because he supposedly looked at a white woman on the street. And my mother and her sister, my Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Brown Simpson (ph.)], were quite young. And I know that my mother's mother, my grandmother, died at an early age of, I believe, pneumonia. And I think my mother was like six or seven, and have heard her say that, she didn't like to talk about it a lot, that she had a kind of a rough town--rough time growing up, being tossed from relative to relative. Speaker 1: Was this publicized about your grandfather? Speaker 2: I, I don't know. I haven't any records. Speaker 1: You haven't any records of it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: The story which is told through your, your mother. Speaker 2: And my aunt. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know why your mother and your Aunt Dorothy were separate--separated in the early part of their--early years of their life? I know your Aunt Dorothy attended school in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 2: Right. And my mother did not, and I don't really know why. I--my Aunt Dorothy was the oldest. More than likely, they could not afford for both of them to go, or the eldest of the two. And I just know that she went to some, some school in St. Louis. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know how long that was? How many years that was for? Speaker 2: I don't. I could find out, but I don't know. I, I didn't get the impression it was for any more than like three of four. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I'm not, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: You mentioned previously that your mother and your auntie suffered as children. Can you explain that? Speaker 2: Well, in that both of their parents were, were deceased and that their parents were gone at a early age. And I believe it was--it's a two year difference between them. So I think they were like six and eight or seven and nine. And they were tossed from relative to relative, is what I mean by suffered. It wasn't like they grew up in a home. They grew up with whomever could take care of them for a while. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about your mother's cousin, Molly [ph.]? Speaker 2: Cousin Molly? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Cousin Molly lived in St. Louis, and I remember visiting Cousin Molly. I remember it being very, very hot in St. Louis. I remember she was roly poly, had a great laugh and was a magnificent cook. Speaker 1: Okay, what do you remember about your grandmother on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I remember nothing. As I said, she died when my mother was six. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: So I don't remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Remember anything, okay. Speaker 2: --anything other than the stories that I've heard. And, and because they were not pleasant memories, my, my mother and my Aunt Dorothy didn't go into detail about her. Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me anything else about any members of your mother's side of the family, any other aunts or cousins or anything like that? Speaker 2: Well, there were cousins. I remember Aunt Mamie [Mamie Brown], and Aunt Mamie lived in the big house on the hill. And I know that she had a son who had some mental issues, and his name was Willie [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember knowing for a while Aunt Mamie's mom. She was called grandma [Wilson's maternal great-grandmother, Bettie Brown]. And I remember her being bedridden when I met her, and she had the most magnificent white bonnet that was kept perfectly wife and ironed beautifully out of linen and very pretty white linen clothes. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And, and she was called great-grandma, and that's all I remember. And I don't remember very many years because I left the South when I was quite young. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and she was deceased at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, so did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I remember we had a cousin, Essie [ph.], who lived--you know, I was told Cousin Essie lived up north, and I subsequently met her. She lived in New York. And then there was Aunt Molly--I mean Cousin Molly, as I mentioned. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Cousin Molly had a daughter whose name was Lydia [ph.]. And we would call her, Lydabee [ph.]. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Lydabee, why? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay, that was just her nickname. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So did your mother share any other stories about her growing up in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Just that she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) during the times of the '30s [1930s], and-- Speaker 2: Just that she worked very hard. And I remember, because they were--you know, the, the movie is 'The Help.' And when I saw 'The Help,' it very much reminded me of what my mother said she went through, my mother and Aunt Dorothy. My mother would tell me that she would work a whole week, like from, from early morning until night and cook the food and, and she would get a dime. I remember that. That it was just awful. My mother was a wonderful cook though. So (laughter) if that's where she got that cooking ability, then, then so be it. But I think they worked pretty hard. But they were--my mother, nor my Aunt Dorothy, were ever angry about what they'd been through. They--it was just accepted as this is how it was. Story_ID: 640603 Speaker 1: What do you remember about Mississippi? Speaker 2: I remember having a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know you stayed there until seven or eight years old. Speaker 2: I remember having a good time. I remember that we ran around the neighborhood. I remember the freedom. I remember the good weather. I don't remember the bad weather. I know that we lived in a little shack outside Mr. and Mrs. Burns' [ph.] house because that's where--my mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] worked for Mr. and Mrs. Burns. I remember we had an outhouse. I remember there was just one lamp in the room that had--from the top of the ceiling that had a long cord. So it must have been connected somehow outside. And, and I remember that there was a lake nearby or a little pond and that we would go fishing in the pond. I remember one day, we were by the pond, and a black moccasin went right by me. I remember that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because snakes were very prevalent in the South and certainly in the warm weather. I don't remember the snow. I don't remember the bad weather at all when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember that we walked quite a distance to school. School was in an area that was called Churchill, and I remember that we walked up this hill which seemed like a long ways to school. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the name of the--what school was that at the time? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't even-- Speaker 1: Oh, can't remember (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) remember. But I remember that our professor or our teacher was Mr. Winbush [ph.]. I guess it was Winona grammar school. This was in Winona, Mississippi. I guess it was just the Winona grammar school. Story_ID: 640604 Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna talk about your father's side of the family. Can you tell me the full spelling of your father's name and spell it out, please? Speaker 2: William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N [William Wilson, Sr.]. And I know very little about my father's family. I know that they came from Uniontown, Alabama [sic.]. I know that he had a sister, Sara [Sara Jones (ph.)], and Sara lived in St. Louis [Missouri] or Memphis [Tennessee], perhaps, and then he had another sister who lived in New York. And we only saw them--I, growing up, only saw them a few times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, again, my father was separated from his sisters at an early age, though they certainly--oh, the other sister was Augusta. And it is, after Augusta, that my sister, Mamie, whose name--Mamie's middle name is Augusta. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Mamie Augusta Wilson [Mamie Wilson] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Augusta. Okay. Now, what is your father's birthday? Birth, the date of his birth? Speaker 2: My father was born September 5th or 6th, 1913. Speaker 1: And he was born in Alabama, you said? Speaker 2: Uniontown, Alabama. Speaker 1: But he was raised in Arkansas, correct? Speaker 2: Did I say Arkansas? I'm sorry. Cut that. That's wrong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uniontown, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's where he was born (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did I say before? Speaker 1: You said Alabama, I believe. Speaker 2: Oh, I should have said Arkansas, forgive me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So he was born and raised in Arkansas? Speaker 2: No, he was not. He was born there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my father said that he got a job on the road early, when he was like fourteen, and traveled around. And I've only heard of his life once he arrived in Mississippi. But I know that he worked on the railroads, and probably that was during the time of the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Works Projects Administration]. So he was put to work at an early age. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And though my father didn't have--I mean had very little formal education, he was really quite smart. And he read all the time, just loved to read the papers. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he read books as well? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Just--okay. How would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I shouldn't--well, magazines. No, we didn't read books, but we read magazines. He loved the papers, and the--both the majority papers and the Chicago Defender, and whatever he'd get his hands on, and Ebony and Look and Life, the magazines of the times. Speaker 1: How would you describe your father? Speaker 2: Tall, elegant, very, very handsome, kind, a very strong gentleman who worked very hard to keep his family together once we got together. He worked very diligently to keep us together. He worked forty, forty years he worked two jobs so that my mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] did not have to work once we came up to the North to meet my dad. Speaker 1: Okay, what was your--I know your father at that early point in his life at fourteen, he was working on the railroad. But I know he held several other positions. What was his other occupation? Speaker 2: Well, when my father came to Chicago [Illinois], he worked for Libby, McNeill and Libby's [Libby, McNeill and Libby; Libby's], which is a company that made canned goods. And then he worked for the Department of Streets and Sanitation [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation] for the majority of his life. But though it was a seasonal job. So in the winters, he had off because he couldn't work in--doing the tar that he did in the streets. And so it was that time--it was because his job was seasonal that he got a second job at Libby, McNeill's, which was, indeed a full time job. Speaker 1: I know you mentioned that-- Speaker 2: And by full time, I don't mean that. I mean it was not a seasonal job. Speaker 1: Okay, I know that you mentioned that you didn't know very much about your father's side of the family, but are there any other stories that he would tell you growing up about cousins or-- Speaker 2: Neither of my folks spoke much of their past. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I did not ever question them about it because I knew it to be an uncomfortable subject. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they were both, because of whatever they'd experienced in their past, very determined to make sure that their children had a better life. Speaker 1: Right, okay. So your father moved to Mississippi, and then he moved to Chicago while you were in living in Mississippi still between the ages of one to seven? Speaker 2: My father ended up in Winona, Mississippi. I don't know at what point in his life he ended up there. Obviously, he was quite young. My father and my mother got together and had my daughter [sic. sister], Mamie, before they were married. My father left before I was born, though my mother was pregnant with me. But my father left before I was born to come north and to find a better way for the family, and he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother joined him when I was at least seven, and-- Speaker 1: Seven years old when you moved to Chicago (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and decided that they now had two children, and that they were going to become a family. And so my father and my mother were married. They lived at 5174 Indiana [Avenue]. I remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they became a family, and we were a family since, until the death of the both of them. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about the letter that your father wrote to your mother about you before she gave birth to you? Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember. I still have the letter. But I know that the letter referenced that he was very proud that we were going to--that they were going to have another baby together, and that he hoped it was girl. That's what I remember (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He got his wish. Okay. Story_ID: 640605 Speaker 1: Which one of your parents do you take after more, you know, with talent and personality. Speaker 2: Well, you're kind to say I've got talent. I didn't know that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I'm--I don't know. I'm told that I look like my mother [Fannie Brown Wilson], and I, I certainly see that. And the older I get, I certainly know that I am my mother's child (laughter), and my father's [William Wilson, Sr.] child because I seem to find myself saying some of the same things that I grew up hearing them say, just, just my whole concept, just my whole thinking is what I grew up hearing as a child. And I will sometimes say to myself, "Oh, my god, my parents used to say that." Speaker 1: Like, give me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're gonna ask me, like what. I can't-- Speaker 1: --some examples, yeah, some examples. Speaker 2: Well, you know, my mother and father used to always say, "What goes around, comes around," and talking about the importance of being kind. And they'd say things like, you know, "You can't ever trust a liar," and they'd say things, "The dog who brings a bone, carries a bone," meaning that if somebody comes to you with gossip, talking about friends, they're gonna go and talk about you to others. I remember those expressions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and my father would always say, well, my dad, you have, you know, "You work, you work so hard. You need to take a break," and whatever. My father would always say, "Got no choice. This is what I do." He didn't ever feel sorry for himself. It was, got no choice. You do what you do. Story_ID: 640606 Speaker 1: Growing up in your parents' household, what do you remember most about them as a couple? Speaker 2: That they both felt that they had a responsibility, and they did it. My mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] felt that her responsibility was to take care of the house, to manage the money, to make sure that, that the kids were good. My father [William Wilson, Sr.] felt that his responsibility was to work, and that he diligently did, to work and to take care of the house when he was not working and to provide a good income for us. And he was there as a disciplinarian when he needed to be. But, but he sort felt that my mother was running things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He, you know, and you would ask dad something, and he'd say, "Ask your mom, ask your mother." Speaker 1: What are some of the activities that you would do as a family with your sister [Mamie Wilson] and your, your--before, even before your brother [William Wilson, Jr.] was brought into the picture, your sister and your mom and dad? Speaker 2: Well, my brother was brought into the picture right when we came to Chicago [Illinois]. He was, my brother was--we came here in one year, and my brother was born within the next two years. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So it's--so, I grew up with my brother. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And the thing that we would do mostly as a family would be--was to go to the Kingdom Hall. We were raised, a religion called Jehovah's Witnesses. And there was a lot to do as being a faithful member of that congregation, which my, my mother was. My father was agreeable to us having a religious involvement, but he didn't go to the meetings with us regularly. We went to book study one night to something called--we went on Tuesday night to a book study, on Friday night to the Kingdom Hall, on Saturday and Sunday mornings, we'd go out and do--going door to door as Jehovah's Witnesses, knock on the door. And then on Sunday, we'd go to Kingdom Hall again. So there was a lot of activity to do. That was mostly what we did as a family. My folks did not enjoy going out to eat. My father would always say, "I don't know what's going on in their kitchen, rather eat at home," loved to have people over at home. But we didn't do a lot as--I mean it--oh, we would go on vacations, you know, now that I think about it. Before my Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Brown Simpson (ph.)] moved here, we would drive to Ypsilanti, Michigan and that was really an exciting time for us to all pile in the car and go to Ypsilanti, Michigan. I also have a half sister from my father, on my father's side, Dorothy [Dorothy Wilson Edwards], who lived in Monroe, Michigan. So we would also drive there. So good times with my family would be going to the religious meetings, just spending together, to time--together on weekends. We'd always watch TV on Sunday nights. We loved 'The Ed Sullivan Show' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What programs would you-- Speaker 2: 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' the--what was her name? Dinah Shore, 'Gunsmoke.' TV was a big thing with us. We didn't go to the movies. We did it, TV in our living room. And, and I remember that whenever we--not whenever, but frequently, when we're in the living room, mom would go to the kitchen, disappear for a little bit, coming back, it seems now, just half an hour later, with wonderful goodies. It could be brownies or it could be a gingerbread cake or just cookies or something that she would go in the kitchen and whip up. Speaker 1: Okay, what would you--what were the relationship dynamics between you and each one of your parents? Speaker 2: I, I--well, I loved both of my parents. I was close to both of my parents. I'm a middle child, and I'm told that middle children always try to keep the peace. So, if, indeed, there was a disagreement, then I would go and try to make sure that things were settled amicably. I was a hard worker. I think that in my mind, I was trying to work to get the, the commendation from my parents. I worked all the time. At the table--dinner table, I sat next to my father, and I always tried to eat as much as my father would eat. I'd match him eating, which is probably why I'm chubby now. But I loved my, both of my parents. I, I had no negative dynamics at all. And they knew that I was the one who would be working, who would be painting the house or doing something in the house. I loved to make changes. So I would recover the chairs and decide that I'm going to paint a wall or--I was always doing something. Story_ID: 640607 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your siblings. Your sis- start with your sister. Give me her full name? Speaker 2: Mamie, M-A-M-I-E, Augusta, A-G-U-S-T-A [sic.], Wilson [Mamie Wilson]. Speaker 1: And she obviously is your older sister? Speaker 2: She was my older sister. I lost her two years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry to hear that. Speaker 2: Yes, she's my older sister, looked physically more like my dad [William Wilson, Sr.]. My dad was half Indian [Native American], and so had very keen features and wonderful colored skin and, which tanned beautifully, his skin, and, and good hair, as we call it. And my sister looked very much like my dad. My sister was very smart in school and made a point of letting me know in no uncertain terms that I was not (laughter). So she--my sister, Mamie, made her strides in academia, I would say, and I made mine by being a hard worker and working around the house, and working from the time I was fifteen. I lied about my age. But even before that, I would do hair of the--mother's [Fannie Brown Wilson] friends in the neighborhood. I was always doing something. Speaker 1: Yeah, we're gonna get into that. We're gonna get into that soon. Now, tell me, what was your sister's occupation? Speaker 2: Well, at the time she was a student. I mean we grew up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, at the time, when she grew up-- Speaker 2: She was a student. She, she graduated Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], and, and subsequently took additional training to get some kind of special teaching certificate. She was a teacher. She ultimately was a teacher with Chicago Public Schools. But before that, she worked in insurance at CNA insurance [Continental National American Group; CNA Financial Corporation, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Tell me about your brother, who's the youngest. Speaker 2: My brother is William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Thomas Wilson, and T-H-O-M-A-S, Wilson [William Wilson, Jr.]. And he's ten years younger than me--nine years younger than me, and he's a character; tall, stately, bright. Speaker 1: And he lives where? Speaker 2: At the moment, he lives--I don't mean to say that he--next moment will be somewhere else (laughter). He recently bought a house in--I'll have to come back and tell you where. It's a suburb of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what is his occupation? Speaker 2: He's a car salesman, and he works for the car dealership at, in Kenosha, Wisconsin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the house that he brought is on the outskirts of Chicago, right near the Wisconsin border so it's easy for him to get to work, but he is, indeed, a resident of Illinois. Speaker 1: And you also said that you had a half sister? Speaker 2: I had two. Speaker 1: Two, okay. Tell me about each one of them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're both deceased. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: One of them--and they're both half sisters by my father, on my father's side. One was Georgia [Georgia Jones], and Georgia was the product of my father's first marriage, her mother, and his wife was Zelma [Zelma Palmer]. And Georgia, again, was a very pretty girl who looked like my father and lived in Winona, Mississippi, subsequently moved to Chicago as well. And Georgia married an alderman whose name was Ernie Jones [Ernest Jones]. But before that, before--that was her second marriage, now that I think of it. Her first marriage produced two sons, one Derrick [ph.], and one, Jimmy. She was married to Jimmy Shelton, Sr. [ph.], and so she had a son, Jimmy, Jr. [Jimmy Shelton, Jr. (ph.)], and a younger son, Derrick. She later on married an alderman whose name was Ernie Jones, and, and we lost Georgia to cancer. And then there was my older sister, Dorothy Edwards [Dorothy Wilson Edwards], who lived in Monroe, Michigan, had a son, Derrick--excuse me, I'm sorry. Then there was my older sister, half sister, who lived in Monroe, Michigan, and she had a son as well, and his name was Billy. Her name was Dorothy Edwards. His name was Billy Edwards [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get a chance--opportunity to spend a lot of time with them growing up? Speaker 2: Not a lot of time, but, again, on vacations and when we would take our road trips. But not a lot of time growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, they were there, but we didn't see each other that much, and it was before social media so, but we kept in touch by phone calls. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 640608 Speaker 1: What sights, smells and sounds remind you of your, you know, childhood? Speaker 2: The smell of a honeysuckle bush. It's a very sweet smell and there were honeysuckles, bushes that grew right between our little house and, and the property of, of Mr. and Mrs. Burns [ph.] for whom my, my mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] worked [in Mississippi]. And so it's that smell that I remember. I love the sounds of crickets or that, that chirping that we hear at night on a beautiful night. What was the other question? Speaker 1: That was the sights, smells and sounds of your childhood? Speaker 2: Smells would certainly be of good food coming from the kitchen-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --is what I, is what I think of, you know. Story_ID: 640609 Speaker 1: What traditions did you, did your family honor, you know, in terms of like holidays, how did--how were they celebrated? Celebrated as in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were not celebrated in my house because we were raised Jehovah's Witnesses and, and their--that organization does not celebrate holidays. Speaker 1: At all? Speaker 2: The only one that was recognized which is not a holiday, but the only occasion that was recognized was something called the Passover--the, the Lord's Supper, the Memorial. They called it the Memorial which is the celebration of the Last Supper that Christ had with his apostles. Speaker 1: Okay. As a child-- Speaker 2: Though, though my mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] was quick to say that she--we didn't celebrate holidays. She did make a point of always cooking a big turkey certain times of year, and always cooking on those occasions, but she would always certainly say, "This is not for Christmas. This is not for Thanksgiving. We don't celebrate that." But she would certainly cook. Story_ID: 640610 Speaker 1: As a child, what were your dreams and aspirations as a child? Speaker 2: I don't remember giving a lot of thought to that. I really think that I grew up just taking life one day at a time, perhaps because in those years, we were taught, you know, until my, my--in my twenties, we were taught that this life was short and would soon be over. So I don't think I gave a lot of, a lot of thought to my future going up, growing up. I mean I was trying to work and make money and make the family comfortable when I grew up, but didn't give a lot of thought to this is what I want to do. Speaker 1: So you learned that at an early age, about life being short and-- Speaker 2: I learned at an early age the importance of working and trying to help my father [William Wilson, Sr.] and trying to make money to make life easier, trying to do whatever I could to contribute and, and to buy things. I would--I think I was constantly seeking to make them proud of me, is what I think I was doing. And, and so I developed talents like working, that taught myself how to do things. If I would read in magazines about how things should be done, like covering chairs or removing paint from walls or, or painting a wall and putting up the tape to keep it from going around, I, I figured that I could do that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So I was a handyman (laughter). Speaker 1: So I rem- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I still am. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's wonderful. Story_ID: 640611 Speaker 1: I remember your mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] answering an ad in the paper in Mississippi, and before she moved to Chicago [Illinois], and she received an offer for a job as a domestic with a family here. Can you tell me about that? Speaker 2: When my mother came to Chicago to meet my father [William Wilson, Sr.], she--they, they became married, and she needed a job. And so, once in Chicago, she answered an ad in the paper for a domestic, live in domestic, and she did, indeed, get the job, and got the job working for Mary Lou Guckenheimer [ph.] who lived in Highland Park, Illinois. And when Mary Lou found that my mother had two girls in Mississippi [Wilson and her sister, Mamie Wilson] because we were left in Mississippi for my mother to come up and be settled--I mean and to find--to get settled, and when Mary Lou found out that mother had two girls in Mississippi that were very close to the ages of her two daughters, Nell [ph.] and Cherry [ph.], then she said, "Of course, they will come to the North, and they will be treated as equal." Mary Lou was very active in the organizations of that time that sought racial equality, those organizations being the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and something called CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], C-O-R-E. And so we moved from our one room shack in Winona, Mississippi where we had, as I said, this elect- one electric light that I remember, to a wonderful, huge home in Highland Park on Ridgewood Drive, where we were told that we were equal. And this is my sister and me. And I said, this will work. This is just fine. I like this. Speaker 1: Pronounce here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So people frequently say to me, "Well, how did you take it coming from that kind of poverty environment to an environment in an all-white community where you were told you were equal." Again, I didn't think a lot about things--I didn't question things a lot. It was just fine with me. I like it. Story_ID: 640612 Speaker 1: --Gonna continue with your early years, the growing up part, and then we're can later go into your education and elementary school and high school, et cetera. Speaker 2: Not much to talk about there (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, we have some things to discuss. So, tell me your experience living with Mary Lou Guckenheimer [ph.]. I know you were seven or eight years old at the time. I know she was very welcoming (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think it might have--yeah, a very loving lady. Her name was Mary Lou Guckenheimer, which it's my understanding, she changed to Mary Lou Gokennor [ph.]. And she had two daughters, Nell [ph.] and Cherry [ph.] and was very active in the Civil Rights Movement, very much believed in racial equality, which is why, when she found out that my mother [Fannie Brown Wilson], who was her live in help, had two daughters [Wilson and Mamie Wilson] in Mississippi, she was very anxious to us--for us to come. So we came to Highland Park [Illinois], and we took the City of New Orleans train, which was really a big deal for us 'cause we used to see it passing through Winona [Mississippi]. So we took the City of New Orleans train, landed in Chicago [Illinois], met my father [William Wilson, Sr.] and, and then proceeded on to Highland Park where we enrolled in Lincoln school [Lincoln Elementary School, Highland Park, Illinois]. I don't remember exactly how long that we were there, but I know that when Mary Lou decided to relocate at Ossining, New York, and we were leaving Lincoln school, I remember the, the principal of Lincoln school, saying, "Are you sure you're not coming back" (laughter)? Speaker 1: Okay, so we're gonna get to that in a moment, but I wanted to go back to her professional career. I know that you said she was involved NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]. Speaker 2: Yeah, but she wasn't a professional career. She was a very rich woman who was a volunteer and who had strong feelings about equality, racial equality. Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me more about her, her daughters that you grew up with, Nell and Cherry? How was it growing up with them? Did you all do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, you know, I don't remember a lot about them except that it was a household, and we got along well. We all sat down at the table and, and ate at night. I remember from that generation--from that time in my life, I remember tapioca pudding. I remember the smell of certain things in the, in the house, rye, I remember. I just remember it being a pleasant time in my life, though it was not a long time. It was an impactful time. Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever recall meeting members of her family, Ms. Guckenheimer's family? Speaker 2: Other than her daughters? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, she had a husband. She married, and she married actually an African American fellow whose name was A.C. Thompson [ph.]. And I remember that, but I don't remember a lot-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --about, about that dynamic. Speaker 1: Did you--do you still keep in contact with Nell and Cherry? Are they still living? Speaker 2: I had contact with, with Cherry who lived in the suburbs of Chicago, maybe fifteen or more years ago. I saw them at the funeral for their mother, Mary Lou. But Nell relocated to New York, and Cherry located, relocated--not relocated, but ended up in a suburb of Chicago. And that's all I know. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me the time that the family moved to New York. Tell me about that time? Speaker 2: It--we moved to Ossining, New York. I just remember that was near the Hudson River. I remember that we went to school. We weren't there for a long time because my mother, from her weekend visits to my, to my father--because they had now married. And, and my mother became pregnant with my brother [William Wilson, Jr.]. And so I don't remember a lot about our time in New York. I don't remember it being long because when, when it came time for my mother to give birth, she moved back to Chicago because my father insisted that we all become a family. So we came from this, again, wonderful house in New York where we lived above the Hudson River, is what I remember in Ossining, New York. And we came back to a kitchenette apartment on Indiana [Avenue]. And I remember saying to my brother, "You ruined my life. I could have been, had a good life up there in Ossining, New York, but you came along and mom and dad wanted us to come back and become a family." Speaker 1: So do you have any recollection of school, grammar school, in New York at that time? I know it was a short time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I don't, no. I remember a little bit about Lincoln school, but not a lot. I remember that when we came back from our experience with Mary Lou--and we maintained contact with Mary Lou forever. Story_ID: 640613 Speaker 1: When we came back to Chicago [Illinois], we went to Farren school [John Farren Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and because we were so young and moldable, I guess, the word would be at that time, we--by the time we came back, we didn't speak as it was perceived we should have spoken, being these little African American ninnies, as my dad [William Wilson, Sr.] would call us. We had begun to speak like those surroundings that we were in. And so in, in Farren, we were not very popular. We were beat up because, "Oh, you think you're white. You're talking like you think you're white." So, I remember that. Speaker 2: Right, and how long did you stay at Farren? Speaker 1: I would think about a year because then we moved to, well, then we moved to Oaken- Oakenwald Street [sic. Oakenwald Avenue] in Chicago, and, and I went to Shakespeare elementary [Shakespeare School, Chicago, Illinois] and graduated from Shakespeare elementary, and it seems to me that I was at Shakespeare from like sixth grade, sixth through eighth. Speaker 2: Oh, sixth through eighth grade. So that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I'm think--that's what I'm thinking. Speaker 2: Okay, right, because I, I notice that it was no mention of junior high school, so you went straight from-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Shakespeare, directly to-- Speaker 1: To Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so the bullying started with you back at Farren or was it at Shakespeare? Speaker 1: It was when we first came back from New York, so that was at Farren. And it continued too at Shakespeare. Speaker 2: Okay, so how did your teachers handle that? I mean how did your parents handle that? Speaker 1: I don't know. At the time, it was perceived as bullying and, and that we reported it to the teachers. My mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] handled it by walking to school to pick us up every day. She would walk us to school, and to a certain distance, and, but she was there to pick us up every day. Speaker 2: Did you have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, it's--I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. You go ahead. Continue. Speaker 1: It wasn't perceived as a big deal. It was perceived as, fighting after school. Speaker 2: Okay, how did that make you feel? I mean-- Speaker 1: I don't remember at the time. I'm--I don't think it made me feel good. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But it wasn't that I felt like I was bullying. I don't know that we even felt like we spoke any differently from anybody else. Speaker 2: Okay, so let's go to, let's talk about Shakespeare. How was your experience at, at Shakespeare? Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Can I ask one--can you just ask her this question? Can you ask her or Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], can you talk about living--'cause you're living a bicultural life at this point, you know, one foot in the white community and exposure in an intimate way, and one foot in the black community? How are you handling that? Speaker 2: Okay. So we came from this experience in Mississippi, living on Mr. and Mrs. Burns' [ph.] property in the one room shack. And then we segued to Highland Park [Illinois], and for a short time, Ossining, New York. And then, and those environments were white environments. And then we came back to Chicago when we became a family with my father, living in a kitchenette on Indiana [Avenue], and, and then to all-African American schools. And so it was a bit of a, we had been through a bit of a transition; not sure that I, at the time, realized what a big transition it was, other than that, we were negatively impacted by our fellow (laughter) students in that my sister [Mamie Wilson] and I were beat up, and, and there was a lot that I remember of, "Oh, my god, you think you're white," because--and I still hear that today from people who feel you don't talk like you should. You don't talk like you're, you're African American. You talk like you try to be something else. But I think that from an early age, it exposed us, and it made us appreciate other, other cultures. We certainly didn't feel inferior to anybody because of our color because we were told that we weren't. We were told that we were equal and that was fine with us. Remember, in Mississippi, we lived on Mr. and Mrs. Burns' property, and though my, my mother was the help, and though my job was to kill the, the garter snakes--I do remember doing that, as I walked along the honeysuckle bushes, I don't remember any kind of negative treatment from them. And certainly, when we came to Chicago with, with Mary Lou [Mary Lou Guckenheimer (ph.)] to live with her, it was a very positive treatment. And so I don't think that I realized the, the cultural impact that perhaps I would think about later. Story_ID: 640614 Speaker 1: Let's continue to talk about your experience at Shakespeare elementary [Shakespeare School, Chicago, Illinois]. What were some of your favorite teachers at the school and some of your favorite subjects at the school? Speaker 2: Well, I certainly know that I liked gym because I was involved with tumbling and that was easy for me. So I did like that. And, and I loved--we had a teacher, and I think his name was Mr., Mr. Young [ph.]. And, and I loved being in Mr. Young's class because we would sing. I remember that. I don't remember anything negative about it at all except that we would walk to school--we were walked to school by our mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] part of the way, across the street. I remember my best friend was a Japanese whose name was Joyce Tonney [ph.]. We lived on 43rd Street, and at that time--43rd and Ellis [Avenue], and at that time, it was an integrated area. And my, my best friend in school was Joyce Tonney who lived down the way a bit who was Japanese. And I remember Joyce telling me that her folks earlier on during the war [World War II, WWII], that her family in California had been put in, in, you know, certain restricted areas in camps. I remember that. I remember that Joyce Tonney was very studious. She read a lot. She was at the library a lot. She had a good impact on me, though, from an early age, I, I think I knew that my area was not going to be academics. I wasn't that comfortable with studying, perhaps, because my sister [Mamie Wilson] was so good at it that I never considered myself to be quite up to her par. Speaker 1: What kind of grades did you get? Speaker 2: Oh, I got good grades. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got A's and Bs. I got good grades. Story_ID: 640615 Speaker 1: But even when I went to high school, the moment I'd be--turned fifteen, I lied about my age. I shouldn't say lied. I wasn't very honest about my age because as I said, I'd really grown up with a focus on working. And so I wanted to work at the neighborhood five and dime, at the Woolworth store [F.W. Woolworth Company]. So I got myself a job there. And my bus from Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] would arrive at 3:15--I mean, excuse me. We got out of school at 3:15. By 3:20, I was on my bus, and I was at my job by 4:00, and I worked from 4:00 until the store closing, and therefore, didn't become very involved in the high school activities at all. It was, my focus was I'm getting to my work. But I was very good at my job or my various jobs at the Woolworths. Speaker 2: Right, and that was also during the time that you would do hair after school for some of the ladies in the neighborhood, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm, absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay, so we're gonna go--tell me about, well, let's go back to your experience at Woolworth. I mean what, what job did you have? What was your position there? Speaker 1: I had a few. I would work in the rug department, and then for a while, I worked in the candy counter, in the candy department. And I remember cleaning all the bins, you know. I particularly remember the bins that had gummy bears, and I remember the bins that had the little Spanish peanuts and candy corn, which were my favorite because I loved the fragrance that came from, from cooking the Spanish peanuts which I had to do. And I remember that we would have sales and contests amongst the employees, and I would always win because I was very aggressive in going up to people, encouraging them to buy whatever it was that we had on sale. It was a positive experience. I loved it. Speaker 2: Okay, so why did you decide not to go to college, like right after high school? Speaker 1: Don't know that I--I guess I wanted to work. I know that I answered an ad in the paper, and, and I was seventeen, and I went to get a job at Woolworths because in school, I had taken, taken typing and shorthand, the easier things to get through school. And so I was very good at typing, and I was very good at shorthand. So I answered an ad in the paper, and got a job at Woolworths in the accounts payables department. My sister [Mamie Wilson], on the other hand, was in college, and the family was struggling to make ends meet to make sure that she was able to, to attend college. Unlike me, my sister was not big on work. So I was big on work, and she was good on--big on academics. I just didn't give it a lot of thought. But I did eventually go to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], and I took--I don't think I made it through more than two courses, part time, and it just wasn't good for my comfort level. Speaker 2: Okay, so tell me about your first job out of high school, out of Hyde Park High School, the first job that you received? Speaker 1: My first job was at Wool- as Goldblatts brothers [Goldblatts] accounts payable, the job for which I answered an ad in the paper. Also, in school, I--in addition to taking typing and shorthand, I'd also taken sewing, sewing. And so I knew how to make my clothes. I remember I, make--making my suit to go on my interview. And I worked, again, in an area that did not have people who looked like me. And, and I worked for Howard Archakoff [ph.] in accounts payable adjusting, and I was there for probably three years or more. Speaker 2: And you were the first African American at that company, correct--or in that department? Speaker 1: I was the second. There was somebody in that department whose name was, I believe, Linda [ph.]. And she'd been there for a long time, but Linda was not, did not look like me. She was very mixed, and very fair skinned, and, and I'm sure very good at her job. But she did not--it was not obvious what she was as it was for me. Speaker 2: So you stayed there for about two years, I believe, correct? Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe because I think in sixty--maybe. Speaker 2: Okay. And then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't remember, two or three. Story_ID: 640616 Speaker 1: And there was a coworker whose name was Inga [ph.], who was from--I think it was Inga, who was from Germany and a tall, blonde, statuesque, just great--with a typical German, "I don't need to stay in this job very long," and went to find a job. And it was at an advertising agency, and she told them that she had a friend and that she'd like for them to interview her friend as well. So when Erica came to me and said--I'm sorry. Her name was not Erica. Did I say Erica? Speaker 2: Erica Lori [ph.], that--that's what I had. Speaker 1: No, her name was, her name was Inga, I think. Speaker 2: Inga, okay. Speaker 1: And when Inga applied for and got a job at Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi], she told the personnel person whose name was Erica Lori, that she had a friend and she wanted to introduce her friend. And Erica Lori called me up. And I went and interviewed, and she, again, was German and wonderful. And Erica hired me and sent around a note to everybody letting them know that Doris Wilson [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], black--because I'm sure we weren't called African American then, was going to be joining the company, and everybody should come around and welcome me. Speaker 2: Oh, that was nice. Tell me about some of your other positions and the role that you play at your tenure during Compton Advertising? Speaker 1: My job was working for a TV producer [Shepp Chartok (ph.)], working for the TV producer, and so I did not know anything about commercial production, but I learned. And my boss was, was in charge of doing the advertising for Kemp- excuse me, for Alberto Culver [Alberto Culver Company; Unilever] and American Dairy Association and Quaker Oats [Quaker Oats Company], and the good thing about it is that those were years when one could get on the job training. And so I said to my boss, "Well, I'd like to go out and see what you're doing," because I know that I'd say, my boss is going to the studio today, and my boss is doing this, and I wanted to understand that. And I was fortunate in that he allowed me to go and, and to learn and that's how I learned a little bit about TV production and advertising and modeling and how modeling was done. Story_ID: 640617 Speaker 1: I met an agent at that time whose name was Shirley Hamilton, and Shirley Hamilton said to my boss, not to me-- Speaker 2: Who is--the name of your boss? What was the name of your boss? Speaker 1: Shepp Chartok [ph.] was this boss. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's for whom I worked when I went to Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi]. And Shirley Hamilton said to Shepp Chartok, who was our executive producer, "I'd like to send Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson] on an interview." And he said, "Well, she just better get the job." And it was--I was hired to do speaking at the auto show [Chicago Auto Show]. And, and my boss was kind enough to let me out at four o'clock, and I would catch my bus and be on the floor at the auto show by five o'clock and work from five 'til closing. Speaker 2: So what kind of narration did you do? What were some of the things in the script that you had to talk about at the auto show? Speaker 1: Well, I was working for Chevrolet, and I remember saying, "This is Chevrolet country." And then we'd talk about the cars. You know, I learned my script. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Tell me about your relationship with Shirley Hamilton? Speaker 1: She was my agent for a long time. I had great respect for her and it's nothing negative--I mean that was my relationship. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Could I just--excuse me, you don't have to look at me. But I just wanna interject some things. But she was, she was important here in the, as an agent, right? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, she was the agent of the time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): (simultaneous) At the time, so can you talk about the whole aspect of just, even advertising 'cause the advertising--this is a mecca. You know, Chicago [Illinois] is an important mecca, in some ways, it's New York [New York], a different kind of market. So can you just talk about her in the context of, you know, who were the agents and what was happening? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Well, it's--at the time I was hired by Compton Advertising, there were not people who looked like me at all in the business. It was a, certainly a very lucrative business, and I worked for Compton, which was one of the five largest advertising agencies in the country. And as I said, charged with making commercials for American Dairy [American Dairy Association] and Quaker Oats [Quaker Oats Company]. And the process of making commercials, is that we go to a studio and we work with the agents in order to get the models who appear on camera, those on camera and those who, who do the voiceover. So Shirley Hamilton was the large agent in Chicago at the time, and, in fact, her agency [Shirley Hamilton Inc.] still exists. It's run by her daughters [Lynne Hamilton and Laurie Hamilton]. So we would call up Shirley Hamilton and have casting sessions that, therefore, we got the models to appear in the commercials that we're doing for the clients that I mentioned earlier. So it was a big business, and that business, too, just had very limited African American models registered, very few. Speaker 2: So at this, during this time, she secured all your work, moving forward, I mean from that first auto, auto job that she got for you with Chevrolet (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I worked through Shirley for my modeling, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, how many, how many years did you work with her? Speaker 1: Oh, many. Maybe--I don't remember. Certainly, a couple, a decade--not a couple of decades, but a decade, until I opened my own business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois] in 19-- Speaker 2: Eighty [1980]. Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s] because I still worked for her quite a bit, but I'd say 'til the mid-1980s when I decided that I couldn't focus on juggling because occasionally, even though I'd opened my business, I can't say that I opened my business and was immediately bombarded with business. So if, indeed, Shirley would call me to come on an audition, I would go because my time was my own. I wasn't having to juggle things as I did when I worked in the advertising business because I went from Compton Advertising to another agency called Foote, Cone and Belding (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but before-- Speaker 1: --which is still around. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 640618 Speaker 1: Before we get to that advertising agency, what were the type of jobs that she [Shirley Hamilton] secured for you in those early years, when you were at Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi]? Speaker 2: I don't remember whether they--the segue between when I was at Compton and when I was with Foote, Cone [Foote, Cone and Belding]. But Shirley sent me on auditions, and I won a number of, of jobs, whether they be for Greyhound [Greyhound Lines, Inc.] or, or Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.] or Virginia Slims or Carson Pirie Scott [Carson Pirie Scott and Co.; Carson's]. I did a lot of newspaper work, fashion work in Chicago [Illinois] and some commercials as well. Speaker 1: So at that time you were doing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Print. Speaker 1: --commercials, print and runway? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The heavy focus was on runway because runway was something that was very easy to do after work. In those days, the shows were usually cocktail shows that were done in the stores, and those stores being Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company Building, Chicago, Illinois] and Bonwit's [Bonwit Teller and Company] and Bloomingdale's and Saks Fifth Avenue, and, and a large portion of those were done either after work or they were done in what we called noontime tearoom shows. So it was easy for me to hop out of my job for forty-five minutes to an hour and do that during the day. But the bulk of that work--and I think that the work that got me the notoriety was the runway work that was done at night because they were all--the events were all attended by socialites and the movers and shakers in the city. And I think that's where, how I first got my base or learned--became exposed to many of the people who later on became instrumental in my life. Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the famed photographers, fashion and beauty photographers that you had an opportunity to work with. I know some of your work was reprinted in Life and Time magazines, some of the campaigns that you were involved in. Talk a little bit about that. Speaker 2: Well, I'd say the biggest and the only one that I care to mention is Victor Skrebneski. And I think he was very instrumental in my career. Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what did he do outside of just shooting you? How was he instrumental in your career? What are some of the other things that he-- Speaker 2: Because I had the opportunity to work for clients that I wouldn't have had the opportunity to work for otherwise. I mean it was he who had the clients, and then it was he who decided to, to use me on the jobs. So that's how that works. Speaker 1: Okay, and some of the fashion designers that you worked with on the runway? I know that you worked with like Fernando Sanchez, it was some Halston, and who were some of the other designers that-- Speaker 2: Bill Blass, Emanuel Ungaro, Ralph Lauren, all the big ones of the time because they would travel to this country frequently and do a lot of work at the stores for which I worked regularly, like Bonwit Teller and, and Saks Fifth Avenue, so a lot--Donna Karan, a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me how you secured a working relationship with Marshall Field's? I know that you were the prototype for the first African American mannequin at that store. So tell me about that experience? Speaker 2: Well, we'll have to go back for during my days at the auto show [Chicago Auto Show], was my first exposure to getting to know other models because we would have times, lunch breaks and whatever, where we'd sit around and chat. And one of those models, whose name was Mary Lou Builder [ph.] said, "You should--you're tall and you're thin, and you should be doing runway work." And, "Runway work, what is that?" "Well, that's the fashion shows that are done." And she told me about the, the sessions that one had to go through, the audition sessions that one had to go through to get those jobs, one of which was Marshall Field's. And so I went and auditioned at Marshall Field's for a year, and finally, I was hired to do work in their tea room. And by that time, I was working for the other stores along the avenue [Michigan Avenue], and though I worked for Marshall Field's, I wasn't happy that it took me so long to get, to break into that, into that session or into that element that I, I didn't choose to work for them a lot, but it did take, it did take--it took a year to do their runway shows. The, the--yes, I was their mannequin but there--that was hired through--that was done through a photographer. There was a photographer who hired me for a job, and Niedermaier display [Niedermaier, Inc.] who did all of the windows for Marshall Field's. And it was the Niedermaiers [Judith E. Niedermaier] who hired me to be the prototype for the mannequins that were subsequently used in Marshall Field's. Speaker 1: During that time also, you were here in Chicago with the, with the Johnson publication [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] and Fashion Fair. Did you get an opportunity to work with them on any of their fashion shows during that time? Speaker 2: No, I never was hired to work for them. I did photo work for that, that highlighted the Ebony Fashion Fair, but I never worked for the Johnsons. I became friends with them. I knew them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my, actually, my composite, when I sent it to the Johnsons was sent back to me. I didn't fit their prototype. Speaker 1: For the runway? You had sent something in for runway modeling? Speaker 2: For the Ebony Fashion Fair which is what they did, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): What was their prototype? Speaker 1: What was their prototype? Johnson? Speaker 2: Well, they didn't have any one who looked like me. There was one model who was my color, whose name was Terri Springer. And the other models just--let me say, did not look like me at this time. Story_ID: 640619 Speaker 1: I know during that time also that you were a frequent viewer of the famed dating show that was aired during that time, and that you applied to be a contestant on that show. Speaker 2: There was a show called 'The Dating Game,' and I had never traveled, and during my time at the office when I think my boss [Jack Davis] was on location shooting in another state, and I was not that busy, from watching the, 'The Dating Game' on TV, I decided that I would apply for 'The Dating Game.' And I sent them my composite and told them that I wanted to come on and be a contestant on their show. And the way 'The Dating Game' worked at that time was, there was a daytime 'Dating Game,' and a Saturday night 'Dating Game.' The daytime 'Dating Game,' if you did well, then you, you would get local trip, and if you did well, you'd get a chance to go on the big 'Dating Game,' which was the Saturday night show. And so I sent my, my application to 'The Dating Game.' And they called me up and said, "We'd like for you to come out and we'd like for you to do a daytime show." And I said, "No, no, no, no. I cannot do a daytime show because I don't want a trip to San Francisco [California]. I wanna go to Europe." And they said, "All right." So I went out and I was one of the three female contestants on 'The Dating Game,' and I won a trip to Europe. And I know that they said to me, "Describe yourself." And I remember the song 'Girl from Ipanema' ['The Girl from Ipanema'], and so I sang, "Tall and dark and tan and lovely," I have no idea where I got that from--I mean what made me say that. But whatever, the fellow [HistoryMaker H. B. Barnum] who was the celebrity at the time was smart enough to choose me, and, and I got a trip to, to Europe and flew to New York [New York] and then took a cruise ship across the, the ocean and went to--landed in Rome [Italy] and--Rome and Paris [France] and England, and then flew back. Speaker 1: What was that experience like? Speaker 2: It was an interesting experience. I didn't like the fellow whom, who chose me. And I said, no, I don't wanna go anywhere with him. And they--and he was simply doing it for the publicity anyway. So he said, "Well, give her the tickets." I'm sure he called me a few choice names. And I came back to Chicago [Illinois] and then had to find somebody to, to go with me, and a friend of mine, a fellow model, did find a fellow to go with me on the trip. And, and I remember Kathleen Tracy [ph.] was a wonderful stylish, high fashion model, considered--considerably, considered to be very well to do, who modeled. And Kathleen said, "You know, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], on the ship, you're gonna have to dress up every night. It's black tie. You're gonna be sitting at the captain's table." So she gave me dresses, long dresses to wear for sitting at the captain's table. It was a wonderful experience. Speaker 1: Wow, and so after that, I know that you came back to Chicago and-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. It was just a ten day trip or a week or whatever, so sure, I just took time off from work. Speaker 1: And then you started your new position with the new advertising company shortly thereafter, or you were in between Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi] and-- Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember. I don't remember where I was when I--it was my--let's see, Compton. It was, it was all around the same time. Story_ID: 640620 Speaker 1: I'd like you to first describe the advertising, you know, who the major, may- play- players are besides Compton and, you know, and who are the major people and place in advertising at that time. Speaker 2: Okay. If I remember. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: 'Cause remember I was the secretary, but yeah I can. I'll do as best I can. Speaker 1: No, as best you can. Speaker 2: Okay, so when I left Goldblatts, we were talk--and went to Goldblatt brothers in the accounts payable department and went to work with Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi], it was 1965. So--if I recall. So it was a different time in life. Also remember, I had never heard of the advertising business. I certainly knew about ads, but I didn't know anything about the advertising business, hadn't given it a lot of thought and certainly knew nothing about making commercials, which I learned is like making mini movies. You know, the work that goes behind the making of a sixty second commercial or a thirty second commercial is just amazing. So I got involved in that culture, and it would be long days and long nights because there was all of the elements involved in the casting of who would appear on camera, the making of the music, the hiring of who's going to do the music. There is a--there was a fellow at the time whose name was Dick Marx, whose son is now, also a very popular musician whose name is Richard Marx. But we used to work with his father Dick Marx at Universal Studios [Chicago, Illinois], and we would meet at the studio at maybe five o'clock and work all through the night doing the music that would be part of this little sixty second or thirty second commercial. And it was not a world that was integrated in no shape or form. Compton Advertising, there was J. Walter Thompson advertising [New York, New York], Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.], DDB Needham [Needham, Harper and Steers; DDB Worldwide Communications Group Inc.], from which Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] came. But there were very few of us around. And probably because at that time, there was no special advertising for--that was targeted to African Americans or Latinos or anybody. It was just general market. There was no thought given to, let's integrate these commercials because the world is more than just blonde hair. There wasn't any of that, that--those, those thoughts had not been aroused, presented, awakened. Speaker 1: That's right. That's just the beginning. I often say that one of our new black histories really was advertisement that began, you know, shortly after this time period, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --in the, the '70s [1970s], so there was no black advertising as we, you know, speak of. Speaker 2: No black ad- and there were very few people in the advertising, in the--who were African American in the industry. And I think that's because, I'm told, that the African--that the advertising industry did not go around and solicit or recruit at black colleges [HBCUs]. So it was not an area that was perceived as open to us. It was kind of a closed community. And to this day, the major agencies are not in any way equally populated in terms of race. They're--the tendency is to hire an African American or a Latino if, indeed, we have a client, and we're going to do things that are going to be centered to that race. I mean some of the clients for whom I work now, I, I'm in a room of twenty people, and I'm the only person in there who is of color. And it's interesting, if, if this is brought to one's attention, it's, well, we're here for everybody. But the reality is that everybody doesn't make their decisions on what they're going to buy or do the same way. Everybody brings their cultural experiences to the table. And that still is not, in my opinion, as fully recognized as it should be. Story_ID: 640621 Speaker 1: So this is a time, you know, there's a lot of tumult happening from civil rights perspective. But you end up in a pretty good place though. I mean you mentioned Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell]. He ends up in a good place. You end up in a good place. And what are people saying about your look, you know, 'cause you were, you were striking as a young person? Speaker 2: But I was striking, but remember, I was very dark skinned, and the things that the white community saw in me were not things that were appreciated by the black community. As I said, my--when I sent my picture to Ebony Fashion Fair, it was returned. In my opinion, it should have been just thrown out. But I really was hurt to get it back in my hands because that was the ultimate rejection. And so, naturally, my tendency was to go to those places that embraced how I looked, that welcomed me. And I felt that I was welcomed because I was Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson]. So there are articles that have been written that have described me as a barrier breaker, and it's not anything that I set out to do. It's how my life went. If I worked with girls who said you should be working for this and that and the other, the white models, it never occurred to me that I couldn't do that. So I would just go and give it a try. And then it became-- Speaker 1: Dori, someone may not--looking at this, may not really understand why black agents, you know, a black publication, one of the premier black publications, would have rejected you. Can you just talk about that just a little more in detail 'cause someone may not under- really, you know, they may not--what is she talking about? Speaker 2: Well, at the time that I grew up, there was definitely an emphasis on color. Even in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I was rejected, and I'm happy that I had to leave early to go for my job because I was rejected because nobody--my color was, was considered-- Speaker 1: Too dark skinned. Speaker 2: Too dark to be quite honest, too dark. And even my own sister [Mamie Wilson], who was very light skinned with, as we call it, good hair, did not welcome me in school. She was kind of ashamed, and so I think that that's why I never grav- I never gravitated to education because it wasn't a comfortable environment for me. School where people treated me differently because I was so dark skinned did not make me happy. And so, so when, indeed, I became embraced by a culture that liked me because of my color, then that's where I ended up. Speaker 1: So what did, what did the white community, what did they say they liked about your look? Speaker 2: Exotic. You know, we--it was just Dori. "Let's invite Dori. Let's book Dori. Dori looks good in clothes." Let's look, because it's not everybody who makes the transition from a runway into the social scene. And for whatever reasons that, it was felt that I brought something to the table, I guess, because certainly not all of the models with whom I worked were so embraced. But, but I was asked really to be a part of a community, and there were wonderful people, Abra Prentice Anderson [Abra Prentice Wilkin], Irving Eps- Irv [Irv Kupcinet] and Essee Kupcinet, Terri [Terri D'Ancona] and Alfie D'Ancona, people who said, "Dori is great. Let's have Dori over." So I became involved in the social life as well, in a social culture in the homes of the Bertrand and Nancy Goldberg, Bertrand Goldberg who built--something on my face? Speaker 1: No, no, no, it's me. I was itching--my nose, sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, forgive me. So I became a regular in the homes of the movers and shakers in the city. And, yes, Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] the--the first Mayor Daley was wonderful, and who took a liking to me for some reason because he'd seen me at things, and, you know, you stand out, if, indeed, one looks different from everybody else. Then one stands out. I remember doing a show for Saks Fifth Avenue, and I believe it was Nena Ivon, and it was a fashion show at the Ambassador [Ambassador Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and the mayor was the guest of honor. So the mayor--we were all standing there, and the mayor comes out in a trench coat, and I grabbed his arm and walked down the runway with him. And that made Time magazine. Speaker 1: Well, he was a king. Speaker 2: He was the king. Speaker 1: He was a king then. Speaker 2: And so here he is with this little skinny, black girl, walking down the runway, and he's wearing his trench coat, and I'm wearing, something white, I believe it was. And whatever reasons, they found that to be so noticeable as to be picked up in the newspaper. A, he did a fashion show, and B, the model with him, you know, he was with a model. My name wasn't used, of course, but--and from that, the Daley family also remembered me. "Oh, you know our dad. Our dad likes you," and whatever. You know, they never got over that either. Story_ID: 640622 Speaker 1: So you're saying--is this like after 19--this is after 1965, 19--in the late 1960s (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: --or early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and this is--I mean you're talking about the top echelon of, of society here-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois] that you are welcomed in and part of, and-- Speaker 2: White society. Remember, I wasn't ever welcomed or involved in black society because the difference is that, from what I was told, because I did question it, and I was told that in black society, it was so much of people who knew each other from college--from fraternities and from college and from the proper schools. I simply went to Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I didn't have that sorority, fraternity connection, you know, that, that many people had. So I--and there were also clubs in the black community. And I was never a part of those. My family was not a part of those. We were working, hardworking people. Speaker 1: Not Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], not the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], not The Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, see, I don't even know the names. Speaker 1: The Frogs-- Speaker 2: Now that you're saying them. I've heard of them. Speaker 1: The Alligators [ph.] (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, oh, my gosh, yeah, the Alligators and the Frogs and the--I--to this day, I, I've never been included in that. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So I gravitated to those areas and those people who did include me. It became my life, and, and therefore, that's how I got involved in my charity and community work as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Though, let me say an exception. I remember that one night we were at Maxim's [Chicago, Illinois], and my friend, Marcie Goldberg, said--no, I'm sorry. Let me start over, and say that one night we were at Maxim's and my friend, Marge Markin [ph.], who was very liberal at the time said, "I want you to meet my friend, and I'm going to arrange for you all to meet. We're gonna come next week." So we did. And her friend was Ann Cook [HistoryMaker Ann Dibble Jordan], and Ann Cook came in, and I looked at her--oh, she says, "My friend is black." And so we're at Maxim's which is a private club, and Ann Cook comes in, and I'm thinking to myself, what does she mean that she's introducing me to this black lady? And she opened her mouth and said, "Hi." And it was Ann Cook who went on to become one of my best friends who is now Ann Jordan, or subsequently became Ann Jordan. So a lot I know, a lot that I know about the black experience really came from Ann explaining it to me because Ann was a part of all this community that had never at all welcomed me. And Ann, indeed, got me involved in Black Creativity and some of the other things. And, and, you know, the ladies only accepted me because Ann had brought me in. And at that point, they had read about me in, in magazines or newspapers and seen me. But it's--I didn't have the, the history with them. Story_ID: 640623 Speaker 1: So this is--so who is in--so this network that you have, like, you know, I've, you know, as we were preparing for this, I was saying that, you know, I think of two--and I may be wrong about this, so you correct me, you know, but I was saying that there was Margie Korshak and there was [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're kind. Speaker 1: --you know, both often servicing people, I, you know, that were like the female PR [public relations] people in town, and, and so I just this--and then I think about--so, so, is that correct? You know, is that--I mean is that correct? Speaker 2: Well, Margie Korshak was in business long before me and was really the queen and still is, I'm sure, the queen of public relations. Margie Korshak, who was in the family of Sidney Korshak who had a store on Michigan Avenue, and Margie Korshak was very involved in the booking of fashion shows. And Margie would hire me to work for her and her clients. She was always very generous, and she was very close to my friend whose name is Frankie Welfeld, who was a model. And when, indeed, I decided to go into public relations which happened because Al Weisman [Albert P. Weisman] who was with Foote, Cone and Belding, and who was one of the leading PR people in the country said to me, "Dori, you're out and about, and you know everybody, and you should go into PR." I said, "What's PR?" So, and without my education, you know, he said, "You know everybody, and you're creative, and you've had these years of experience." So it was Al who encouraged me to go into PR, and what I knew from PR was really from years of watching Margie. And because I had worked for a diverse client base--I shouldn't say diverse. It was a client base of Coors [Coors Brewing Company] and Hallmark [Hallmark Cards, Inc.] and Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and major, major clients, I thought that people would look at me as a creative who's had all of this experience. Speaker 1: They (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When, in fact, I--and when, in fact, I opened my own business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois], people turned and said to me, "But I don't have any business that's black." And all of a sudden, the race thing hit me in the fact again, and I was just totally shocked. I remember going to, to lunch one day. Jerry Davis [Jerry C. Davis], who was the business editor at the Chicago Sun-Times, and Jerry said to me, "Dori, how do you think you're gonna make it in this business?" And I said, "What do you mean?" And he said, "Everybody in public relations is a Jew. They're all Jewish." And I said, "Well, but I've got all these years of working for all different kinds of clients, you know. I've been fourteen years in the advertising business, and I know what I'm doing, and I'm creative," and blah, blah, blah. He said, "Well, we'll see." And he was right. It took me a really long time to--it, it took me longer than I anticipate to start getting work, and, fortunately, the, the word of mouth, you know, it grew, and people started giving me an opportunity at work. But I've never been the agency that has been called upon by the big, black companies. In fact, in those days, the major African American countries--I mean companies--the major African American companies hired Margie. So it's really interesting now when, when people come up to me, and they do frequently, and say, well, you were the first African American per- African American people, you were the first African American person that I heard of in public relations. We didn't know anything about that field at all. And subsequently, you know, over the years, five or ten years later, there became lots of others, but mostly people who specialize in the African American community. My expertise, because of the training that I had, is a generalist. I feel that I can talk to anybody and handle publicity for anybody. Speaker 1: Right. I just, you know, the thing is, is that also, I think PR, as an industry, you knew, grew also, you know, because really, you had a rolodex. See, this is--rolodex, and I'm not saying they're not important now, but they were real important then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and being able to pick up the phone and call people and reach them on the other end. There was a value and is a value still to that, you know, to this day. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, I mean I picked up the phone, and I reached Julieanna Richardson-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: --way back when, thirty years ago or more or certainly close to that. Story_ID: 640624 Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, but what I was saying is that, you're in these circles, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], I mean these, these are the mover, you know, the-- Speaker 1: The whole--McCormicks, the blue bloods, yeah. Speaker 2: These are the blue bloods, and these are the society people, and this is a time when, you know, I was thinking, you know, and I'm talking about, you know, late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], even though there's a lot of disruption happening (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And into the '70s [1970s], yeah. Speaker 2: But the early '70s [1970s], right. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: There's a lot of disruption happening, but there's also--and, you know, and I--before I get to the disruption, Chicago [Illinois] is very segregated. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And there're only a few, and you were one. You know, I think [HistoryMaker] Leigh Jones, you know, his clientele. He had both, but he was also servicing, you know, he had people who were, you know, he had a Jewish clientele. There're not a lot that are able (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And therefore, we were best friends, you know, and we still are, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, to be able to have, to be able to go both those places, the, you know, we're talking about the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois]. We're talking about Rush Street area, that's booming. We're talking about-- Speaker 1: Oh, god, those were such fun times (laughter). Speaker 2: So let's talk about that though, talk about that. Speaker 1: Well, you know, I just remember it as being very fun times and, and safe times. I lived on Scott Street, which was right by Rush Street, and, and I mean we would, we would go to Faces [Faces Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and Maxim's [Chicago, Illinois] and then later on to a place called Zorine's [Chicago, Illinois]. It never occurred to me that I was any different than anybody else. I'd get dressed up and go out, and we'd dance, and then we'd go to the Oak Tree [Oak Tree Restaurant and Bakery, Chicago, Illinois] for breakfast at 1:30 in the morning and, and go home and take a nap and shower and be at work the next day at a quarter to eight--I mean a quarter to nine. It was just a fun, fun time in the, in the circles in which I traveled. Now, this is not to say that life in other parts of the city were not as I knew it. I would go home certainly every weekend to visit my folks [Fannie Brown Wilson and William Wilson, Sr.] who lived in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois]. But, again, I had no fear there. There wasn't the time of people taking their lives in their hands to go, as is current right now, in 2017, when it really is a dangerous time. I think the times that I--in my youth, I felt it to be a much safer time. I felt it to be a much safer time, and-- Speaker 2: And you're talking about a time that, you know, like in New York [New York], they had Club 57, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but Maxim's, these are the places that people are going. There's house music that's--well, maybe the house, it emerges a little later. But, you know, there're--this is the social sector, you know-- Speaker 1: This is where we get dressed up, and we go and we dance. And we dance until it closes. And, you know, we, we have champagne and we dance. And we have just a good time. Speaker 2: Who are on the scene though? Who are the people on the scene that are out there, and, you know, are in the mix, you know, also, or people are following? Who are they? Speaker 1: Well, there was Marilyn Grabowski who was an executive with Playboy [Playboy Enterprises, Inc.], which is why I found lots of--we'd go over to the Playboy Mansion [Chicago, Illinois] on Sundays for lunch and movies. Walter Holmes, a designer, Noreco [ph.], a designer, Sue Carey, who wasn't Sue Carey at the time, but Sue Plumbridge. I have to think of more. Speaker 2: Okay, but, you know, the Playboy Mansion, you know, that is a lot--you know, Hugh Hefner is ruling the day, and, and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and a lot of, you know, a lot of people came through Playboy. We don't-- Speaker 1: A lot of people came through Playboy, and remember, there was the Playboy Club [Chicago, Illinois] during that day, in addition to the magazine. And my friends, Richard Rosenzweig and Judy Henning were--Richard Rosenzweig was second in command to Hefner. So I got involved in that circuit in that I was invited to parties at the mansion. And those were lovely parties, I must say, just the outpouring of food, and where you're hobnobbing with, I hate to say it now, but with the Bill Cosbys and with the Robert Mitchums, everybody you could think of would come to have--on Sunday for movies. And I'm talking about Sunday afternoon. I'm not talking about night things. I'm talking about Sunday, Sunday afternoon for brunch and movies. And then there were the big Hefner parties, and, and everybody came through. I mean I cannot tell you whom all I've met from that, from that environment. Speaker 2: And what does that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a hot time. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean and what does that, when you think of Chicago at that time, what do you sort of think of with that because, I mean I even--who was it? One time, oh, god, Cleo Wilson [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson], when I was starting a project (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, gosh. Speaker 2: --she was, she was, I mean I think like the--they even interviewed people. They--who was writing, the one who did 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family'], Alex Haley was one of the writers, a lot of people. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: A lot of people came through Playboy, a lot. Hugh Hefner was pretty egalitarian at a time when-- Speaker 1: Absolutely, without a doubt, without a doubt. I agree with that. And, and for a time, Derick Daniels [Derick J. Daniels] became president as well, and he had come from Knight Ridder newspapers, and he and his wife [M.J. Taylor Daniels] became close friends of mine. So we ran around together, but absolutely. Hefner was early on very inclusive, very inclusive, you know. He had Playboy Bunnies and, and I was always welcome to his house and, and I think that Christie [Christie Hefner] has carried that on. Story_ID: 640625 Speaker 1: So, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], so there's you, Leigh [HistoryMaker Leigh Jones], who else is on the, in the--on the black side that are in these, these circles? Who else is there? Speaker 2: Well, during the modeling time, there was Judy Ross [ph.], who was a very close friend of mine, a very beautiful, chiseled, light skinned woman. There was Ann Jones who was also a model, but they didn't segue over into the social circles. In all honesty, they just weren't, they weren't, you know, they, they modeled, but they--and I'm not saying--you know, there's a lot of people who felt that if, if--who felt only comfortable amongst their own communities. Because my background had been so, going from one to the other, it never bothered me that, that people didn't look like me. It never even--I didn't spend a lot of time worrying about it or having the need to say, I'm black because I'm unashamedly, unabashedly black, un- you know, un- unapologetically, black. That's obvious. Speaker 1: And didn't you develop a close friendship with, with--was it Potter Palmer, was it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, I mean--and what was he like? You know, I always hear about the Potter Palmer, you know, because we have the Palmer House Hilton [Chicago, Illinois] here, and that--was he the fourth, I think, or, no. Was he the third? I don't know. You know, I-- Speaker 2: I think he was the fifth [sic. Potter Palmer IV]. I don't know. I'm still friends with Potter, but, yes, we were involved, and that was an interesting experience. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: You know I don't like to talk about who I, who I--but, but I will tell you that, that I was chairing an event at the, at the Playboy Mansion [Chicago, Illinois]. I had asked them, asked Hef [Hugh Hefner] to let me use the house to do a charitable event. Speaker 1: Do you know what year that may have been, approximately? Speaker 2: It had to be in the mid-'70s [1970s], like maybe '73 [1973], '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And Hefner had never given the house out for, to a charity. It was only for his events. And I said, "Well, I'm very involved with a Mannequin Guild, and we're raising money, and we're gonna raise this money for the--all the money that we raise from our mannequins' ball goes to the, the Rehab Institute of Chicago [Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago; Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, Illinois]," blah, blah. So I talked and talked, and he let me have the mansion for a party for, for the mannequins' ball, and all of the runways girls--the mannequins' ball was something that was done by runway models, not the photo girls, the runway girls. And we had a glorious turnout. When, sometime later--not, not long, maybe a year later. I was with my friend Cynthia Olson, and we were coming from a film festival. And then she said, "Well, I'm going down the street to meet Chuck. Come go with us." Her husband, Chuck Olson [Charles Willard Olson III], who I later learned was--I knew Chuck Olson as being an insurance executive, but he was also co-owner of the Atlanta Braves and Potter Palmer was his partner. So Cynthia said, "Come on, go with us, come on, go down the street." And I remember that we went down the street, and--I'm pausing here because I'm drawing a blank of the club that's directly across from the Four Seasons [Four Seasons Hotel Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And so we went to the club, and, and we had dinner--so Cynthia was meeting Chuck, and I did not know that Chuck was with Potter. And so the two of us walk in, the two guys are there, and it's let's have dinner. And we had dinner, and then we went out to listen to jazz. And then Potter and I became involved, and he said to me, "I, I know you very well because I tried to get into that party at the mannequins' ball and they brought you downstairs, and you said I couldn't come in," (laughter), "for the party at Hefner's house." And he said, "And they--and you wouldn't let me in." I said, "I'm sorry." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That was 1971. Speaker 1: That was 1971, okay, that he had--okay. Speaker 2: We did a few mannequins' balls. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The one at Hefner's? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: It was? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hefner was 1971. Speaker 2: Okay. That's lovely. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no because--I mean it-- Speaker 1: Well, if that was '71 [1971], then the event that I'm talking--'cause I wasn't dating--I didn't date Potter until '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So he must have remembered from that time. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 1: Why are you looking at me like that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, I was just--that was three years (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean I--and I remember the party very well, but I didn't remember-- Speaker 2: Remember him, right. Speaker 1: No, I remember going downstairs--I remember them saying, "Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], somebody's at the door and wants to get in." "Well, did he have a reservation?" "No." "Is he on our list?" "No." "Well, then he can't come." Speaker 2: Right. But that was a big deal, so that's--you know, civically, 'cause parties and how you give parties, and who's on the list, you know, was all extremely important back then. Speaker 1: Yeah, and because I had been involved in charitable events, you know, from my early modeling days because this was a time of glamour, glamour. The, the charity parties that were held at the, at the retail stores, and at that time it was really a big deal, for them to have parties, two or three times a week, cocktail parties, and, and have the who's who in attendance for various charities and then have the glamorous girls run, walk down and do the shows. So I got to see how things were done, and then I met people who included me in their surroundings, so I got to see, you know, I got to experience a lot. Story_ID: 640626 Speaker 1: So not everyone transitions like you say, from model into, into society. That doesn't happen very--unless people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and, you know, I'm pretty much a sponge. I say--I'm told that I--I've been told that I pick up things. You know, you, you sort of--but I was also very fortunate to have people who sort of took me under their wings and, and took me about. One, one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, who were they? Speaker 2: --one hairdresser who, whom I met, whose name was Emory [Emory Jones], and I remember Emory coming to my house, getting me dressed, when I lived with my folks [Fannie Brown Wilson and William Wilson, Sr.] at 60--on Chappel--excuse me, on Jeffery [Avenue], 6915 Jeffery, and he came and got me dressed because he was going to introduce me to Victor Skrebneski. That's how I met Victor, at a club, and at the same time, I met Michael Butler. So once I met Victor, and then from him, I met Walter Holmes who was an English designer, and Walter pretty much in those days, you know, Walter and Victor and Stefano Marchetti pretty much ruled what we did. You know, Victor, "We're gonna go here tonight, we're gonna go there tonight, and you're gonna wear this dress, and you're--," it was a very planned thing. "And you get there at this amount of time because we have to get there in order to get photographed." And so we became like the little it group. It was Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson] and Walter and Marilyn [Marilyn Grabowski], and, and we would be photographed-- Speaker 1: Marilyn, who? Speaker 2: Grabowski, with Playboy [Playboy Enterprises, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we'd be photographed at everything we went to because we were always looking divine and glamorous, and that was what it was at the time. Remember, there were social columns in both the Sun-Times and the Tribune [Chicago Tribune]. Speaker 1: And who, who-- Speaker 2: And those were weekly columns, so everybody was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, whose columns were they? Speaker 2: Eleanor Page [Eleanor Page Voysey] in the Tribune, and Peg Zwecker, Bill Zwecker's mother, in the Chicago Sun-Times, and then after that, Bobbie Goldblatt and others. But Eleanor Page in the Tribune was like the, one of the respected social writers of that time. I just read an interview--I mean someone that--and Margaret Carroll. Do you remember her at all? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Margaret Carroll came along later. And then interestingly enough, I'll tell you who subsequently got the job quite a bit later, was Jackie Heard. Jackie Heard was a Tribune society writer when I met her. Speaker 1: I did not know that. Speaker 2: Yes, and she went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that before she went with the city? Speaker 2: She went from there to the mayor's office, yes. Speaker 1: I'll be, wow, 'cause people don't usually even transition from society to politics like that. Speaker 2: Well, she was a newspaper--I mean she was a journalist. Speaker 1: But news--a journalist, but still. Speaker 2: But she covered other things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and hers, perhaps, was not the full time job as it was when Eleanor Page had it because that's all she did. And I think Jackie did some hard news as well. Story_ID: 640627 Speaker 1: Well, these were the years of Irv and Essee Kupcinet. Irv Kupcinet was the one who started the talk show. And Irv Kupcinet had a show called 'Kup's Town' [sic. 'Kup's Show'], and every celebrity who came to town would come and talk on the Irv Kupcinet show. It was just wonderful. And Irv and Essee were like mentors of mine. So I met a lot of people that way as well. But these were also during the days of Arthur Rubloff who started Rubloff [Rubloff Company, Chicago, Illinois], Don Roth, Blackhawk [Chicago, Illinois], restaurateur, Arnie Morton, restaurateur, just--certainly Hugh Hefner, Jim Hoge [James F. Hoge, Jr.] of the Chicago Sun-Times. It was just a, a wonderful of vibrant people doing exciting thing. Abra Wilkin [Abra Prentice Wilkin]--I'm sorry, she's Abra Wilkin now, but she was Abra Prentice Rockefeller Anderson; Jon Anderson who went on to, to write for the Chicago Tribune. Abra was also a writer and Abra used to write a column, Abra Anderson Wilkin used to write a column for the Chicago Daily News. These were the days of Peg Zwecker. These are--were the days of--who was a columnist as well. And as I mentioned Eleanor Page [Eleanor Page Voysey] who was a society person. Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a wonderful, vibrant time. Speaker 2: And talk about the society that was here, you know, I mean what was the nature of that group and what were, like what would be considered a really good party, you know, back then, or something that would keep people--you know, what were the elements of a good party back then? Speaker 1: I think the elements were good--of a good party probably were the same as today. And it's about people. And it's about having fun. And we chatted about everything. There were no things that we didn't talk about. So we would discuss politics and literature and movies, but we weren't, I must say, intellectuals. It was, it was lightweight talk, it was good food, it was lots of white wine. It was lots of champagne. It was usually a beautiful house. Speaker 2: And you mentioned Emory, and this is Emory who is Leigh Jo- Emory-- Speaker 1: This is Emory Jones who, who unfortunately, we just lost-- Speaker 2: Just lost. Speaker 1: --and, and the hairdressers of those days were Emory Jones and, and [HistoryMaker] Leigh Jones. But Emory Jones and Leigh--no, I don't know that Leigh did. But Emory Jones worked for the, the white hairdresser of the time whose name was Fred Glaser, and Freddie Glaser became famous for giving Barbra Streisand her look. And so I met Emory because I think I read about him or we knew--we had friends in common or something. And there were not very many of us on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], and so we, we got to know each other. I believe Leigh Jones tells me that, that we used to ride the Hyde Park bus together downtown, but at any rate, when it became time for me to get my hair done, I looked for Emory. And Emory subsequently introduced me to Leigh, but, so when I was going out and about, Emory wanted to make sure that my hair was just perfect, that I looked just so when I was going to meet the movers and shakers. Speaker 2: Now, I under (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when I was just first meeting them. Speaker 2: I see. Now, I understood that Leigh and Emory are cousins. Is that-- Speaker 1: Well, they called themselves cousins, but I don't think that they're blood cousins, but they started around at the same time. They were hairdressers who decided that they were not going to let their color define them. They know--they both knew they were talented. They knew that they could do any kind of hair, and so they set out to do that, to be judged by their talent rather than by their color. And we had that in common, you know-- Speaker 2: And this is really a time when the black community is discovering, in many ways, downtown, you know. They're, you know, they're coming out because it's a segregated community. So people were, you know, just sort of coming out or they're--people are being hired in jobs, advertising agencies. That's when Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] and Vince Cullers and, you know, the-- Speaker 1: Well, Vince Cullers had his own remember. Speaker 2: He had his own, he had his own (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Tom Burrell was with Needham [Needham, Harper and Steers; DDB Worldwide Communications Group Inc.] when-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --during those days. And he subsequently, shortly thereafter, opened his own. But he had been with Needham for a while. Speaker 2: I think he was with Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.]. Was he, you don't-- Speaker 1: No, we were in the same building. Speaker 2: You were, okay, it wasn't Needham. Speaker 1: We were in the same building as--Foote, Cone [Foote, Cone and Belding] and Needham were in the same building. And so I would see him, and Eugene-- Speaker 2: Eugene-- Speaker 1: I just saw him at a funeral. Speaker 2: Why am I doing that? Gene, Gene--we've interviewed him, Gene-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I wanna say, but it's not Washington. Eugene, Gene, Gene, oh, darn it. It'll come to me, Gene. It's not-- Speaker 1: And I think he worked at Foote, Cone for a while as well. I believe he did. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he actually worked for Tom, and then, and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He did-- Speaker 2: --and then left and then started his-- Speaker 1: --he did. Speaker 2: --own agency [E. Morris Communications, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, but we would see each other in the lobby of the building. We were both at 401 North Michigan [Avenue]. And so--Morris, [HistoryMaker] Eugene Morris. Speaker 2: Eugene Morris, that's right. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Vince Cullers was across the street, the Equitable Building [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: I see, I see. Story_ID: 640628 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, and Barbara Proctor [Barbara Gardner Proctor]. Let's not forget Barbara Proctor (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's--can we talk about her because we never, never were able to do her interview. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh. And she was very significant. Speaker 1: Oh, my god, very, very. And when I got ready to open my business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois], I went and talked to Barbara because I knew Barbara. And she was just such a wise and witty woman. Speaker 2: Can we talk about--can you talk about her, you know, and-- Speaker 1: Well, I can say as much as I think I can. She was the first African American that I know of in the advertising business, I mean the first African American female. I don't remember where she came, along with Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell], but she was a dynamic, tall African American woman who was extraordinarily bright and had major clients and, and was--I would certainly call her in my early days one of my mentors because I would call Barbara to get some words from Barbara as to, as to how I would phrase things. And she was always there and very sharing and very generous, and I was always a big fan. Story_ID: 640629 Speaker 1: So you're saying 401 North Michigan Avenue. Can you talk about that building 'cause that's right near, that is right near Wrigley [Wrigley Building, Chicago, Illinois] and it's also near the Tribune [Tribune Tower, Chicago, Illinois], right? Isn't that building there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the Wrigley is across the street, and the Tribune is next door, and it's the building that's set back in the plaza. And that building during the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] housed both Foote, Cone and Belding advertising, which I joined in 1968, and Needham, Harper--it used to be Needham, Harper Steers [Needham, Harper and Steers; DDB Worldwide Communications Group Inc.]. And I believe BBDO [Batten, Barton, Durstine and Osborn; BBDO Worldwide] was right across the way and Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.] was down the street in the Prudential building [One Prudential Plaza, Chicago, Illinois]. So that was like a big advertising community. Barbara Proctor [Barbara Gardner Proctor] was across the street, and as was Vince Cullers. And Vince Cullers and Barbara were the two who made the general community aware that you don't do the same advertising for us as you do for the--for us, being people of color, as you do for general. To do one advertising campaign and figure that it fits all does not work. You do not run an ad in Ebony with all white people, just as you would not run an ad in one of your publications, be it Life or Look with all black people. And during those days, you didn't. So you have to understand that, the ads should be different. The culture is different, the clothing is different. And in commercials, the same thing, the speech is different. You can't really talk the way we talk, so it's important to relate to people and to appeal to people in, in language and in looks and in terms with which they are familiar, which is still an issue today. It's not as well as it should be, though it's certainly better. Speaker 1: And, you know, when you think about it, I mean this is, this is an exciting time that the black community is finding itself, you know. Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] is, is-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --people are coming in from all over the country to go to Operation PUSH. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: The black voice is being found, you know, black and beautiful. I mean all this stuff is happening at the time, and-- Speaker 2: And the women's movement too. I remember marching down Michigan Avenue and participating in a bra burning that was right across the street in front of the Wrigley Building with Hedy Ratner [Hedy M. Ratner] and a group of, you know, of, of us who, who felt that things needed to be different for women. So, yes, it was an exciting time. I don't know that at the time we realize it, when one is living it, does one realize it's exciting. I don't know. I'm not sure. Story_ID: 640630 Speaker 1: So you're at Foote, Cone and Belding and are you--I have you as director of fashion and casting and so what are you doing in that regard then? Speaker 2: Well, Foote, Cone and Belding recruited me after reading a story about Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], and I think Dori's work with the film festival [Chicago International Film Festival], and, and as I mentioned, I had gained some notoriety while with Compton Advertising [Compton Advertising, Inc.; Saatchi and Saatchi], and CBS 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] called up and, and asked me to, to take over--there was a very popular show called 'The Lee Phillip Show.' And I hosted 'The Lee Phillip Show' for two weeks while Lee [Lee Phillip Bell] took a holiday, which was just unheard of. And so there was an article written about that, of the various clothes that I wore, and here's what Dori's doing on this show and whatever. And so Al Weisman [Albert P. Weisman] from Foote, Cone and Belding called up and said, "You know, you're in the advertising business. You've got, at this point, four years under your belt, and we need you to--we'd like to talk to you about coming to work for us." Well, I had also been doing my modeling, and I'm wearing my top eyelashes and bottom eyelashes, and, and my wigs, and I'm running to do my fashion shows after work. And I said, "Nah, I'm not interested. I wanna become a big model, a big, black model." And those were the days of Naomi Sims in New York [New York] and Naomi was indeed my color, and had made wonderful strides, and that's what I wanted to do. And so John--I mean, excuse me, so Al Weisman said, "Well, I just want you to come and talk to somebody." So it ends up that I met with John O'Toole, who was president of, of Foote, Cone and Belding. And I didn't really realize the significance of that. And so I remember arriving for our breakfast with my wig case in my hand and lots of stuff on because I had a fashion show that day. And John, in essence, said to me, "Okay, you've got four years of experience under your belt. We need African Americans. We need women, so don't you wanna become more than just a pretty face?" And I said, "How dare you say that to me?" He said, "Well, I mean your pretty face, you know you're not making--it's not really doing anything important, but you can come and work for us and really make a difference, and I will still allow you to pursue your fashion shows." And so I did. I went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what did you learn, what-- Speaker 2: And then I got in trouble for doing my modeling because when I went there, because I'd had experience with, with TV production, Foote, Cone had picked up millions and millions of dollars in billing in Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], the Sears business. And Sears would make, what we called regional commercials, like they would make dresses and shoes and this--whatever they had on sale, they would make little short commercials, and those commercials ran in different markets. You know, Texas could be dresses. Ohio could be shoes. So they were really doing retail only in TV commercials. And there was a unit of us that traveled around doing commercials. You know, in the winter, we worked in Florida or in California. In, in the good months, we worked in Chicago [Illinois]. So our little retail unit did some six or seven hundred commercials. My job in that was fashion director, fashion and casting. So if, indeed, Sears says, we're gonna be selling these dresses, then I would arrange for casting sessions to bring the models in, and then make sure that they were fitted properly. That they looked good, that they were accessorized properly, of course, working with seamstresses and things. But, therefore, the title, casting and fashion because they felt--Foote, Cone felt that that would give me--that would be a way for me to use whatever knowledge I had learned in the fashion business. And so it was a title that they created for me. Speaker 1: I see. So you were there--is it, you said-- Speaker 2: Fourteen years. Speaker 1: Fourteen years, okay. Speaker 2: And I left there only to open my own business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois]. And during that time, it was a wonderful experience, again, because traveling with a unit, and the unit being a TV producer, associate producer, a writer, an art director, a copy--I mean a copywriter and an account executive. And so it was a wonderful learning experience too. And, again, you learn about the work that goes into making these little commercials that we may or may not remember. It's a huge, huge business. Speaker 1: So what--well, it's a huge business, and that's when really things were staffed, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --because you had-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, I mean that's when jingle writers, you know, or singers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Speaker 1: --even could make a lot of money-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and we worked so much with those jingle writers and, and the singers and the voiceover people and I still hear voices on TV that I recognize. Joel Corey was a very big one, and I still hear Joel doing McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and things around town. Story_ID: 640631 Speaker 1: So what are you learning though about the industry and the business then, 'cause you go off into PR [public relations], but, you know, you're working in advertising. And I think at that point, were they--you know, 'cause at one point, I think after advertising agencies start having PR arms, but I don't know if that was really the case then. So I think-- Speaker 2: Well, it was the PR person, Al Weisman [Albert P. Weisman], who was the PR, who had the PR wing of Foote, Cone [Foote, Cone and Belding] that got me into the business-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --that recruited me, wanted me to meet John O'Toole who was the president. And it was Al Weisman when I decided during the '80s [1980s], that I'm reading all of this about how easy it is to get an SBA [Small Business Administration] loan, and I'd like to open my own business somehow. And actually, it was M.J. Daniels [M.J. Taylor Daniels] who was married to Derick Daniels [Derick J. Daniels], the then president of Playboy [Playboy Enterprises, Inc.], and the two of us decided that we were going to open a business. And, and because I had read so much about, about getting an SBA loan, I decided that I could get an SBA loan and that I would open my business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois] and people would just start running. Well, it took me a year to get the SBA loan at which--during which time, M.J. kind of dropped out because she wanted to do some other things. And they were very nervous about getting tied up with somebody who had a government loan. You know, there's this fear about, I don't wanna get involved with the government. So I finally--after a year, did get my SBA loan and interestingly enough, they wanted a history to show. And the only thing that I had to show--Mrs. Allen was my accountant, Mrs. Willia Allen. And the only thing that I had to show was my clippings. And it was Willia who--I said, "Well, I have nothing to show. I have no background. I have no education," blah, blah. She says, "Yes, but you've got your clippings." And so we did a stack of clippings like this, and that was the basis on which I got my SBA loan to open my business. Speaker 1: And what did you have any estimates, you know, 'cause a lot of times--sometimes they say you should estimate out how long it'll take you to be profitable. Did you do any of that? Speaker 2: No, I didn't, and I--because remember, I didn't have any schooling. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I just knew that I was creative, and when Al Weisman encouraged me to open my business, he said, "Well, you're creative, and you know everybody and you can figure out how to do it this, and it's really all about getting people, press." Well, that's really what I thought it was. It's all about getting people press. From my modeling--I knew all the, all the writers, I knew all the columnists. I knew the TV people. I knew everybody, so therefore, this should be very easy, I thought. Speaker 1: And so, you know, you, you talked earlier about how you were surprised that someone said, you know, this is a Jewish business, and how do you--and the intimation was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he was right. Speaker 1: --that you are not going to be able to function. You know, it's one thing to, you know, I mean to know--but you are not--so, so what was he right about? Speaker 2: Well, he was right about the fact that the business is most--that the big--that the Jewish community controls a lot of businesses. And Jewish people support their own. I remember Miles Berger telling me once, Miles Berger who was and still is a big real estate developer. And I was asking Miles for some business, and he said, "Well, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], I like you and I've known you forever, but, you know, Margie [Margie Korshak] is my cousin." And he said, "In our community, we support each other." And he said, "That's the thing about the black community. They don't support each other." He said, "We support--Jews support Jews." And he said, "I'll be happy to recommend you, but I'm just gonna be very honest with you. You know, it's gonna be your people that are gonna, hopefully, give you the, you know, your first account, your big account." Well, that never happened. It was, I think, a Jewish person who did. I--and that's kind of a cute story. I was one night--I had gotten my SBA loan, but I'd used probably most of the money because things were not happening as, as I'd wanted them. And, and I remember that I was in the Pump Room [Chicago, Illinois] one night, with my girlfriend, Nora [ph.]. And we met this guy, and he said, "So what do you wanna do?" And I said, "Well, I really wanna open a PR firm," but maybe I had gotten some money where--no, I think it was during this time when I was waiting, was waiting for my loan to come through. I said, 'Well, I wanna open a PR business. I wanna open my own business. I've never had a business, blah, blah, blah. But I'm waiting for the money--for the SBA loan to come through," and whatever. He said, "Okay, I'll give you some money." And I said, "Excuse me?" And he says, "Yeah, I'll give you some start up money." So he wrote me a check for twenty-five thousand [dollars] which, which led me to, to be able to get some things started until the SBA loan came through. He's Jewish, and-- Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: Stephen Kaplan [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Still a friend. Speaker 1: So he started you off then. Speaker 2: He gave me the seed money to-- Speaker 1: The seed money to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) 'cause it took money, you know, it takes money before you can get the doors opened. And I, unlike you, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], had no business training, no nothing. I just thought that I'd open my doors and everything would happen. Story_ID: 640632 Speaker 1: So how long did it take for that to happen, that you start having--'cause you said it took a while. Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it took a while, you know, I remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long is a while? Speaker 2: --some things that--I remember a fellow from New York whose name was Peter Rittmaster whom I met through somebody. And he was a wealthy socialite from New York who came here for a while. And I remember during this time when I'm telling anybody who would listen about my desire to open my business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois], I remember Peter Rittmaster saying to me, "Well, are you prepared for failure?" And I was indignant. "What do you mean am I prepared for failure?" He said, "Well, you're talking to me about what you wanna do, but what do you want--what are you gonna do if it doesn't work out?" And I had no response. Probably, those people who took business know that you have to be prepared for failure. I was not prepared for things not happening as I had wanted them to happen, and then I became overtaken with fear for a long time, with just fear. What am I gonna do? The encouragement that I got from my folks [Fannie Brown Wilson and William Wilson, Sr.] when I quit my job at Foote, Cone was, "You're quitting your job? Are you crazy? How could you quit your job?" I mean nobody in my business had ever--in my family had ever had a business. Nobody in my family had ever envisioned having a business. It was, you're doing good if you've got a regular paycheck. I have no idea what made me start thinking--unless it was reading about Barbara Proctor [Barbara Gardner Proctor] and some of the others, as a female, I could get an SBA [Small Business Administration] loan and open a business, and voila. So I had to learn the hard way that it didn't happen that way, that I--that success, I think, comes from the intersection of working hard and getting a break. It doesn't just happen. Speaker 1: That's right. So, so where do you--where's your--where was it operating out of? Speaker 2: 919 North Michigan [Avenue]--no, no, no, no, the Water Tower [Water Tower Place, Chicago, Illinois] on the eighth floor of the Water Tower, 845 North Michigan. There was a wonderful, shared office space called the home office. So I had an office, but remember, I came from Foote, Cone and Belding where there were five floors or whatever, and all of a sudden, I'm in an office, and though it's a lovely office, it's a tiny, little room, and all of the shared facilities were there. So there were lots of us who were in, in businesses. There was Mrs.--Mr. Weiss [Louis A. Weiss], from Weiss Hospital [Louis A. Weiss Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] across the way. There was, oh, my god, a lat- person. Anyway, but then we had the common areas with a receptionist upfront, and then Betty Johnson [ph.], who did all of the typing and whatever. But it was a lonely experience because there I was, all of a sudden. And before, I had a secretary, and it was noisy and there was activity going around. And I'm in a very quiet space, and I have to figure out how to do everything. It was rough. Speaker 1: So what do you decide? How do you get started, and, and who do you work with, and how do you prove yourself, you know, fairly new (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I got started by getting a brochure made and sending it out to everybody that I knew and that I know. And I can't remember who my first job was for. Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the early clients though? Speaker 2: Yes. I remember getting work for Carson's [Carson Pirie Scott and Co.; Carson's]. I remember getting work for Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company, Chicago, Illinois], boutiques and then--a boutique called Intrinsic [Chicago, Illinois], opened by my friend, Cary Fetman, the Pompeian Shop [ph.]. So it started with a lot of fashion, I believe. It started with fashion, and then ended up with me approaching more people and getting more opportunities. Story_ID: 640633 Speaker 1: What did it grow to be in that, you know, in the way because you became really, you know, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], by the time I came to Chicago [Illinois] which is in 1980, you know, you're mentioned a lot of times when people are looking for PR [public relations]. Now, I don't know if-- Speaker 2: Well, they didn't call me (laughter). I don't remember it. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), but you--I--what I'm saying is that when someone would ask for--or maybe if you were--let me put it this way. If you were black, you know, and you mentioned, you know, PR, maybe you had a project or opening or something like that, you were directed to you, you know, so, as the, as the go to person. So I'm just wondering from the time of starting to, you know, maybe, let's say in the, you know, early '80s [1980s], you know, what is that--what--how do you build what you build and, and what are some of the challenges you're experiencing 'cause you had started to talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, I opened my business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois] in, I think 1982 or something like that, I think it was. And, and I think that there is always-- Speaker 1: So 1982 is, is--is that the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty-one [1981] or '82 [1982] or something. I remember when I started-- Speaker 1: Wait, well, Harold Washington--wait, but Harold Washington is elected 1982. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. He's elected 1982. Speaker 2: I didn't remember that, but certainly, I was very proud and involved with that, yeah. Speaker 1: So I'm asking, what, what are the early parts, like how does it take--what do you have to do to make things happen and who--you know, you're working in the shared office space, how--you know, what are the, you know, when is your first big account that you're really proud of and, or how long does it take, you know, 'cause people don't always tell that story? Speaker 2: I don't know which my first big account was, quite frankly, but I remember that I was proud of everything that I've done. I've been particularly proud when I meet somebody, and I'm able to sell an idea, and, and really make that happen. For instance, one night I was at Gibsons [Gibsons Bar and Steakhouse, Chicago, Illinois], and somebody introduced me to a guy from Shifferland Somerset or something like that-- Speaker 1: Schieffelin and Somerset [Schieffelin and Somerset Co.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I said that I'd really like to work for him. It was a liquor company, and I said, I'd really like to. And he said, "Well, let me introduce you to our people in New York." And I met the people in New York, and I was on the board of the Harold Washington Library [Harold Washington Library Center, Chicago, Illinois] which had just opened. And I said-- Speaker 1: Well, that's later then. The Harold Washington Library-- Speaker 2: But you asked for things that I was proud of. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or things that I know, what-- Speaker 1: So that may be--what is that, around 1986, '7 [sic. 1991], something like that, the Harold Washington Library, but keep going. Speaker 2: Yeah. What I remember is that I sold them the idea of let's do a joint thing and let's honor African Americans and let's, let's--and you can underwrite the whole thing. And so I, I went to DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], and we did, we did an event, and we actually called it the History Makers [History Makers Award]. I think I told you that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and you helped me on that. And we honor--so the whole--I'm proud of that because of the fact, A, it was something that was copied along the way, I mean since then. But the fact that I was able to sell an idea from a concept and, and take it all the way through execution. And I've done that for other things as well, the Carson Pirie Scott [Carson Pirie Scott and Co.; Carson's] opening in, you know, in the, in the--on 95th Street at the Evergreen Plaza [Evergreen Park, Illinois]. But, but I've enjoyed everything that I've done, whether it be restaurant openings or whatever. I try to bring a little something unique to the table. Certainly, I was friends with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and was given the opportunity to, to do the, the premiere of 'The Color Purple' which was an interesting project, you know, getting Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and all of those people to come in and getting the sponsorships and making it happen. Story_ID: 640634 Speaker 1: Was the nice thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you talk about that because that, that's--John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.], that was--Ariel Investments [Chicago, Illinois] was involved with that, right, as a funder, I think. I think that they were-- Speaker 1: We had a lot of funders. I, I don't remember who all they were. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we had a lot of funders. Speaker 2: So, can you talk about that as a--you know, you said an interesting project, and, you know, and often--can you talk about what you bring to the table? What were some of the ideas and how you would really take a project and brainstorm about it? Speaker 1: Well, let me--I think it's interesting to know how I met Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]. And I do watch TV. In all of my offices, I've had a little TV because I had nobody to talk to, so I had a little TV. And so when Oprah came to town, I just thought that that was the neatest thing since chopped liver. And I picked up the phone and called her and introduced myself. And she picked up the phone, and whatever-- Speaker 2: Wow, so you-- Speaker 1: Then one day I was at Crickets [Chicago, Illinois] and Jon Anderson from the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] was having lunch with Oprah. And he said, "Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], I want you to meet somebody." And, okay, and it's Oprah. And she said, "Oh, you and I have talked on the phone." And that's how we became good friends, which I thought was interesting. And we subsequently had lunch, and she said, "You know, I don't have an agent. I don't have anything," and I knew Jeff Jacobs [Jeffrey D. Jacobs], and I said--picked up the phone right there at Crickets and called up and introduced the two of them. And she met with him that same day, and, and they developed something that was history. And so when--and I knew all about 'The Color Purple' thing when Oprah got it, and went, went through that process with her, how exciting it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean when she-- Speaker 1: Well, Oprah, Oprah went-- Speaker 2: Oh, when she got the roll [of Sofia Johnson]. Speaker 1: Oprah had, I had been away to-- Speaker 2: When Stephen-- Speaker 1: --a spa called the Heartland [Heartland Spa, Gilman, Illinois] which was a client of mine, which was a spa down, downstate, and Oprah decided to go away to the Heartland, and there was another couple on, on Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]--I won't say who they are. But they wanted to take over her show ['A.M. Chicago'] while she went. And having experienced the things that I had over the years, I said, "I wouldn't let anybody else take over my show. If I were you, I would ask them to tape your shows in advance because that's what people do, tape your shows in advance, so that when you leave, your show still stays on the air." Well, it was during her trip to the Heartland and in them running one of her reruns that [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones came to town and saw her. And so that's how he saw Oprah, and said I wanna meet her for 'The Color Purple.' So I, you know, remember very well her calling to tell me that this is what happened and when through that whole process. Speaker 2: Because that really launched her-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --in many ways outside, you know, of, of her show. Speaker 1: But there was always something extraordinary about Oprah. I remember one day she had invited me to go hear her. She had met Operation--the Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. And she was going to go to speak at Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois]. And Oprah picked me up (laughter) in a limo at my apartment on Dearborn [Street]. She was disheveled, in the car, she's putting on her pantyhose, her, you know--and she's fixing her hair. And we're just chatting like we, like girls chat. And we got there, and she got on the stage, and this whole other person came through, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]. I remember going (makes sounds), hearing her because it was just--I was just so taken aback. And then she--when she got off the stage, and she was herself again, and we're going, and we're in the car. And I said to her, "I just can't get over what I just saw," and she looked at me, and she said, "What do you mean?" I said, "Well, that person that came out up there," and blah, blah, blah. She said, "Yeah, I know I'm destined for greatness. I've always known that." Speaker 2: Isn't that interesting. Speaker 1: She--that's one of her--yes, she did. Speaker 2: Because, you know-- Speaker 1: And I never forgot it. I went (makes facial expression). Yeah, because and when I met her, and, you know, she had this little short Afro, but a lot of hair, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she had-- Speaker 1: --took her to Leigh [HistoryMaker Leigh Jones]. Story_ID: 640635 Speaker 1: So I had a show in Chicago [Illinois] called 'Memorandum.' This is, little things that I do when I'm not as busy as I should be and I get in trouble. So because I was very proud of my background as a secretary, and I decided that I wanted to be on TV. And I couldn't get through to the person I was trying to get through, whom I identified as Sve Schubin [ph.] who is head of NBC [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. So I decided to wait until 6:15 one day because I knew the secretary would be gone. And I called Sve up, and I told him that I wanted to be on TV, and blah, blah, blah. And, and he said, "Well, what do you wanna do?" And I said, "I wanna be Barbara Walters," and whatever. Well, that resulted in a show that I had called 'Memorandum.' And that ran for, I think two years. And then they wanted me to go to another market. But remember, I was at Foote, Cone [Foote, Cone and Belding], and, and Mr. Schultz [Arthur W. Schultz] would give me off one day a week to go film my show. Okay, so then we segue a little while later, and it was during one of my boredom times. And I decided that I wanted to do something on TV again. So I called up Dennis Swanson who was the head of ABC's Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. And I said to him, "I've got, you know, these tapes to show from when I was on, had my TV show." And now, I wanted--and mine was a public service show. It was, I think, the first general audience public service show. It wasn't--I mean community show. It wasn't black, it wasn't white. We interviewed everybody. So I called up Dennis Swanson, and I went in to see Dennis Swanson. And I remember very specifically, him saying, "Sounds good, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], but I got this tape here. Have you heard of Oprah Winfrey?" And I said, "No." And he said, "Well, I just hired her. Here's her tape, and she's just wonderful." So therefore, I was very interested in watching her when she made her debut and all that because he had told me so much about her. Speaker 2: I see, I see. So, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She'd come from Carolina. Speaker 2: She'd come from Carolina. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So when you met her in the early days, because, you know, the thing about Chicago is being introduced properly, and, and I think you, you introduced her to [HistoryMaker] Leigh Jones, right? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but-- Speaker 1: Lots of people. Speaker 2: Who else did you introduce her to because that's, I mean that's the rite to passage. You can't come into this city and not be introduced then. Speaker 1: An awful lot of people, including her agent, Jeff Jacobs [Jeffrey D. Jacobs], who, who--and certainly, the relationship changed his life. And I mean this has been documented by Katie Couric and others. But, yes, she, she had wonderfully curly hair, thick hair, and I've always been--loved people who have cur- I mean I've always wanted thick hair. She had it. But she wasn't happy with it. Her hair was breaking and she said it was breaking off. And it was this, that and the other. So I took her to Leigh Jones, and Leigh Jones said, "My goodness, you've got so much hair. Let me do some other things with it." So that's how she segued from her-- Speaker 2: Her other look-- Speaker 1: From her other look to, to Leigh Jones. And, and remember Oprah was just starting out. And there wasn't any budget for promotions. So Leigh tells the story that he went down, and he did her hair every morning--it was live TV, for a couple of years. Speaker 2: So that's what--so can you talk about Leigh and his position in the marketplace 'cause you mentioned--you talked about Emory [Emory Jones] and how Emory was working for the topflight salons, but-- Speaker 1: And Emory and Leigh were always together. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I, yeah, and I think--I don't remember where Leigh was working at the time, but it might have been for Kaye Pierre on Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], and then the, and then subsequently, Emory came to join him there. Speaker 2: So, but, Leigh's clientele, what had it developed into, like who are some of his clients? Speaker 1: When I met Leigh, his clientele was 90 percent white. I mean he, he had a few African American customers because he's in a big salon, and people would see him doing his work, and, you know, when clients came in and wanted a hairdresser, and many times they came in without an attachment to a particular hairdresser, and so they would refer Leigh business. And I think that's how he built his clientele and then people would tell--this one would tell that one, "Look at my hair--," 'cause he's a brilliant haircutter. And I think he got a lot of his clients because people would refer. Story_ID: 640636 Speaker 1: Back to Oprah, that's extraordinary about the introduction to Jeff Jacobs [Jeffrey D. Jacobs] because it was Jeff Jacobs that really--I mean you say they changed each other's lives in many ways, but he's the one who advised her to, to have her own--you know, to own her own show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']. Speaker 2: Um-hm, but Oprah is very smart business wise. Let me just say that. I think he might have advised her, but I wouldn't be surprised if it wasn't Oprah who knew. I was--when you said, who did I introduce her to? I picked up the phone one day and called Mrs. Johnson and said, "Mrs. Johnson, there's this person in town whom I think you should meet." And she did. That was Eunice Johnson and John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] at the time, and, and Irv [Irv Kupcinet] and Essee [Essee Kupcinet], lots of people. I mean Irv knew of her because she'd taken the--but, but I took her to things that they were doing, and we'd go to exercise class together and just start laughing rather than doing what we were supposed to do, start laughing, and one day she said something about that she had--she had to go to the bank because I think she had bounced a check. And she said, "I gotta make a deposit," or something, and I mean money never bothered her. I mean it never--she never paid much attention to money. She was, she was digging in her purse and she pulled up this check, and it was like a three hundred thousand dollar check. And she had it in her purse for a while. She said, "Well, I just forgot to go to the bank." And I remember looking at her, going (makes facial expression). Just, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you know, not many people know her at that state, you know, before she went--so, what else would you say, what other stories do you have about her or that you think were sort of extraordinary about, you know, about your interaction with her that's-- Speaker 2: Well, I told you the one about Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], I think. We talked about that. Speaker 1: Maybe you told it on the other-- Speaker 2: Oh, that Oprah had invited me to go with her one day to give a speech, and she was going to Operation PUSH and she arrived to pick me up in her limousine and her hair was whatever. She hadn't put on her makeup yet. She was still--she was, she had her pantyhose. She was putting on her pantyhose in the car, and we get there, and we get to Operation PUSH, and I go take my seat in the back or whatever 'cause I'm just there with her. And Oprah gets on the stage, and this whole person comes out, so much so that I watched her talk. And I think I got tears in my eyes. Whatever she talked about was so grabbing. It was so moving, and when we got back in the car to go home, then she was just her same person that she was before. And I looked at her, and I said, "Oprah, how did you do that?" She didn't even have any notes. I said, "How did you do that?" That's just--it was so inspirational. It was so this and that and the other, and she just looked at me, and she said, "Well, I know, I was always told I was destined for greatness. I've always known it." So with her, it was just her. Speaker 1: And then her career really took--she became (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my gosh. Her career really-- Speaker 1: Took off. Speaker 2: Because she listened, but she's really smart. I mean she listens, and she takes things in, and she applies them and-- Speaker 1: You know, we were--I think, don't remember, a recent conversation was talking about the number of people who have come here to Chicago [Illinois]--'cause I mean you, you came here younger, so you, you know, essentially grew up here. But the people who came here and how people, their careers took off, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --you know, like, you know, Michael Jordan. That's the, you know, his career took off, Oprah Winfrey, her career took off. And people talk--what about this city allows for someone to come in from the outside and, and still be really quite accepted and extraordinarily, you know, and I mean the same thing with Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. I mean, you know, we can sort of look at people who came and then really hit the national stage in a major way. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Ludacris was just--I saw, just Ludacris the other day who was saying how he started here, and certainly, all those people from Second City [The Second City, Chicago, Illinois]. I think that we're really a small town within a big town. I think the area in which things are really popping is a small town. And if one goes out and gets involved in the community, you can meet people easily, I think. Story_ID: 640637 Speaker 1: There're other people that come and say this town is very clique-ish. Speaker 2: You're kidding. Speaker 1: (Laughter) There are, yes, there are a lot of people who say that. So, but I'm saying that maybe the town--and I don't know, you know, what it is. Maybe it recognizes excellence and accepts it in, you know, but once you get in, you're okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, but I'm saying, you, you came in, you know, you got into it, and you got into the, the heart of the white community. I want you to talk a little bit about this, this white community and the, the nature of the networking, the nature of the network because, how business is done. Can you comment a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Well, I think that business is done by people really being aggressive and going after the business. I think that many times people don't have a vision that--of exactly what they want, and I think that it's my job as a communications person to let people know that I can help them in some way. When I first started off--and perhaps now, I'm not as aggressive as I should be. But I really do think that one has to be aggressive. One has to be a Margie [Margie Korshak]. Margie asks for the business, and she asked and she asked. And I would be, early on more so than now, if I ask once and I don't get the response that I want, then I would sit back and say, well, they know what I do. And so I don't wanna be a pest. And it was Alderman Ed Burke [Edward M. Burke] who said to me, "Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], if you don't let people know how good you are, if you can't sell yourself, then why would anybody else? If you don't think you're the best, why would anybody else think so?" So you have to be out there and really show that you want something. And then people will sense that security, you know, that confidence and give you a chance to do it. So I think that one really has to work hard and to be aggressive and to go after something and let somebody know what indeed, you, you have, you bring to the table that can be helpful. People frequently say you know everybody. It's not that I know everybody because I don't work at it. And I used to work at it harder, and I'm starting that over again. I would read the newspapers and see who's gotten promotions and then write them a note and congratulate them on their promotions. And to this day, people say to me, you know how rare it is to get a note or that people take the time. People remember. So I guess one has to have confidence, which I have in some days and some days I don't. But one has to have a confidence that I've got some creativity and I can do this. So it's a matter of letting other people know that you can do it. People frequently say in the area of public relations--which is, I guess, why I'll never get rich, people say well, I don't want any public relations. You know, I don't know what that means. And, and so in our world, we've, we've come to use the word civic affairs, community affairs, community relations, but it's really all the same thing, about getting your name out into the community, getting the client's name out into the community, showing someone that you can do good, that you've got something to say, that you've got something that will be of interest to them. It's all about it, and you're right. I think the business has changed because of shows on television, the whole idea of a publicist and with celebrities, publicists have developed brands of their own. But in Chicago [Illinois], it's really about letting other people know what you can do for them. I'm fortunate that because of the publicity that I had in my early life--I mean earlier on, people know the name, and then it got to a place where I decided, I don't want any more press, and I wasn't taking any stories. And that's probably not my best move because people do pay attention to whom they read about. But, but for years, I would say, no, I don't, I don't want my picture, I don't want anything. But, but I've learned that that kind of visibility for me, even though I'm behind the scenes, is still good. Story_ID: 640638 Speaker 1: So, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], this is--so you had to learn how to operate your business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois]. So, I mean, so can you talk about some of your learning lessons around because, you know, you've talked a lot about well, I'm creative, you know, so hence, then I should be okay, and I've got a rolodex, but what are you learning about the business of PR [public relations] in this town. And, and what was, you know, you said that, he was right, so what did that mean? Speaker 2: Well, it means that, that there are certain people who will help you out of an obligation. For instance, as this one person [Miles Berger] said to me, "Margie's [Margie Korshak] Jewish, I'm Jewish, I'm gonna help my--I'm gonna help her." That's that. I think that people have all kinds of reasons that the doors are open to some and not to others, but I think a lot of it has to do with the familiarity. This one is a friend of mine. This one's recommended through this or whatever. That's how I think business is done. Business is done by certain people calling, opening the doors for you. It's as simple as that, giving you the opportunity to prove that you can do something. And so I think that it's opportunity and hard work, and, and some kind of track record to show. And, it's a bit of luck and some of us--some, some people have it and some of us don't have it as well as others. There're some people who just have more and more opportunity. But in my experience I have to constantly be aware and remind people that I'm here to do a job. I mean people will call up all the time and ask for freebies, but when they've got money to spend, they'll call and give it to someone else. Speaker 1: Well, that--those are, those are disappointing experiences, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The whole idea of how to turn one's social contacts into business is not something that I feel that I have I have learned fully. I mean I under--I understand it intellectually. I don't do it as, as well as I should or as well as I think it should be done. I will sometimes be in networking situations, and I figure, well, this one knows what I do. I don't have to remind them, and I could be knocked over by men who will come right up, if I'm talking to somebody as though I'm invisible, and start pushing their business. I think that men are a lot more aggressive than, than women are about letting people know what they do and how people can be helpful. Speaker 1: So you're talking about the challenge that a lot of females face, you know, in business. You're talking--and women talk about that all the time, you know, in business, but you're also talking about the, you know, some of the aspects, but up to this point, you really had--you had been in a colorblind kind of situation. And then when you opened your business, it's where do you fit, you know, because someone might wanna put you, you know, 'cause you have the SBA [Small Business Administration] or the WBA, you know, women business-- Speaker 2: MBE [minority business enterprise], WBE [women owned business enterprise], um-hm. Speaker 1: W--MBE, WBE, you know, they're--you know, the city built up. I mean, you know, it became a focus under Harold Washington, and, you know, and opportunities were opened there. So, but what are--can you talk about that because that can be somewhat complicated. Sometimes the business is so small that it's not worth it (laughter), you know. Speaker 2: I think that process is one that really needs proving. I mean that it really needs fixing. I think it's a sick process. The idea that one can make you go through all kinds of hoops to prove that you're a minority is crazy to me. Some of the things that one has to do makes no sense. And it's supposed to be that, that it's my understanding that the whole process was designed to give people the chance to get their foot into the door and to build their business, to be the start point. I've got a contract with the city, so that's my start point. Rather than that working properly, it seems to me that the same people keep getting the jobs over and over and over again, and become multi multi millionaires. And the whole idea of it giving a chance, a handicap for other people to get in the door, to me does not work. And the whole process of contracts does not work. I mean we're certified in all of those areas. Have I gotten any work through it? I don't think so. Do I get any RFPs [request for proposal] from the City of Chicago [Illinois]? No. And then I turn and, and I hear--I have people check, and they say, well, those contracts really don't come through the city. They come from someone telling their friend, whatever. There're all kinds of ways of getting around the contracts. So I'm not at all enamored with the process, though we are certified and we constantly renew. Does it really work? I don't think so. Story_ID: 640639 Speaker 1: When you look at your business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois], what are your strongest years, you think, when you look at that because you even talk about, almost as if you let the, the foot off the pedal or you decided to, you know, you said, I'm gonna scale back. So I'm just wondering if you look at your, you say twenty, twenty something--well, it's more than--it's twenty-five. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah it's more--no, I--what I think I said, when I scaled back in terms of the publicity on me-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --because I thought that that was perhaps not as positive as it should be, only in that I'm in the press so much. But I find, I, I think that was not a good move. Speaker 1: So you didn't wanna upstage your clients, is that right, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. I mean people would call me for stories, and I said, no, I don't wanna do it this time. But I don't think that that was the smartest move because I think people remember whom they, (laughter) whom they've read about lately. And, and so, but people still come up to me and say, "Oh, I know you as a model. You're--are you still modeling?" You know, it's stuff like that that kind of bothers me. I got that as recent as last night. And I look at myself and go, that would be, no. That would be, no. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But, you know, but during this time, Dori, there--we had, we've had an interesting shift in society during this time, at the time that you were being, maybe reflective and pushing back. That was at the time that we were starting to have the, you know, shortly after that would have been or around that time, the emergence of reality shows and people becoming, you know, the total focus. Speaker 2: Megastars. Speaker 1: The total--well, the focus on celebrity, and everyone being a celebrity, and even, now, I've even had young people in their forties talk about their personal brand. I remember one time, it was on a--so this is a little, you know, things that--so all that shift, we have to look in the context of, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, you know, I was with Michelle Flowers [Michelle Flowers Welch] the other day, and Michelle--two days ago. We were unfortunately, at a funeral. But Michelle Flowers said to me, "You had a brand before you knew you had a brand." And I looked at her, and I said, "What?" She said, "My cousin who lived in Cleveland [Ohio]," or somewhere, "knew of you--I said something about [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson, and she said, 'Well, I know Dori Wilson.'" And she says, "Well, how do you know Dori Wilson? You live in Cleveland." And she said, "You don't even realize the impact that you were making." And I don't. And so I'm very flattered when people will come up and say, "I saw you when I was a little girl," (laughter), "and it made me decide to wanna do this." And then I realized what an impact the printed word does have. Story_ID: 640640 Speaker 1: I say that because, or I, you know, I wanted you to comment about that because, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], I think there's also something else. This city still, to this day, is very segregated. Speaker 2: Very. Speaker 1: Very. Speaker 2: Very, you look at that--go to the restaurants downtown. It's very apparent. Speaker 1: And not many people cross over. It's very--not many. I mean I think about the times like, you'd either go to a black party, you know, where it was black or you would go to white parties, and there would be one or two. That's it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: And so can you speak to that and this, you know, this city because it's a complicated city in many, many ways. Speaker 2: Well, I wonder if it's because of the emergence more of neighborhoods. And so people don't have to come downtown anymore. They go and dine out and go to the theater and support their own little pockets of neighborhoods is what I wonder if that's it. There was a time when everything was going on, it seemed to me, like down here. All the good restaurants were down here. I frequented things--when I say down here, I'm sorry, I should say downtown. Speaker 1: Downtown (laughter). Speaker 2: I frequent things downtown because that's where I've lived since I moved from my parents' [Fannie Brown Wilson and William Wilson, Sr.] home, and so the things that I went to on Michigan Avenue or Oak Street or Rush Street or whatever, was because it's right in the area. And, and from being in this area--or in an area for a long time, one gets to know the waiters and the waitresses and the people who work at the stores, and the people who you see on the street. You get to--a familiarity. And I'm wondering if it's because there are so many restaurants in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], for instance, or maybe the suburban areas that people go to, I wonder if that's it. But I also know that some people don't feel quite comfortable in the black and white community that I live in, and they don't feel comfortable going places if they don't see people who look like themselves. It's never bothered me, but I do know very powerful black people who have said to me, "I'm not coming to that restaurant because I don't see any other black people in there." And, and that's their right, but I really--when I say I don't see color because I'm very proud of what I am, it doesn't--I've never--I will go to Josephine's [Josephine's Cooking, Chicago, Illinois], Josephine's place on 75th [sic. 79th Street] or wherever it is. I go to, you know who I mean, Josephine Wade. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I go to Brown Sugar Bakery [Chicago, Illinois] on 79th [sic. 75th Street]. My friends now are going to Brown Bakery on 79th. My friends travel from Far North [Far North Side, Chicago, Illinois] to go to Brown Sugar Bakery. I go wherever it is I wanna go. I go to Pricilla's [Priscilla's Ultimate Soulfood Cafeteria, Hillside, Illinois], I go to wherever I wanna go and where, wherever it's convenience to go--wherever it's convenient for me to go. Why other people don't, I think has to do with a comfort level. There was a place in downtown Chicago [Illinois] a while ago called Houston's. Do you remember that? For some reason, Houston's had an incredibly large African American clientele, who came downtown to go to Houston's. Other people in other places in the area had no black clientele. It was amazing to me. But they had accomplished this comfort level success. And subsequently, Houston's closed, and I was told that it closed because it had too many black people. So I don't know. Speaker 1: No (laughter), that's absolutely right. Well, you know, we had, I mean in Chicago, we've not had a lot of black clubs, I think like other cities, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I mean the clubs would get--they would start, you know, like if it were a nice black club, which we haven't had a lot since I've been here. So it would be a nice, black club for about a heartbeat-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and it would be almost too black, and, you know, and then I often think about how 47th Street, like whatever that hotel is over there, that is the--I can't remember-- Speaker 2: Sutherland [Sutherland Hotel, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: Not the, no, no, no. It's the-- Speaker 2: Oh, on the lake [Lake Michigan]? Speaker 1: On the lake. So when I first came, on Friday nights, everybody, the cars would be lined up, and I'm like, seriously. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that has been--I don't know why we've had the issue here, but in the area that you have lived, the East Chestnuts [Street], the--you know, around the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois] and the downtown area-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: This was--this is the area that was, you know, the people would come and, and see the city and it, it's the tony part of town--what I would call the tony part of town-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, and where the wealthy white and the few blacks, you know, that lived in that part of the city, lived, but you're saying--see, that is an interesting thing what you've just said, is that not many people, like it never got integrated that way because not many people feel, still comfortable, even though the down--you know, the downtown area has become, like really vibrant, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes, and I've heard it said to me, "Why would I spend my money in a place where I don't feel that I'm welcome?" And these are from African Americans--I've heard this a few times from African Americans who could well afford it, yeah. Story_ID: 640641 Speaker 1: So why don't you talk about the International Film Festival 'cause I think you were there--you were early, right? Were you at the beginning? Speaker 2: Number two. Speaker 1: Number two. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, because that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, again, we go back to people whom I know, whom I've known for a long time who are movers and shakers. When I met Michael Kutza who was founder and director of the film festival, he was on either festival two or festival three. And I came on the board, and am still a board member emeritus, and we've had everybody in the world in town for the Chicago International Film Festival, from Tom Cruise to Steven Spielberg. We've got Joan Fonda coming in next week, Helen Mirren, you know, it's-- Speaker 1: Jane Fonda, Jane Fonda. Speaker 2: Jane Fonda's coming in. Did I--what did I say? Speaker 1: You said, Joan Fonda. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. I meant to say Jane Fonda is coming in next week. And--do you want me to start that over? Speaker 1: Yeah, you can start that over because I would--in starting it over, also continue to talk about what state it was when you, you know, when he started because it grew phenomenally. And I don't think it, you know, I mean it may have made a big splash, but it really set, set the stage for--a lot of other film festivals would go on. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. When, when I met Michael Kutza who is the founder and director of the Chicago International Film Festival, he was a young fellow who had inherited a lot of money. And his dream had always been to open a film festival, and he's always loved festivals. I believe that that was festival number two or three, and I think that now he's going into his fifty-fourth year. During the time, the first--I don't know, fifteen or so years, Michael totally funded the festival on his own. And the festival is, is heralded as one of the--if you've gotta go to a festival in the United States, it is the most respected festival in the United States, and therefore, it has drawn the likes of Ron Howard and Steven Spielberg and Tom Cruise and Jane Fonda and Helen Mirren and Robert Redford and everybody, and Gina Lollobrigida, Sophia Loren--if I think of the people whom I've met from my years of involvement in the festival, where I am, indeed, a board member emeritus. But early on, these were the same people who were starting out at the same time I was. They, when I started out, there was a big involvement in community and in work on charitable boards. And so I am on lots of boards, or I have been more active perhaps even in earlier years. But I serve on one of the boards of Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Sandy Guthman [Sandra Polk Guthman] and Joan Harris [Joan W. Harris] came to me when they had the idea of forming a theater that would be a theater, a wonderful state of the art structure that would be the house for many of our--the performing vehicle, the performing venue for many of our community theaters. And, therefore, a couple of years later, after us working on it, the Harris Theater [Joan W. and Irving B. Harris Theater for Music and Dance, Chicago, Illinois] was born, which is recognized as one of the premiere venues in the country. And it is also the home for fourteen local performing arts theaters who, when, indeed, they do their yearly performances, do it through the Harris. Speaker 1: Which is really a central part of Millennium Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, the Harris Theater of, of Music and Dance. And, again, I've known Joan Harris from--for years and years, and most of the charitable involvements that I have are through people whom I've known for a very long time. And I feel very committed to, to--that we have to give back some kind of way. We have to, we have to get involved. We have to help those that are less fortunate. I love animals, and therefore, I serve on the PAWS [PAWS Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], one of the PAWS boards, P-A-W-S. Pets are worth saving too. Speaker 1: Now, you know, I just--I was honored with a, you know, Chicago magazine, and I--and she was honored, and I hadn't heard of PAWS at that point, but I mean it's really--it has a beautiful facility. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And, and she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paula Fasseas is marvelous, and she takes it out into the community. And a couple of weeks ago, if you'd come by Oak Street, I would have been standing there on the corner in the cold, begging for money for PAWS, and I--and we did, we did very well. But I'm so impressed with what Paula Fasseas has done. In her giving-- Speaker 1: How do you spell her last name? Speaker 2: F-A-S-S-A-S [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Paula Fasseas. Story_ID: 640642 Speaker 1: I wanted to talk about the academy high school for the performing arts [Chicago Academy for the Arts, Chicago, Illinois] that you founded. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't found. I was a part of a group. I had a friend, Larry Jordan, who was a public school teacher, a teacher of dance in the Chicago Public Schools system. And there was a time when art and dance and theater were--the arts were cut out because of budgetary reasons. And for many talented youth, the only incentive to going to school is the chance to participate in their art and dance and music courses. So with those being cut out in school, Larry, who was a school teacher and who had gotten let go, if I recall, because of that, decided, let's form a high school. And let's form a high school like the one depicted in the musical 'Fame,' in the movie 'Fame,' the New York school for the performing arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. And so, we worked with Joan Wrigley and Essee Kupcinet and Joyce Sloane from Second City [The Second City, Chicago, Illinois], these were big names at the time in getting this high school for the performing arts opened. And it has gone on to produce some wonderfully talents students. It was the first school of its kind in Chicago [Illinois] where one could go and study in their particular talent, as well as get their interdisciplinary training, you know, their academics as well as their creatives. And it's a wonderful institution still and I'm very proud to have been involved in that. Story_ID: 640643 Speaker 1: I just wanted to just mention. List, name a few of your PR [public relations] projects that you've had over the years [at Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois], and wanted to see if you can share, you know, maybe some of the PR objectives, of some highlights of those projects that you had, like the City of Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: For the City of Chicago, under the Jane Byrne administration, I was given a contract and then--after much and much talk, with, with Jane Byrne, I was given a contract. And then it was you tell us what you want to do. So because I had very--been very involved in the fashion industry, I knew that one of the things that Dorothy Fuller, who was very involved in the fashion industry said was that many of our local companies don't get work. And the City of Chicago could help us by providing contracts for the uniform companies to make uniforms or, or just supporting the fashion industry. So I went to the mayor, and I said, can we do something with the Department of Economic Development [City of Chicago Department of Economic Development; City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development] where that department would help develop Chicago's fashion industry, make it into a much more viable industry. And they did, and they formed the Apparel Industry Board which is still around today. And it's still involved with helping that particular industry grow, the fashion industry--the fashion and manufacturing industry. Speaker 1: Wonderful. What about the Chicago Public Schools? Speaker 2: For the Chicago Public Schools, I did work on--I've done a few things from a vendor fair for the Chicago Public Schools. But one of the things that I'm proud about--proud of, is under the leadership of the late Michael Scott [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.] who was chairman of the board, we did a program called Dancing in the Schools. And we did a project called--actually, it's called May I Have This Dance [ph.], and it was a project that, that dealt with fifth graders, male and female, at a time when the two are very tense. And so May I Have This Dance was a dance program where fifth graders would lend--would learn ballroom dancing. And the ballroom dancing would also be tied in with education from those countries, like it could be salsa. It would be the merengue. It could be something from Africa. It could be something from Brazil. So the boys and girls dressed, came dressed in their little white shirts and black outfits. They learned respect for one another. The, the males learned to, to dance and to interact with the females, and at the same time, they learned the academics that went along with those, with those countries. It was fashioned after a program that is in the New York school system [New York City Department of Education] and at a time when young students are so accustomed to hearing females spoken of derogatorily on the rap music. It was a program that was designed to help the two sexes at a young age gain a respect for each other, learn movement, and at the same time, learn a little bit about things that were going on in the world. Speaker 1: What about the City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that I was a part of the PR team for the City Colleges of Chicago, and again, it was designed at that time to just get some of the positive things going out, going out to the public about what's going on in the city colleges. And for most of the clients for whom I've worked, it's a project of, of educating the public of things that are going on that are good things, so that you don't always read bad stories in the paper. Speaker 1: What about some of the banks, like Independence Bank [Independence Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], First Bank and Trust of Illinois [First Bank and Trust Company of Illinois]? Speaker 2: Again, it was the same thing. I was on the board of First Bank and Trust, and, and, again, was--did some community CR [community relations], some community programs. As you know, the banks are, are required to have a certain amount of participation with the communities, provide community support for not for profits and in both of those instances, we were hired to highlight that, the community involvement within the banks. Story_ID: 640644 Speaker 1: So tell me about your nephew, Travis. I know that he moved in with you-- Speaker 2: Travis is now twenty-three and a student at Loyola University [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. He came to me, to live with me when he was ten. And it's been a very interesting learning experience to watch a young man grow up, to try to impact positively a life. We have some good days and some bad days. But he's a lovely young man who has survived in spite of a lot of obstacles that are put before the youth today. And I've very blessed to have him in my life. Speaker 1: Okay, when you-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, so how did Travis come to live with you? Speaker 2: Well, I've always been fond of Travis. He's my brother's [William Wilson, Jr.] child. And I've been fond of him--I was there at the hospital the day he was born, and my brother said that, that I almost fainted. I do know that I, I remember that I was there. And there were some problems and some difficulties in, in a relationship that resulted in me getting a call one day from the Department of Children and Family Services [Illinois Department of Children and Family Services], asking if I could help out with Travis. So I did, and it was supposed to be on a short term program. I mean I was sitting in my office on a Friday afternoon, and it's, "Are you [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson?" "Yes." "Are you the aunt of Travis Wilson?" "Yes." "Well, can you take him because otherwise, he'll have to go into the system?" And without a doubt, I said, "But, of course." So Travis has been with me ever since. Speaker 1: How has, how has he adjusted to that and how have you adjusted to that? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's been a learning experience for us both. I think that it's provided stability in Travis' life that he had not had for, for a while due to issues not--none of which he was responsible for and none of which could he control. So I've tried to provide him with some stability and, and love, not to say that he didn't have love before, but just try to make his life as pleasant as I can. And he's had some opportunities that have come from my feeling that it takes a village, and so he goes to summer camp. And he--I mean he has gone when he was young, younger, summer camp in Wisconsin and in Michigan and in four years, he participated in a program called the Cambridge program [Cambridge Advanced Program of Studies], where he went to study at Cambridge during the summer for five--four years, just a thirty day program, six week program, I should say, at Cambridge University in England [University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England]. So he was provided that kind of international exposure, not that he's a scholar, but it was a wonderful exposure for him. Speaker 1: So he's in college (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's very athletic. He's in college now. He's athletic. He loves to work out. He loves to swim. He loves my two doggies, Taco and Bell. He loves his cat. His cat is Tiger. Speaker 1: So what is he studying in school? Speaker 2: Communications. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Communications and the visual arts. Story_ID: 640645 Speaker 1: As an African American woman, I'm sure there're some challenges raising an African American male. What are some of the challenges you've had with Travis [Wilson's nephew, Travis Wilson]? Speaker 2: Well, I think that any woman raising a male has a chall- has issues, not matter what, what the race. I had--my life before had been all about Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson]. Certainly, I was very involved with my parents [Fannie Brown Wilson and William Wilson, Sr.], but I--but, and my family, but not on a day to day basis. So to get this little boy in my house, was frightening and, and I didn't know what to do, but I really counted on my friends to help me for advice. And one of my friends said, you know, get him in an after school program over at Fourth Pres [Fourth Presbyterian Church, Chicago, Illinois]. So I did. Others said, get him involved in, in activities. And so I did, go him involved in AYSO soccer [American Youth Soccer Organization]. This was stuff that I really did not know anything about. And, you know, it was really--I'm a girl, and, and though my brother [William Wilson, Jr.] came along when he was--I was nine when my brother came along, came along, I really did not have any experience with raising a boy. And, and, and certainly, I think Travis, if anything, has suffered from not having a regular--I mean a male in his life full time. But on the other hand, he's benefited from having this village of friends around who have been helpful. But certainly, it has been challenging. And I'm not saying that I've done everything right. I've just done everything as best I can. Speaker 1: Okay, when you think about-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So certainly, since he's lived with you for the last-- Speaker 2: Thirteen years. Speaker 1: Thirteen years, he's been exposed to a lot of things that he had never been exposed to. How has that experience been for him, from your perspective? Speaker 2: On one hand, I think it's been expansive, and he's enjoyed it. On another hand, he seems to feel guilty that he's experienced things that his friends have not experienced. On one hand, he seems happy that he's experienced them. On another, he feels that it, that it--he feels pressured. I think he feels pressured to do what I can do. And he doesn't understand when he gets to be my age, perhaps he will. I think at some times he seems to be competitive with me. He says, "Well, I can do this better than you, and I can do that." I mean I'm just learning about this. I don't really know quite how to best handle that, whether this is something that he's going through or what? But, again, boys, I'm sure, are different than girls. But then I've heard women say that their daughters are competitive with them as well. So we're in therapy. We're trying to work it out. I'm trying to make sure that I can get him some answers to the questions or to those areas that I can't really answer myself. I don't claim to know it all. And this has really been a challenge, probably the most challenging thing I've ever done. Speaker 1: And so, in what areas is he competitive with you? Speaker 2: Oh, he'll say, "Well, I can grow your business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois] because I know social media, and you don't." And then he'll get mad at me, and he'll say, "And I work out all the time, and I'm in good shape, and you're not" (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know. And the other day, he even said to me that he was, he has this part time job, and he works at music festivals with the help that goes on with, you know, putting on a music fest- he says, "Well, and so I'm going to put in a sixteen hour day, and I'm sure that you, with your sensitive little feet, have never put in a sixteen hour day." And I said, "Excuse me? I have done many of them, and when I was your age, I would never think about it twice." So, little things like that. I know they're silly. It sounds silly, but at the moment, it can be really unsettling. Speaker 1: Right. Now-- Speaker 2: He gets after me because he doesn't like the way I eat. He doesn't like the fact that I don't exercise. I get a lot of criticism, and I've learned to kind of smile, and to quote, not engage because I tend to try to answer things back, and I found that that makes things worse. It's been an experience. Speaker 1: Well, do you have--does he handle or work with you on the social media area of your business? Speaker 2: No, because I don't really get hired to do a lot of that. We're just getting into it more. But the clients with whom I work at the moment have another entity that handles social media. And though we can do some little parts of it, we're not a full time, social media agency. As you know, it's all very new, and everybody wants the social media, and everybody wants to upload videos and to do Periscope and to do whatever. And I do what I do best, which is advice and consultation, and publicity as it were. Though I understand some social media, I wouldn't venture to say that I'm an expert. And I have said to Travis, well, perhaps it can venture that you can do some of that or you can bring some clients into the business who want social media. I'm not closing my ear to it. He keeps encouraging me that I have to be new school, rather than old school. So you can know how good that goes over with me, right? You can just imagine that I'm just thrilled for that advice. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So he's challenging you (laughter). Speaker 2: I'd say so. Story_ID: 640646 Speaker 1: Okay, so I mean, in this community of Chicago [Illinois], you know, I'm sure it had probably crossed your mind as a, as a mother, as a auntie, about his safety. Speaker 2: For sure. Speaker 1: When you think of this community, and you've grown up in this community, what are some of the hopes and concerns you have for the African American community of Chicago, especially the young people? Speaker 2: I think it's at a state--I, I think it's at a frightening state right now. What we're hearing about happening to children, innocent children, innocent people in general, but I'm particularly touched by the children. There was a nine year old killed just last evening who happened to have been in a car, and, and somebody walked up to the car and, and started shooting. I think that it's very scary. I grew up feeling very safe even though during the time, there were gangs, Black P. Stone Rangers [sic. Black P. Stone Nation] and whatever, but I remember them fighting amongst themselves. I don't remember them just killing people randomly. I think it's horrific, and I'm scared every time Travis [Wilson's nephew, Travis Wilson] leaves the house, even though I think he's sensitive about areas in which he travels, I hope so. But I think it's spreading, and the problems are full city. I think it's a state of life, and I think it's extremely, extremely sad that violence has become the new normal. And I, I'm very disappointed that our politicians have not been able to attack that with the same diligence as they do construction and reconstruction of beaches and things of that sort, rather than the reconstruction of neighborhoods. Story_ID: 640647 Speaker 1: Are there some projects or things that you haven't had, yet, the opportunity to do but would like to do in the near future with your PR [public relations] business [Dori Wilson Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm fortunate to have worked on a variety of different projects. I guess I'd like to one day have that huge, multimillion dollar project. I've not had that. I think it would be fun to do something in, in the area of a reality show or, or to be behind the camera, brainstorming on something to do with a reality show. I love the new ways of communication, communicating and engaging people. I'd like to get involved with that somehow, but I haven't identified how or figured out how. So I'm not even very good at articulating that. But I am interested in always growing and expanding and utilizing what I know to take the next step. Story_ID: 640648 Speaker 1: When you look back on all the things that you have done, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Survival, the fact that I've survived, kept my doors open at a time when, in a business, and at a time in, in that a lot of people have gone by the wayside. I'd like also my legacy to be that I did what I could to help Travis [Wilson's nephew, Travis Wilson] and to help others. And I'm very blessed to have had a village of people who have helped me along the way in my, in my life, all of my life I've had that. You know, from the Julieanna Richardsons who helped me learn and who exposed me at a young time about--I mean at a time in my life, made me think broader. I admire people who think broader and who are visionaries. I don't think that that's my strong point, but I really am, am happy to have been exposed to people who have done that. Speaker 1: Okay, are you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By done that, I mean who have been, have had a concept to have had a vision and who have made a tremendous impact. I think that's terrific. Story_ID: 640649 Speaker 1: So, let--you know, I wanted to talk about the women's boards first because, you know, a lot of work got done with those women's boards, you know, especially, 'cause you were on--when I look at the women's boards that are listed here, you know, it's the Chicago Heart Association, Chicago Hearing Society, National Kidney Foundation [National Kidney Foundation of Illinois], Brookfield Zoo [Brookfield, Illinois]. Those are, you know, some of them. And so what--you know, 'cause a lot, you know, so can you talk about them, you know, the women's boards and, I mean you were saying you didn't like them anymore, but-- Speaker 2: Well, I think the women's boards certainly serve a purpose. I think that on the boards that you mentioned, and on the boards that I, that I've been on, the women are usually wives of, of prominent men, CEOs or they're women who are wealthy within their own right, and they're interested in giving back. Certainly, the publicity that one gets, the recognition that one gets from chairing a benefit that brings in a million dollars or whatever is very good for both the wife on the board and for her husband. It makes everybody look good. And, so therefore, I do think that historically, women, the wives, have always been, been instrumental in the life of many charities because when you're giving large amounts of money, when, when large amounts of money are being given to not for profits, usually struggling not for profits, it makes a difference. So there is no question that they make a difference. I'm on the board of the Harris Theater [Joan W. and Irving B. Harris Theater for Music and Dance, Chicago, Illinois], one of the founding members of that board which was formed by two very powerful women, both Sandy Polk [Sandra Polk Guthman] from the Polk Foundation [Polk Bros. Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] and Joan Harris [Joan W. Harris] from the, from the Harris Foundation [Irving Harris Foundation, Chicago, Illinois]. And, and that board also has--it's, it's a mixed board of male and females. The men are powerful within their own right, usually, very big in the corporate sector. And, again, they're giving back to the community, and they're getting recognized for giving back to the community, so the whole concept of giving back is tremendous. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: But whether it be on that level or whether it be on a local level of going, giving clothes to a women's shelter, which I do, and, or, or helping with, with furniture for, for abused women and children's shelter, which I do, it's the whole idea of giving back that is very important, I think. Speaker 1: Well, I mean I think of also these--it's the idea of giving back, but there're also tremendous contacts to be made there, and to be invited on, has a status in and of itself. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you mentioned, you know, Joan Harris and Sandy, Sandy Guthman is, I mean she runs a major foundation for education, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: I mean she's stepped down now, but, but-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, her family, the family foundation. Speaker 1: --her family, her family foundation. And Jack Guthman, a lawyer, you know, extraordinaire, and then Joan Harris is viewed as a powerful in the arts, you know. Speaker 2: Sure, sure, and her husband [Irving B. Harris] also was the cofounder, along with Valerie Jarrett's mother [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman], of the--I mean funded, I know, the Erik- the Erikson Institute [Chicago, Illinois]. So these are people who just have a history of, of not only making--doing well, but giving well as well. Story_ID: 640650 Speaker 1: I wanna talk about a few more--I do wanna talk about the service, but I wanna talk about a few more of your boards, like I--you know, when you were talking about Dorothy Fuller, I could not--because I hadn't thought of that name in a long time. And she was the grand dame for the fashion industry here (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For fashion, yes. Speaker 1: And then you also had earlier, you know, mentioned Nena Ivon, you know, at Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue], you know, who also was a fire--was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --institution. Speaker 2: And still is, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. So I want you to talk about, because we started in fashion, but I want you to talk about, you know, how Chicago [Illinois] often feels like it's a second city, and it's not New York [New York], but the fashion industry here and what that fashion industry, how it may have differed from New York, and what it was and who were leading people here? Speaker 2: Well, I think the fashion industry in Chicago is certainly a lot different from New York. New York has all the glitz and the glamour and the, and the celebrities and--which makes it a really wonderful environment or so I read about it and I hear about it. You know, you've got the models who are photographed wearing the latest clothes, and we don't have that kind of outlet here for the kind of national exposure. Though we do have some, some talent here that has done well, it's really hard to make a living in fashion in Chicago on the level that it is in New York. And as I'm saying that, I'm just thinking that fashion, in general, from what I understand, has changed. It used to be that we walked into the stores, and we bought stuff and we were really thrilled to be wearing--I'm wearing right now, a Yolanda Lorente. We were thrilled to be wearing a Bill Blass or a Fendi or a Yolanda--and the whole mood in fashion has changed. It's not so much the big names any more as it used to be. It's those people who are creative and coming up with a, with a look. Certainly, there are the Guccis and the Valentinos and--but I think the emphasis is a little bit different. In Chicago, we have designers who are making a living, but who have found it really difficult to, to have a store and make that store work. We--I don't know that we have one local designer with a store on Michigan Avenue. We might have [HistoryMaker] Barbara Bates on South Michigan Avenue. I'm not sure, but on North Michigan Avenue, we don't have anybody unless it's Contessa [Contessa Bottega]. She's a little bit off the beaten path, but designers talk about how difficult it is to make a living because of the competition that comes from online. And, again, that's be--that's part of the whole changing things in our lives. And then in New York, they have the Vogue and all of the fashion magazines. So they're able to push the designers on the latest models, and it all has become more personality than anything else that we just don't seem to have here because of our lifestyle. Story_ID: 640651 Speaker 1: When I had the contract for the Department of Economic Development [City of Chicago Department of Economic Development; City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development], and I was charged with the responsibility of letting us know something we could do, I went to Dorothy Fuller, whom I had worked for, for years as a model. But I was also a friend of Dorothy's, and I knew about her constant wish for the city or somebody to get behind us and help our industry. So it was because of this contract that I had, that allowed me to work with Dorothy Fuller and the Department of Economic Development and founding the Apparel Industry Board. Dorothy was such a believer in Chicago [Illinois] fashion and in manufacturers and the talent that was here and felt that we just didn't have the opportunity or anyone to pull it all together because it used to be the unions and the manufacturers and the small designers and so the Apparel Industry Board was able to, hopefully, pull everything together and have it, make it into a cohesive industry. And I give her a lot of credit for that, and I'm happy to have been a part of that. And, fortunately, her legacy is still living on. Speaker 2: And what about Nena Ivon? Why did she, of all the places, she sort of became really prominent and ruled the roost over at Saks Fifth Avenue. But not only that, it was what she did for lots of other people in the fashion industry. Speaker 1: (Background noise) Well, Nena was in a position to actually be able to showcase so many of the major designers, to bring them here. Speaker 2: Hold on. Okay. Nena, start again on Nena. Speaker 1: Nena Ivon who was fashion director for Saks Fifth Avenue for, I think, forty-five years, was in a position to showcase so many of the designers who, at the time, would come and make personal appearances, the Bill Blass, the Yves Saint Laurent, the, the Curage [ph.], all of the European designers used to come to the United States and in some of the major stores to make personal appearance. So Nena was behind bringing together so many of those. I remember working with Nena when she hired me to work for Ralph Lauren, and Nena is, is certainly--Nena Ivon remains a person who is so involved in the fashion industry and in the preservation of it, and, and, therefore, she runs the section at the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] that has to do with fashion. And she's a teacher at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and she is so supportive of fashion and everything fashionable. Speaker 2: I wonder--okay. Yeah, now, the--just as you were talking about that, I just--what about Marilyn Miglin 'cause that's another--were you close with Marilyn? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Marilyn's still around. Speaker 2: Yeah, she still is. Speaker 1: Yeah, she's still around. When I was modeling, Marilyn Miglin was the only place that I could find makeup that did not turn my skin gray. I was just impressed with Marilyn Miglin and her Marilyn Miglin model makeup, which is what it was called. I met Marilyn Miglin when I was working at Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company Building, Chicago, Illinois] doing tearoom shows. Marilyn Miglin was a model. She had been a Chez Paree [Chicago, Illinois] girl, and she'd opened up this makeup shop on Oak Street. And, and I loved it because of the variety of colors and the kinds of makeup that she had. And she's still around, and very busy on QVC. You know, I think she's been with--maybe it's HSN [Home Shopping Network]. She's--one of them she's been with for like thirty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) QVC, I think it's QVC. Speaker 1: Is it QV--for like thirty years. And I saw her recently, and she still looks great, and is still out there doing it. Again, what a legend. What a, what a--footprints in the snow she made. Story_ID: 640652 Speaker 1: I was looking at the black organizations that you are involved with, you know, which involves the Lawson House YW- YMCA [Lawson House YMCA; Lawson House, Chicago, Illinois], which is, I think one of the older YMCAs [Young Men's Christian Association] here in town, or the black--wasn't the Y--it's known as-- Speaker 2: No, it's not a black YMCA at all. It's on Chicago Avenue. But the Lawson House has recently been purchased, and it is now a--it segued from the YMCA into a house for homeless. And so it houses-- Speaker 1: So it was the men--men would come and stay there at the YMC- right? That was-- Speaker 2: I didn't know that it was men. I thought it was coed. It's been-- Speaker 1: No, but I think it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on that board for fifteen years, and it was always a place where one is segueing from homelessness. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And so, so it has now been purchased by Holsten development [Holsten Management Corporation, Chicago, Illinois], and they're making it into a affordable living. It's still going to be the same little one rooms, but it's so that people who are segueing from homelessness can live in dignity. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's a mixed, it's, it's probably, certainly one of the oldest YMCAs, and it's on Chicago Avenue. Story_ID: 640653 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about Black Creativity and also the, Joseph Holmes Dance [Joseph Holmes Chicago Dance Theatre]. So Black Creativity was, became our really, the society ball (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, my friend, Ann Cook Jordan [HistoryMaker Ann Dibble Jordan], got me involved with Black Creativity. And it was a wonderful experience. I will say that I haven't been there lately, but I certainly, proudly list it as the organizations with which I've been involved and was involved for a long time. The creativity that the, the creativity that they showcase is, is remarkable during that time that it, that it's done in February. And, again, their, their gala is one that is chaired mainly by women, I believe, but it does, indeed, raise an awful lot of funds which go to the preservation and showcase of African American artists. Speaker 1: That's right. And can you talk Ann Jordan, you know, Ann--it was Ann Cook, but then Ann Jordan because, you know, she, she's been gone for a long time, but she was very much a player here in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. And you--and the story of you knowing her young, you know, I mean younger when she's like, "Hello," you know, with the southern accent. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, because from looking at her, as I was told, it was prefaced by, "I've got this black friend that I want you to meet." And Ann Jordan is not someone who is obviously black. And, and I didn't realize that she was until she opened her mouth with, "Hi." And then I said, oh, my gosh. She is one of the most incredibly bright and kind women I know, incredibly connected through her long family history and through her marriage, served on boards, many boards, did wonderful work with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and I would always talk on the phone with Ann, and I was always complaining. "This one did this to me, and that one did that to me, and do you believe that this one said this?" And Ann said, "Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], Dori." "Yes, okay." "Dori, is it really important to your life?" And there like, I felt like an idiot. "No." "Okay, then why are you upset?" I thought that was wonderful advice. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she makes the best monkey bread. I remember at her--we went to her house once, and I couldn't get over the fragrance. I guess it reminded me of my mother's [Fannie Brown Wilson]--used to be my mother's yeast rolls. But she makes during holidays. It's called monkey bread, and she's just--it's just divine. Speaker 1: So monkey bread. What is it? Speaker 2: It's a, I guess it's old fashioned yeast rolls. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: But I looked up the recipe, I mean I got hers, and I made it, but it just--if you wanna have your house smell great, make monkey bread. Speaker 1: Yeah, she left us and then went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and it never stopped there, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never stopped, and, and Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] during the summer, and, and her kids are all doing remarkably well. I mean that whole family--there's somebody who has a history of success, you know. They, they've made such a difference in this country. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And they're all connected. Her cousins and her nieces and her nephews and I, that kind of family--she doesn't know anything but success, it doesn't appear. It's wonderful. Speaker 1: That's right. I say that family rules the country in many ways, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --because they've been-- Speaker 2: And, and her education, I mean the best of schools, long before-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --anybody else of color were doing the kinds of things that she and her family has done. It's just remarkable. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I'm so happy to know her. Speaker 1: And, you know, I think of her when I came here. I think of Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious], you know-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --because they were all of the same ilk and, actually, I think-- Speaker 2: And cousins. Speaker 1: And cousins, like I said, they--that's what I'm saying. The family rules the country. Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett's her cousin. Speaker 1: Right, Valerie Jarrett. That's right. Story_ID: 640654 Speaker 1: Can we talk about also your role with Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] because Columbia College, when you look at it today, and I know it's been--you know, had some ups and down. But from where it began, I mean it had--it owns the South Loop [Chicago, Illinois], you know, I mean, it's had--so who--the founder of Columbia was a man named--god, what's his name? Shoot, maybe it'll come to me. Speaker 2: Well, I came on the board during the days of Mike Alexandroff [Mirron Alexandroff]. Speaker 1: That's him. Speaker 2: Is he the founder? Speaker 1: He's close to the founder. Speaker 2: Well, I know he was around for years and years and years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). I mean-- Speaker 2: And that was really an exciting time because the whole commitment was for open environ- you know, for open enrollment that people could, could just come in and, and, of course, the arts opportunities, the opportunities for education in the arts were just boundless. And he was such a wonderful guy. He--we would, he was Greek, and he loved to go to the Greek restaurants with the board. We'd go out at the Greek restaurants for dinner and stuff at night. But I was just so impressed with the, with the very liberal outlook that the school presented and with the opportunities that it presented to, you know, to, to a base of talented, creative students. And now, it's--I was on the board for eight years, but that was a long time ago because it has, indeed, changed exponentially since then. Speaker 1: No, it has because I think Warrick Carter [HistoryMaker Warrick L. Carter] came in, and they did all the buying up of property. But I'm telling you Alexandroff was the beginning. Speaker 2: Oh, he was remarkable. Speaker 1: Okay, he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was, I know he was there for a long time. I'm very proud to have known him. He was close friends with my friend, Al Weisman [Albert P. Weisman]. And, you know, just wonderful, I mean. I can hear him speaking now, just a wonderful character of a man with, with conviction and the, and the strength to stand up for them. Story_ID: 640655 Speaker 1: And that's what I wanna talk to you about, this service aspect, you know, or what you would say is central to the Chicago [Illinois] that you came to and got to know. Can you talk about that a little bit and that you became part of the fabric of, can you talk-- Speaker 2: Ask me again? Can you repeat that (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I want you to--you know, I want--I started out by saying service because I do think service and civic engagement and companies that were homegrown. We don't have that as much anymore, you know. But there was a lot of things done between civic engagement and the business community, and, you know, and the city. And I'm just wondering if you could talk about that Chicago. You know, if you go back, and when I say go back, you know, to the time you got started and got invited in, if you could describe what you found unique about that? Speaker 2: I think at the time it seemed to me that the vibrancy is what excited me. There seemed to have been so much going on, and there seemed to have been at that time opportunities for involvement in what's going on and opportunities to get involved and to make a difference, which might not be as true today as it was then. But there were so many things it seems that were just starting so one could, if one felt, get in on the ground floor or be aggressive and know somebody and say, I wanna help with this or I wanna help with that, and, and it was possible for it to be done. So it was, it was a part--it was the feeling that I had of being able to be involved. If there was something going on in the city that I wanted to get involved with, I could call somebody and call somebody and get involved. I don't know that it's as easy today for one to get involved with community, with service, with giving back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, it's become a big business. There are, indeed, corporate titles called community engagement where they have somebody who's paid a lot of money to go out and figure out who can we help, where can we spend our money because they know that that kind of giving back supposedly makes them look good amongst this audience whom they're trying to attack--to, to attract. It's, it's grown an awful lot from those of us who just got involved because we wanted to do good and we wanted to make a difference, and we wanted to have a plaque in the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago [Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, Illinois] or we wanted to fill a table at Black Creativity. It's become almost a business now. Story_ID: 640656 Speaker 1: And, you know, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn] was starting to ask you about your hopes and concerns about the black community. Or, or I could start saying that--let's start with the Chicago [Illinois] community, and we'll go to the black community? Speaker 2: The Chicago community is--well, right now, we're at a particular political time in our, in our lives the likes of which I have never seen. It's something that's on the tongues of all of my friends. What are--what can we do? Is there anything that we can do? Is it helpless that our present--and, and a lot of my friends are Republicans. I am not, but what friends of mine are saying now is that the, the powers that be in Washington [D.C.] at the moment have affected their interpersonal relationships, that friendships have gone down the drain, that--one of our friends--we have a mutual friend who was so concerned about the impact that this, the trickledown effect that what's happening in our political system right now has had that she went and talked about it to her shrink. And she said, "My African Americans friends whom I've had for friends for twenty and thirty years no longer wanna talk to me." And the therapist to whom she went said, "You wouldn't believe. I've had divorces come through my office, friendships have broken up, marriages have broken up because of the whole disconnect between what we're being told by our political power and elected officials, that it's impacting our lives, the trickledown." I think that Chicago as a community is up in arms because of what's going on, again, with our budget in Springfield [Illinois]. I think that there's kind of a hopelessness in Chicago. The, the--it seems to be the emphasis on business and not on people. People seem to have been--people are not considered anymore. I mean the political structure says, well, it's up to the families, but the families have been such trouble. You've got kids raising kids. There--there's such hopelessness in the communities, much of which still look like bombed out Beirut [Lebanon], though I do say that it's positive that we've got Whole Foods [Whole Foods Market, Inc.] and some of the other food people coming into this bombed out Beirut area, but there's many, too many bombed out buildings. There's many, too many vacant lots, many, too many children that are on the street, and the violence, I, I refuse to accept that our political powers can't do anything about it. Maybe some of the money that has been recently announced to go to the redevelopment of Oak Street Beach [Chicago, Illinois] could go to put some, some help into the, those--the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] communities. It is so annoying to me to walk down Michigan Avenue and to see four policemen on each corner when, indeed, they can't be found in the communities. And I mean groups of fours on each corner and just standing around chitchatting. Perhaps it's true, as some say, that the money is down here and therefore, the, the police are down here. I, I find that really problematic, but I feel helpless in knowing what we can do about it. The whole idea of people running for office these days is not necessarily the best person. It seems like the person who can raise the most money. When we have a little small town election where one has to spend $50 million to get elected, then you wonder, what is it that they're trying to get elected for that is worth $50 million. It's more than just the ability to wanna impact things. It's confusing, it's sad to me. Speaker 1: Yeah, I want the old Chicago back myself (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I do too. Speaker 1: I do. And I wanna be committed to what will make that happen. Story_ID: 640657 Speaker 1: I want you to think of yourself as the, you know, the little girl that you were who was at, at Farr- is it Farren [John Farren Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Farren and Shakespeare [Shakespeare School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Farren and Shakespeare-- Speaker 2: Shakespeare, Shakespeare I remember better. Speaker 1: And, really, you didn't talk about it so much, but there had to be some feeling of isolation, you know, in, in some respects, even though your mother [Fannie Brown Wilson] was taking you back and forth to, you know, to school, and, yet, you know, you broke on, you broke, broke through, and, and burst on the scenes. So I want you to talk about your life and what you want your legacy to be as that person that was once that little girl? Speaker 2: You know, I think I still feel that little girl inside. I don't think that anything in my life happened because I was smart enough to have a plan. I really don't think I did. And I--perhaps, it's because of the way that I was raised with, from early on in thinking we're just here for a short period of time because something is gonna come and everything is gonna start over. I didn't really think a lot about the future. I think if I had, I probably would have spent more time on my education. I was thinking about stuff for day to day, and though my mother used to say, you know, "You gotta think about tomorrow. Don't, don't spend all of your bucks [dollars] now. Spend--think about tomorrow." But on the other hand, I was going to a religious upbringing that said, you know, it's gonna be over in a certain amount of years, and, and so I don't think that I focused that much on longevity, and on the fact that I might live and, and--I don't think I focused that much. I think a lot of stuff in my life happened because I happened to have been in the right place at the right time. The right place, I don't know. A certain time and a certain space. Whether it was right or wrong, I don't know. It's just what influenced my life. It's not that I didn't have a big plan. I wish I could say I did, but I don't. Speaker 1: But don't you think--has anyone described you as naturally smart? Speaker 2: I've heard people say that, but I'm not. Story_ID: 640658 Speaker 1: So, Dori [HistoryMaker Dori Wilson], when, when all is said and done, what do you want people to say about you or describe you, when all is said and done? Speaker 2: A nice person who did her best and who really loved Travis [Wilson's nephew, Travis Wilson] and my doggies. Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you want (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I really tried to help others. You know, I, I really do try to help, not that I consider myself fortunate, but I really try to help those who are even less fortunate than I. Story_ID: 640659 Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: She did the best she could. I don't really know. I haven't given a lot of thought to that, and at my age, I should. Speaker 1: And if Travis [Wilson's nephew, Travis Wilson] is watching this, after you're gone, what do you want him to know? Speaker 2: That I loved him and did the best I could and that I'm very happy to have had him in my life...