 Story_ID: 360611 Speaker 1: This morning we're interviewing Congresswoman Diane Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson]. The videographer is Matthew Hickey and the interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. Congresswoman, can I begin by asking you to give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Um-hm. My name, Diane with one N, Diane E. Watson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my middle name is Edith. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I gotta tell you something, I was named after two grandmothers. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Edith [Edith Jacques (ph.)] and Belle [Belle O'Neal]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my father [William Watson] used to call me Edie Belle. And I just hated that. So when I got to the age of consent I dropped the Belle and left Edith in there (laughter). Speaker 1: And left the Edith? Speaker 2: And left the Edith-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --E-D-I-T-H. Speaker 1: E-D-I-T-H. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we this morning? Speaker 2: We're sitting in my office in Los Angeles [California] on Wilshire Boulevard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's considered Hancock Park [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Great. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October the 5th. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Two thousand and five [2005]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 360612 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you five very, very simple questions, simple answers, require only simple answers. But they tell me that it relaxes you and relaxes me (laughter) which is just as important. The first question, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I like red. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Mexican. Speaker 1: All right. What is your favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: Bermuda. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I had, I have so many. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you can give us two if you want. Speaker 2: --I might, my favorite, it's going to be all right. Speaker 1: Good. That's a wonderful one. And I did leave out one. Your favorite season or time of year? Speaker 2: I love the holiday season, from Thanksgiving through Christmas. Speaker 1: Okay. Good enough. All right. Now this is, well we want to explore with you the background, maternal background, your mother's [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] background, and how far back you can take us in your family. We'll do your mother first and then I, we will do your father [William Watson]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Let's begin though by asking you for your date of birth. Speaker 2: You need the whole thing, huh? Speaker 1: Um-- Speaker 2: Oh, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock] (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'll tell you what, we will (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eleven, twelve, thirty-three [November 12, 1933]. Speaker 1: Okay. And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California. Story_ID: 360613 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you for your mother's full name. Speaker 2: Okay. Her name is Dorothy Elizabeth O'Neal, maiden name, spelled O, apostrophe, capital N-E-A-L, Watson [Dorothy O'Neal Watson]. Speaker 1: Okay. And her place of birth? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. And her date of birth, if you know it? Speaker 2: January 4, 1910. Speaker 1: Okay. Good enough. Now, how far back on your mother's side can you take us, or do you have knowledge of? Speaker 2: I can go back to my great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was your great-grandmother's, maternal great-grandmother's name? Speaker 2: I think it was Mary Smith [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you happen to know her date of birth or place of birth (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I do not. I think she was in, born in Mississippi. And if I can just give you a little background. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: My grandmother's mother was the result of the slave master and the slave. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she escaped from Mississippi and went to Chicago where my grandmother [Belle O'Neal] and my mother were born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother had several sisters. And they were very fair skinned, my grandmother was fair skinned but not as fair as theirs, so she got the education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was educated at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] as a surgical nurse. And operated-- Speaker 1: Provident in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yes. And operated on the first open heart surgery with Dr. Williams [Daniel Hale Williams]. It was written up-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --in the textbooks, the nursing textbooks. Therefore, my older sister [Barbara Watson Coleman], deceased now, went into nursing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And did her term paper on my grandmother's education. So I just wanted to put that in. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: So, you know, they educated the ones that looked more Negroid. Speaker 1: Right, right. And-- Speaker 2: To give 'em a little head start. Speaker 1: A little bit of a head start. Speaker 2: And the others were just pretty ladies. Speaker 1: Now, back to your great-grandmother, Mary Smith, she escaped from slavery? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Are there any stories that you are aware of, of how this escape took place and approximately what time period we're talking about? Speaker 2: It goes a way back, and that written history has been done by a cousin and an aunt [Gertrude O'Neal Jones] who is now deceased, my aunt is deceased. But I can find it and you can, you know, put the dates and all in. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: We have a pamphlet, a brochure on that side of the family, my mother's side of the family. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we have a documented text on my father's [William Watson] side. Speaker 1: Wonderful. This is going to be a great interview. Okay. Then great-grandmother, Mary Smith, escaped, came to Chicago. Story_ID: 360614 Speaker 1: She [Watson's maternal great-grandmother, Mary Smith (ph.)] came and joined sisters, am I getting this all right, I mean, came to Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She came, I think she might have been the oldest one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then there were other sisters born. Speaker 1: Okay, subsequent. Speaker 2: And they were born in Chicago-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I met them, oh, it must have been in 1955 or '56 [1956], and these were grand ladies in Chicago. I have to give you a picture of that particular group. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they kind of, I, we were Belle's [Belle O'Neal] children, grandchildren, and they kind of looked us up and down. Well there was a color divide in those days as you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And they, hmm, they didn't, we didn't pass the color test (laughter). I was traveling with a teacher friend and who was very, very dark. And I remember having, meeting them in Chicago and they were very formal, you know. It was the first of September and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they had on their furs and their hats and their gloves and their jersey print dresses and they looked at us, we had on shorts, you know, Hollywood types. We had on shorts and had our hair up in curlers and all, and they wouldn't speak to us. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So I said-- Speaker 1: Very prim and proper ladies. Speaker 2: Yes. So I said excuse us, and we went back and got all dressed and came out and she, and they said, "That's better." Speaker 1: Wonderful. Speaker 2: Well, I came back and told my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson], I said, "You know, your aunts are snooty," oh, no they're not. Aunt Elizabeth [ph.] and Aunt Forrestine. And, you know, we used to hear stories about them 'cause my grandmother lived with us-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she talked about her sisters. But my grandmother talked about five people over and over again. Mahatma Gandhi and his satyagraha, his peace movement. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Eleanor Roosevelt. And Eleanor Roosevelt had a close friend, her name was Mary McLeod Bethune. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: My grandmother went to school with Mary McLeod Bethune. So it was Eleanor Roosevelt, it was Mary McLeod Bethune-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Marcus Garvey. Why Marcus Garvey? Because it was always back to Africa. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she would take my mother, seven of them, down to Aimee Semple McPherson's temple, to hear Marcus Garvey. They used to go on the streetcar. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Because they were just a generation or two removed from the continent of Africa. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so they talked about going home, going home, going home. And that was driven into my consciousness, going home. Well, you know, we came up, well, home is here. But they wanted to go back to Africa. So I want you to know it ran right into my mother's generation. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And I'm the next. There was, there was that strong, and I think that's what Alex Haley got across in 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family']-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --listening to the elders. My mother would make my sister and I--my grandmother--sit at her feet, and I must have been four years old or somewhere like that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and she would talk about Marcus Garvey, what a great man he was and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they always wanted to go home. Because as you know, the owner of the plantations would just literally rape the women-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --and sell the babies off. And they wanted to get away from that, they wanted to go back to what they knew. And so my grandmother, very, very strong, independent minded and so on, was the product of that relationship and was born in Chicago, there's much more to tell about her. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 360615 Speaker 1: What I wanna do is sort of get that tree, that Mary Smith [ph.], your [maternal] great-great-grandmother [sic. great-grandmother]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --escaped from a plantation in Mississippi and got to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your great-great, your great-grandfather like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I know very little about the men. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know about my grandfather [James O'Neal]. None of them were alive-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --when we were born. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But I know from the stories and finding relatives that knew. But, you know, it's amazing, when you start looking at the history of African Americans, you'll find that very little is known in the family line about the fathers. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Why? Because they were not around. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: And it was the mother's. So we have a maternal orientation, and I think Alex Haley mentioned that too. Speaker 1: Absolutely, he did. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He certainly did. Well, let's do this. Mary Smith managed to reach Chicago. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And there were several children born-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --which would have been grand (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aunts. Speaker 1: --parents and grand aunts-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and so forth. Speaker 2: Uncles, um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you give us the name of some of those grand aunts or uncles or your grandmother? Speaker 2: Aunt Forrestine. Speaker 1: Aunt For- spell that for me? Speaker 2: F-O-R-R-E-S-T-I-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Just, um-hm-- Speaker 2: --I'm going to have to think of all those names but I will give them to you-- Speaker 1: That's fine. Speaker 2: --within the process-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of recording this. I've got 'em all down. Speaker 1: And one of these was your mother's [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] mother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Belle [Belle O'Neal]. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: B-E-L-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Good. And-- Speaker 2: And Aunt Elizabeth [ph.]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: If you can't remember 'em all now, that's fine. Speaker 2: I'll have to, there were uncles and I'll give you their names (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 2: --in a moment. Speaker 1: Let's-- Speaker 2: And this all has been written so we can-- Speaker 1: Okay. So we will be able-- Speaker 2: --really fill with the exact. Story_ID: 360616 Speaker 1: How much do you know, or--about your [maternal] grandmother, Belle [Belle O'Neal]? Speaker 2: Well, she is the one that was educated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as I mentioned, she was a surgical nurse at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --operated on the first open heart surgery with-- Speaker 1: Daniel. Speaker 2: --Dr. Williams [Daniel Hale Williams]. Speaker 1: Right, Hale Williams. Speaker 2: And when she married my grandfather, James O'Neal, James Lyle, L-Y-L-E, O'Neal, she decided she wanted to bring her children west-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for an education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a learned woman and read, and she felt that the best opportunity for her and her family would be here in California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it took them seven years. And they stopped along the way, they stopped in Oklahoma where several of my aunts, you know, there are seven of them all together-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, were born. And we had some that were born right here in Los Angeles [California]. She told us about going across the country and stopping in these different places. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And my grandfather was a very enterprising man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he got out of his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was James Lyle? Speaker 2: O'Neal. Speaker 1: O'Neal, okay. Speaker 2: He got, and he always had the tendency towards becoming a minister. So he observed that there were no places to bury black people except in the churchyard. So he and nine of his friends, ten of 'em, bought up property in Oklahoma-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and called it, and formed a benevolent burial society. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was to be land for a cemetery for African Americans. And he then had the deeds to the property and so on. Put them in, you know, steamer trunks, they used to-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --put it in a steamer trunk. And a group of them were moving west, so he gave the steamer trunk to the first of his partners who was coming west, and they were coming somewhere around between northern California and Los Angeles, in that area, and he bought the steamer trunk with the deeds in. Well, over the decades those deeds just, who knows what happened to 'em. Then when my grandfather was able, he moved out and they went to Nevada. And they were the only black family in Nevada. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother's first husband, now, Lyle O'Neal was not her first. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: A person by the name of Mr. Rabouin was her first husband. Speaker 1: Can you spell that? Speaker 2: But Mr. O'Neal was my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Rabouin, R-A-B-U-O-I-N [sic.]. In the French it's Rabouin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. He was French. Speaker 1: He was French. Speaker 2: My grandmother went into the Spanish American War as a nurse. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: And she was aboard a ship down in Cuba, going towards Cuba. And she was one of these people who would take control, take command (laughter). And so her feet were hurting-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and she told us this story over and over again, and she went around looking for a pair of shoes that wouldn't hurt her feet, and they belonged to the captain-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and she married the captain. And so when the war was over, she and the captain, her husband, went as a team to work in homes. And they went somewhere in the South, and when they found out that she was black, they let them go. I guess, they thought with the name that she was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --French too. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So they ended up in, somewhere above Fresno [California], you know, people came in through channels where they knew there were other-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --blacks. And they had a daughter, Juanita Rabouin [Juanita Rabouin Phillips]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she's the one that just died last September. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: No, she died in July and her birthday was in September, September 26th. Had she made it she would have been one hundred, so we just said she died at a hundred. He left off on a train going east and they never saw him again. So my grandmother, having this one child, married James Lyle O'Neal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't know whether she, I am not quite sure whether she went back to Chicago [Illinois] and met James Lyle there or how she met him, but I know she was with Mr. O'Neal when they-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --came across country. Story_ID: 360617 Speaker 1: I do know that in Nevada, they [Watson's maternal grandparents, Belle O'Neal and James O'Neal] were the only black family in the town. So she could not put her daughter [Juanita Rabouin Phillips] in the black school, she couldn't put her daughter in the white school. So she sent her daughter to some friends at Tuskegee [Alabama] 'cause she had gone to school with the president of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] at the time. And then apparently, my aunt came back and lived here. She always wanted to come back 'cause she was sent away from her family, the only family she really knew. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And she felt that she had been abandoned. So I think she came back as a teenager to Los Angeles [California]. And we just traced her steps last year. I had two party buses and put all the family on, and we went to places where she went. And the interesting thing about that child from Rabouin, is that she went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and dated Ralph Bunche. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: So I almost became his niece (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, right. Speaker 1: And she formed the Alpha Gamma chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: I was made an Alpha Gamma at UCLA. I followed in her footsteps. I was fifth generation UCLA-en. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Because of that. And my grandmother had her working on the place, you remember that? Speaker 2: Um, on-- Speaker 1: Working on the place out in Westwood [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You went out and you worked at the place-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so you worked in people's homes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she would walk to campus. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Very interesting, yeah. Speaker 2: Let me just go back and catch a couple of things. First of all, the school in Nevada, do you know what part of Nevada or what town, what, where-- Speaker 1: I remember my grandmother saying that the, I guess, that they did a horse and buggy. And they would have to push the buggy up hills and all. And I don't remember the exact town-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but I remember that you had to go through the pass. And she said that a lot of people would stop there and they would stay there until they got the resources to go through the pass to come on into California. She used to talk about the Sierra Nevada mountains-- Speaker 2: Sierra, right, right. Speaker 1: --and all. And being somewhere up high in Nevada. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I can go back I'm sure and find the exact location 'cause-- Speaker 2: That pass, was it-- Speaker 1: --my aunt-- Speaker 2: --James, James Beckwourth's pass-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --he was the one who discovered it. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. And so I can get you the exact dates and locations and so on-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because it's written. This I'm giving you from memory. Story_ID: 360618 Speaker 1: You may not know the answer to this question either, but I wanted to know that if you did know, in Tuskegee [Alabama], who was her contact there at the time? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll have to give you that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Because that would have been-- Speaker 2: My aunt [Juanita Rabouin Phillips] that just died, her sister, her daughter went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and worked in the library there while she was getting her degrees, and she was able to research a lot of this. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And she brought, and put it all together as I said last year when they came to my home. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we just had a wonderful weekend, a wonderful weekend-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --going through all of that. Speaker 1: That had to be marvelous. Speaker 2: See her mother was always sent away. And when she went back to Tuskegee, she married there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he [A.C. Phillips] was being sent to St. Louis [Missouri] to be a principal of a school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was principal of Vashon [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] who were the black, they were the black-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --high schools there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so that's where they lived. That's where they had their family, and they lived there until she died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course, he died decades before she did. But anyway that's, I'm getting-- Speaker 1: Right. But-- Speaker 2: --towards the middle of the story. Speaker 1: --no, we'll tie all of this in-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --because I'm-- Speaker 2: So you go back to where you want me to be. Speaker 1: --I'm, let's go back to Grandmother Belle [Belle O'Neal] and her and James Lyle O'Neal [James O'Neal] deciding to go to, go west. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they got as far as Oklahoma. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they bought some land there-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and so forth before continuing on to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --California. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what I'd like to, and you may not know the answers, you know, I'm asking them so that-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --we'll have a basis. Speaker 2: And leave the blanks so I can fill them in. Speaker 1: Good to know, good to know. Grandma, your Grandmother Belle and James Lyle O'Neal (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By the way let me just-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --jump ahead. My youngest aunt died a few days before the oldest one died. And she had been the one to start our family reunions back in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was her name? Speaker 2: Gertrude Jones. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: O'Neal Jones [Gertrude O'Neal Jones], of course. And so she wrote the booklet, and I edited some of it. And when she passed away, she was living next door to me in Sacramento [California], of course, I left, and she moved from, we were in a duplex, and she moved over to another place. And so she finally moved in with her son. She had a minor stroke, so she moved in with her son and she had all the boxes. Well, you know, the younger generations, they don't follow this like we did. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So he has everything. At her funeral I charged my cousins, the generation under me, to form an organization to bring all the family history together. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So those papers and all are up in Sacramento somewhere (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So I just wanted to tell you that I can get it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and we can fill in the blanks. Speaker 1: Okay. The, now, when she died last year, this is Gertrude O'Neal Jones, how, how old was she? Speaker 2: Eighty-six. Speaker 1: Eighty-six, okay. Story_ID: 360619 Speaker 1: Let's go back to your [maternal] grandmother [Belle O'Neal]. There was one child when they, she met James Lyle O'Neal [James O'Neal]. And I have Juanita [Juanita Rabouin Phillips]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was born. Speaker 2: Now Juanita was born and alive when she met James Lyle O'Neal. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So he married her, she already had a child from her-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --first husband. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I can get you his first, Rabouin's first name, I don't know it offhand. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And I've just got Mr. Rabouin. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, you know, the, where I'm going with this, there were other children born, including your mother. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what I'm trying to do is get that, if you know their order, if you don't know the order (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I do. Speaker 1: --you can--okay. Speaker 2: Of course, Juanita-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Rabouin-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was number one. My mother Dorothy Elizabeth-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --O'Neal [Dorothy O'Neal Watson], number two. Speaker 1: Um-hm, go ahead. Speaker 2: Ruth Ann [Ruth Ann O'Neal], two words-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --number three. Pauline O'Neal-- Speaker 1: Number four. Speaker 2: --number four. James O'Neal [James O'Neal, Jr.], and he was named after his father, James Lyle. Speaker 1: So it was a junior? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Number five. Speaker 2: Number six was Gertrude O'Neal [Gertrude O'Neal Jones]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Number six. Speaker 2: And John O'Neal. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And I know in those days you had to have a lot of children-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --because there were so many things that could have happened. Speaker 2: Now, Mr. O'Neal had had a child by his first wife-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when he married my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So Ira O'Neal [Ira O'Neal, Sr.], and his son is Ira O'Neal, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who I just spoke to yesterday, he lives in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause his wife's daughter died on the operating table. So I'm gonna go back to her funeral. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On Saturday. Story_ID: 360620 Speaker 1: The seven children plus Ira [Ira O'Neal, Sr.], who was-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --James' [James O'Neal] son by a previous marriage. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they are, are moving. Speaker 2: Senior, be sure you put Ira, Sr. Speaker 1: Ira, Sr. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Right. Now during that period, I guess, Dorothy [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] was the oldest and-- Speaker 2: At home. Speaker 1: --at home. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Right. She was born in California, or was she born in-- Speaker 2: No, my mother was born in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --in 1910. Speaker 1: Oh, in 1910. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Juanita [Juanita Rabouin Phillips] was sent away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And came back to go to school. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She went to elementary school somewhere in Tuskegee [Alabama]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Alabama. And then apparently she came back. I don't know the year but I can get that, that she came back home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause my grandmother [Belle O'Neal] used to tell us about her staying on the place. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: See, at the home wherever she was working-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and walking to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So, and she used to go down to Santa, she loved Santa Monica Beach [Santa Monica State Beach, Santa Monica, California]. And so we went out to the beach and had lunch, you know, on the, there used to be what we called the Inkwell, and that's where people of color went (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now, now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that was here in Santa Monica [California]? Speaker 2: That was here in Santa Monica, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So not the Inkwell I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I took 'em all back into the past and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --and to the spots where she loved. Speaker 1: Whew. Speaker 2: And it's a lot of detail there but I'll try to keep on your-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --questioning, your scheduled questions. Speaker 1: Okay. We're gonna try to keep it-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, in chronological-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --order. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, your mother was actually born in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then they started moving west? Speaker 2: Yes. And when--she got here when she was seven years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And her father wanted to be a farmer. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, the entrepreneur farmer. And she, my mother tells this story now, about the only time she heard her mother raising her voice ranting and raving, was when, and they all ran into the kitchen to see what was wrong, she, and she always called her husband Mr. O'Neal, "Mr. O'Neal wants to move us to Watts [Los Angeles, California]." Where is Watts? And she said, "Mr. O," she was born in Chicago, remember? Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: And so going to Watts it's like going back to Mississippi, to the farm. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, he wanted to be a farmer. So he became a truck farmer. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: That's very typical here in California. Where you farm and you sell off the back of your truck. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 360621 Speaker 1: My mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] remembers at seven years old putting the baskets of whatever it was on the truck and selling the goods from the truck. And, you know, I'll never forget back in the 1960s, Mervyn Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] did a study, and--of black Americans here as to what they would want to do if they had a chance. And you know what came out number one? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: Blacksmithery. Speaker 2: Wow. Wow. Speaker 1: See that's what they knew. And then farming. Speaker 2: And I know blacksmiths was a trade-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a trade. Speaker 2: --throughout the country-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --for blacks. Okay. Speaker 1: I'll never forget that. And so my grandfather [James O'Neal] wanted to be a business farmer. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now that meant that you, that he and his wife [Belle O'Neal] would live in Los Angeles [California], but he would go to that farm in Watts [Los Angeles, California], get the produce-- Speaker 1: They moved out to Watts. Speaker 2: Oh, they did move out to Watts? Speaker 1: They moved out to Watts. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: And my mother didn't graduate from Jefferson [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California], she graduated, and we argued with her over that, she said, "Now let me tell you, it's my story." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She graduated from the high school in Compton [California], Compton High [Compton High School, Compton, California]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: 'Cause that's where, you know, you had Compton, you had Watts and Enterprise [ph.]. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so she had to move out there, and she said that it was the worst thing that ever happened to her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow, she did not like it. Speaker 1: --was having to leave. They lived on 49th Street on the Eastside. And he wanted to go, and he got a plot of land out in Watts, and moved his family out there and my mother was old enough to work with him-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and put the produce up on the truck. Speaker 2: And your grandmother-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --was a housewife? She stayed at home-- Speaker 1: At that point. Speaker 2: --took care of the children. Speaker 1: Yeah, at that point. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then he moved from Watts, he moved back to the Eastside. And he found out that his health was failing because he couldn't take the moisture from the ocean. So he went to Arizona for a period of time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: When he went to Arizona, my grandmother went to work and she worked at General Hospital [Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Where I was born. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she'd have to be at work at six o'clock in the morning. So my mother became the head of the household because Aunt Juanita [Juanita Rabouin Phillips] was back at that time, had graduated and was in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So anyway my grandfather came back and lasted two weeks and fell dead in the streets. He had an asthmatic attack. And he couldn't take the early morning moisture. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And he was a hardworking man. In the meantime, before he died, he started Mount Zion Baptist Church [Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church, Los Angeles, California] along with several other gentlemen. Speaker 2: Do you know the date of his death, transition? Speaker 1: It had to be in the '20s [1920s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Nineteen twenties [1920s], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, see he was dead when I was born. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So was my paternal grandfather. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But anyway, my grandmother would ride the streetcar out to, and you know, General Hospital is in Boyle Heights [Los Angeles, California], out to the Eastside. My mother ran the household and took care of all those underneath her. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, you know, one sister would buddy up with another sister and so on. My grand- my mother ran a tight ship. And when she married, she ran a tight ship. Speaker 2: Another strong lady in the clan-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, well my grandmother had to, you know, raise those children. Speaker 2: So you have a legacy-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --that's oh, that's good. Speaker 1: Absolutely. My mother lives with me now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And given her ways--I had, we have a live-in family and they take care of her and so I had them go buy her some shoes. And so she was showing me those shoes and she said, "These are really comfortable," and she puts 'em on the first thing in the morning. And she said, mom, she said, no, my mother, you know, you don't show me off like that. And I said, "Well how do your shoes feel, mother?" She says, "How they feel? They feel good. They feel good. What are they supposed to feel like?" Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I just wanna know if they're comfortable. 'Cause I'll go back and get you another few pairs, you know. She wouldn't hold her foot up. So Rose [ph.] just picked her leg up and she said, "Look at these shoes," you know. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And my mother is very, very, she's a Capricorn, very strong-willed. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you don't get her to do anything that she doesn't wanna do. Speaker 2: Well, she had to have been down-- Speaker 1: She's in dementia, you know, first stages of Alzheimer's and all. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But boy she knows what she wants when she wants it and-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Well that, that's wonderful, you know, you're blessed. Speaker 1: And we're heavy on the Irish side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Heavy on the Irish side. So-- Speaker 2: By that you mean, when you say-- Speaker 1: O'Neal blood. Speaker 2: Oh, right, right. I got you. Speaker 1: Scotch-Irish. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Heavy on that side, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Hard workers and really strong willed people. Speaker 2: Right, right. Okay. The, your mother is running the household, your grandmother has gone back to work (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To work. Story_ID: 360622 Speaker 1: Before we go too far, let's go back and revisit your father's side. And I wanna be sure that I do have that, I don't. I need your father's full name. Speaker 2: William Allen Felix Watson [William Watson]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the second. Speaker 1: The second, okay. And his date of birth? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know my father's date of birth-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --leave it blank. I'll get it for you. Speaker 1: Place of birth? Speaker 2: Kansas City, Kansas. Speaker 1: Okay. And how far back can you trace his family, grandfather, great-grandfather and so forth? Speaker 2: I have a cousin, Marilyn White, who ran in the Olympics [1964 Summer Olympics, Tokyo, Japan] in Japan in '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She won the mile [sic.], you know, the dash [100-meter dash], I guess it was the mile. And after she did that she came home, got married, had kids and didn't participate again. But she wanted to know where her athletic ability came from. And she found out that her mother was a tennis player out at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] too. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And so when her mother died, we were all there at the funeral site and my father's sister, Bessie Black [ph.], who died in 1999, was telling me, way back when, she said, "You know, I have a great aunt and she's in Chicago [Illinois], uh, no, Detroit, Michigan." And she started telling me, said, you know how you're standing there at the grave and, you know, you start talking about family. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she said we had a Bible, she had a Bible that must have been three hundred years old. I said, "A Gutenberg?" She said, "I don't know what it is but she had it." Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But the Bible was loaned to Prophet Jones' [James F. Jones] mother. Then the mother died, he had it and he died. So we don't know what happened to the Bible. So I said, I'm gonna have to go back there and talk to her. Well this cousin, it was at her mother's funeral-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --started to record some of this 'cause she wanted to know who she, some of the family background-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So over the last thirty to forty years, she has become a scholar and an expert and has written the family history on my father's side. And I think it was the Belforts [ph.] out of France that went to Quebec [Canada]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was the Belforts and the Landorfs [ph.], it's a, don't, just put a blank, blank and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I can get you all this. But anyway, they came from Quebec and they went down to Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we're part of that-- Speaker 1: That family. Speaker 2: --whole scene. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she started writing. So she's got all this documented, she's taken the classes, she teaches classes and all. But I can very quickly tell you that my grandmother was Creole, she was a Jacques [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Your fraternal [sic. paternal] grandmother? Speaker 2: My father's mother, Edith. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Edith Jacques [ph.]. And she, I'll just go through this real quickly to give you some background on that side. She and her sister, who was just, maybe a year or so older, her mother and father were in Chicago. Her father was organizing the Pullman porters before Bayard Rustin. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he got in an argument-- Speaker 1: And A. Philip Randolph. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --before-- Speaker 2: Before-- Speaker 1: --both. Speaker 2: --that group. And he got into an argument with one of the men. And apparently this man chased him, and this is my aunt telling us this at this funeral-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --when she would, you know, we got to talking about the family. And so she said that the man chased him down over a period of time, and either shot him or stabbed him to death in the street with his twenty-some odd-ish wife and the two young children, babies. And what you did at that time was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, stabbed or shot him, not-- Speaker 2: Killed him. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Killed him. Speaker 1: They killed him-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but not the wife-- Speaker 2: My grandmother's father-- Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: --not the wife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The children were sent to the orphanage. The orphanage was the convent, and it was the Order of the Holy Family [Sisters of the Holy Family]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where my grandmother grew up in a convent for thirteen years. They only spoke French. It was the only order, black order in the United States, in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: In the aftermath, well during Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], there were two missing nuns who would not leave the convent 'cause they--you saw that? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they had their dog with them? Speaker 1: And I saw that, I remember that. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where she grew up. She obviously came out and started a family. Her sister stayed and became Sister Philomena [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now because they were Jacques they spoke only French, you see, and they're direct descendants from these French people that came down-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and so on. Story_ID: 360623 Speaker 1: Now they married, the French married Africans, they married Native Americans, so we have, we found out that we're descendants of Hiawatha, no not Hiawatha, excuse me, strike that. John Alden [sic. John Rolfe]-- Speaker 2: Oh, and Pocahontas. Speaker 1: Pocahontas. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She had, remember they went to London [England] and she had six or seven sons [sic.]? Speaker 2: Right. I-- Speaker 1: We're off that line. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So anyway, down there they married into several Indian tribes down there. So that's who the Creoles are. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: They're a mixture of African and French and Native Americans. Speaker 2: And was your father [William Watson] from that direct line, in other words the grandfather was the child of one of the people who was in the orphanage? Speaker 1: Yeah, Pocahontas and so on. Now my father's mother was Edith [Edith Jacques (ph.)], she's the one that was in the convent. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Philomena [ph.] stayed in the convent, she came out. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: As a very young child, she went in the convent, her chore was in the kitchen because of her family background and because of working and preparing meals. And the nuns lived very exquisitely, like the pope does in the Vatican, I want you to know that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They're spartan but what they had was the finest. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So she served them on china and they had crystal and so on. And she learned to cook from her heritage. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: As far as I'm concerned, my grandmother was the best cook in the world. I have never tasted food like hers. Because what they did, they prepared food as the French do now. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they prepared, they didn't, there was no fast food, and they, she used a roux, do you know what a roux is? Speaker 2: Oh, yes-- Speaker 1: The roux is like a stock-- Speaker 2: --it's the base, yes-- Speaker 1: --the base. Speaker 2: --for the stock, yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And she made the best gumbo in the world. And all of my sister's [Barbara Watson Coleman] life, my sister's been dead eleven years now, and my life we've been trying to duplicate her recipes. But she learned them through her culture, through her practice in that kitchen, through using certain herbs. And they-- Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: You know what I was looking at down there with the destruction, I said, oh, I hope they served, saved a lot of those herbs they use. 'Cause, you know, creole food is extraordinary (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the written down recipes-- Story_ID: 360624 Speaker 1: But let me ask you this, did you meet Aunt Edith [Edith Jacques (ph.)] through--which was your great aunt [sic.]? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Aunt Edith. It's Grandma Edith. Speaker 1: Grandma Edith, right, Grandma Edith. Did you meet her through going to New Orleans [Louisiana] or did she come out to the West Coast? Speaker 2: My grandmother left New Orleans, and she came, I really can't tell you where she was living early on when she left the convent but I can tell you that she became a caterer and she worked for the du Ponts. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: And she was an exquisite chef and caterer. And when she would come here to visit her daughter, we'd go, and that was over on the Eastside, we'd go there and that was the highlight of my life-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to go where ever Grandmother Edith was because they would, you know, they church, serve the, and she would tell us, children are seen and not heard-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in our house so this, that, and the other. Very, very strict, being in a convent. And we always thought my father [William Watson] needed to be in the monastery. They were very, very strict, and they were devout Catholics. We were christened at St. Odilia's [St. Odilia Catholic Church, Los Angeles, California]. And you had to, my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] was Protestant and my father Catholic, and you had to promise to bring your children up Catholic. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So when Grandma Edith came we would have to be up at four in the morning 'cause, you know, the nuns were up early. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they'd put us in this much water, it was never hot, I said, "Couldn't you--didn't they have hot water running?" My sister and I, they, and on the street walking to church for 6 a.m. Mass. I can remember it today. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Just like it was yesterday. And it was always cold and kind of foggy, and so we'd be walking to St. Odilia. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she would sit on the first row. And I remember looking through the door and seeing, they had a, these, kind of like a washtub attached to it and that's where the water would drip and it would almost overflow, and I'd look at it and say, "Ooh, I wish I could go out there and play in that water," drink that water or whatever. Not paying any attention to Mass, it was in Latin then. And but that was what we had to do 'cause my grandmother, you see, came out of the convent. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they would feed us in the kitchen. And Barbara [Barbara Watson Coleman] would sit on that side, I would sit on this side, we would be served in china. And I can remember a clump of rice and a long claw of crab and a grainy texture, she used filo, not all this other stuff. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It was the flavor. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, here I am, what two, three years old-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and it was the flavor of it. And I can still remember it, well, anything she touched-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was magnificent. Speaker 1: Let me ask you, St. Odilia's, where is that located here in Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: That's over-- Speaker 1: Roughly. Speaker 2: --on, let's see is that Hooper? Hooper Avenue, and there was a school attached to it, but it's over in the area, the 50ths on around Hooper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. St. Odilia's. Speaker 1: On Hooper-- Speaker 2: It's still there. Speaker 1: Hooper and 58th [Street], or is that close, would I be close? Speaker 2: 58th is a little far, no it's like 51st [Street], 52nd [Street]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Over in that area (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's, that's good enough. Story_ID: 360625 Speaker 1: We've got your father [William Watson], and we've got your mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson], and though we've got a little bit of your mother growing up, we have nothing on your father-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --growing up. Speaker 2: My father was in Kansas City [Kansas] and I guess he was in, he went to school, I guess it was at Lawrence High School, Lawrence, Kansas-- Speaker 1: Lawrence, Kansas. Speaker 2: And right over on the other side was Kansas City-- Speaker 1: Kansas, right. Speaker 2: --Missouri. So he was working there in a theater [Eblon Theatre, Kansas City, Missouri] at age fifteen and sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At that time the ticket takers looked like page boys. Remember the page boys? Speaker 1: I sure do. Speaker 2: Double-breasted and a little cap and all. And the woman who owned the theater was Miss Eblon; she also was Creole. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my-- Speaker 1: Now this, this was a theater in Lawrence, right? Speaker 2: I think it was in-- Speaker 1: Or Kansas City? Speaker 2: It was in Kansas City-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born in Kansas City, Kansas, went to school there, and then I guess went across the river, as I understand it. Speaker 1: Right. It's just a bridge-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a bridge. Speaker 1: --separating them. Speaker 2: And worked in Kansas City, Missouri-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at the theater. He was the ticket taker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now my father was always well built and tall, and I'm sure at age fifteen or sixteen he looked like he was twenty something odd. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Miss Eblon fell in love with my father as a teenager, she was twenty years older than he. At that time they were segregated. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she looked like, she was from Louisiana so she looked like she was white. Speaker 1: Now the theater where he worked, was it an integrated theater or black theater? Speaker 2: No, no, it was a black theater-- Speaker 1: Black theater, okay. Speaker 2: --owned by Miss Eblon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he left there, he was an athlete, he left with his trainer to come to run on the beach in Santa Monica [California] to be the next Joe Louis. Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: And he came out here. And I can tell you my mother was graduating from high school, and she had signed up at L.A. City College [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California] as number 1003. She was the third person to register at City College, that's written-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --in the history. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And she met my father. Now a good friend of hers called her, they used to have brunch on Sunday at each other's houses. And she said, "Dorothy, don't come with George Tate." Do you know Rae Watkins Tate [ph.], you know, Rae Watkins? You remember Bruce Watkins [Bruce R. Watkins] in Kansas City? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, I remember. Speaker 2: His wife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His second wife-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --was Rae who lives here. Well her mom and dad and my mom and dad were like this. My mom would go with George, he was her buddy and he would be her escort. So she was coming to the brunch with George. She got this call from Ann Lankford who said, told her, "Don't bring George, come alone, I've got this new dandy out of Kansas City I want you to meet." Speaker 1: Now, you said Ann Lankford, there was a-- Speaker 2: Lankford. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: L-A-N-K-F-O-R-D, Lankford. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Called my mother on this particular Sunday-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and said, don't bring George. And so, come alone 'cause there's this new dandy-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know what a dandy was? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: You know, my father came in with a fedora, gray, a three-piece gray suit, and gray shoes. Speaker 1: He was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a dandy. Speaker 1: He was a dandy. Speaker 2: And he was tall and slim, you know, kind of muscular, he was an athlete. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he came to work out. He met, I've got pictures of the day they met. My-- Speaker 1: Now, do you have a date for me approximately? Speaker 2: They met in the 1920s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Late because I was born two years after they had married, so it was in the late 1920s. I can get you a date. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: All these blanks I can fill in-- Speaker 1: Sure that's-- Speaker 2: --it's documented. Speaker 1: --that's fine. Speaker 2: I don't have-- Speaker 1: That's fine. Speaker 2: --all these numbers and names in mind. But my mother had one of these clutch hats with the flower on the side, and this like, and these silk shoes-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and so on. And when she met him, she put her foot up and was leaning toward him, we've got those pictures-- Speaker 1: Wonderful. We-- Speaker 2: --out on the lawn. Speaker 1: --we-- Speaker 2: And that started a romance. She got married, and they married-- Speaker 1: So it was love at first sight? Speaker 2: It was love at first sight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 360626 Speaker 1: She [Watson's mother, Dorothy O'Neal Watson] had my sister, eighteen months later she had me, and then a few years later my brother, and he [Watson's father, William Watson] was looking for a boy. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So the first two tries presented girls. When my brother was born he was working at the City Hall [Los Angeles City Hall, Los Angeles, California] and he was an elevator operator. Now, you know, that was big time stuff back in the day. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Gil Lindsay [Gilbert W. Lindsay] was down there. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Judge-- Speaker 2: Now let me go back to siblings. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was Barbara [Barbara Watson Coleman], it was Diane [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson]-- Speaker 1: Barbara Jean. Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: And Diane Edith, and William [William Watson, III]. Now I got to tell you this story about my brother's name. William Allen Louis Felix Watson III. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then Patricia Annette [Patricia Watson Bradfield] is the youngest one, four of us. When I met this aunt, Sarah Jane Jackson [ph.], in Detroit, Michigan-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the first thing she said, "I wanna show you some pictures," and she had on the wall, she said, "This is my brother, William, my brother, Allen, my brother, Louis, my brother, Felix." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We never knew, we used to laugh at my little teeny brother having all these names, that's where they came from. Speaker 2: That's where they, so you go down the line. Speaker 1: That's where, that's why it's important to know your history. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, it's the best (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so my brother, my father had those names but he didn't carry all of them. He gave all of 'em, birth certificate that long (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, all the names. So he's really the third. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Good enough. Now and the, your mom and your dad they got married. Obviously, he didn't return to Kansas City [Missouri], he stayed out here. Speaker 1: He did not return to Kansas City, he stayed out here. He did not go back into boxing. He, I remember when I, when one of my younger siblings was born he was working at a potato chip factory. And they used to put potato chips in these green cans, tins. And I remember getting up, crawling up on the tin and getting in, you know, crawling on it, and leaning-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --opening it up and taking the potato chips out. Then he went to City Hall, and that's where George [George Tate] worked. And George married my mother's best friend. And when she decided she'd go alone, she said, "Take Elsie [Elsie Tate]." So anyway they paired together-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and they had a child who died when she was five. Story_ID: 360627 Speaker 1: We're still with your ancestors. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You haven't been born yet, of course. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But your mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson], she has met your father [William Watson]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And he, you know, they came together immediately. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Married and-- Speaker 1: He was working at City Hall [Los Angeles City Hall, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: He was working at City Hall. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: In the beginning, he, I don't know what he did, but I remember when I was like two or three, crawling on those tins with potato chips, so he worked-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for that company. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Then he went to City Hall and ran the elevators with George, his buddy. And George Tate was the last person he saw before he died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he went into law enforcement. And wouldn't you know he was trained by Chief Ed Davis [Edward M. Davis]. And Chief Ed Davis and I would end up sitting next to each other on the judiciary committee [California Senate Committee on Judiciary]. Chief sat on that side, and there was an undersheriff on that side from Riverside [California]. And I said to myself, when the chief got elected to the Senate [California State Senate], "Lord, what are you doing to me?" (Laughter) I mean, why would you allow this to happen to me (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was a reason, there was a reason. Story_ID: 360628 Speaker 1: Do you know, I gotta, just gotta tell you this story. They set up a series of orientation sessions for him [Edward M. Davis] and the newcomers to the judiciary. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And by the way, I was the first black, the first woman, and the first non-lawyer on the judiciary committee [California Senate Committee on Judiciary]. And the only reason why I got it is because David Roberti, my seatmate, when he became pro tem [president pro tempore] at my urging, he gave me everything I wanted. Pro tem before him-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --said, like, "Are you out of your mind?" (Laughter) Why do you want judiciary? And you're not a lawyer. I said, "That's why you need me." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I said, "You need some balance." Speaker 2: Some balance, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so he said, like, little girl go back to your office and don't paint it purple and pink. So when I-- Speaker 2: Now Chief Davis [Edward M. Davis] said this to you? Speaker 1: No, no, no, the pro tem. Speaker 2: The pro tem-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Roberti, okay. Speaker 1: No, no, Roberti was not the pro tem, it was the one prior to him, Jim Mills [James R. Mills]. Speaker 2: Oh, Jim, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I had just gotten elected in 1978. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I went in with my list of committees I wanted to sit on. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he laughed at me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He said, "Oh, no." And he was like, docent in a museum or something, you know, strictly to tradition and all. And I said well, you know, "What I've observed is that you need some balance. When you're making public policy, you need to hear from the people who you are making policy for." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I don't see that happening. So he sent me back to my office. Well, I talked David into, about three years later, I said, David--we had one of those protracted sessions, you know, that took us way in on the budget. I remember Cusanovich [Lou Cusanovich] was presiding over the Senate [California State Senate] and I said to David, "If you ever wanted to become pro tem, now is the time." He didn't say too much, and we broke for the year and I came back home. He called me, he said, "Would you come to Sacramento [California] and have breakfast with me?" So I did, and he said, "I'm gonna go for it. Would you help me?" I said, "Not only will I vote for you, but I'll help you get some votes." And so on the 5th of December, and that was 19--about '80 [1980], David Roberti won the position as president pro tem in a bloodless coup. My seatmate in the beginning was Jim Mills, and Jim never spoke to me again, never came back to the chambers again, and disappeared into the blue. I don't know if he's alive or dead. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: When David came in, he gave me judiciary, he gave me business [California Senate Committee on Business, Professions and Economic Development], the business committee, he gave me the chair of health and human services [California Senate Committee on Health and Human Services] with the second largest budget in the Senate. He gave me, and, of course, education [California Senate Committee on Education]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They asked me to be the chair of education, I said, no. I'm an educator, I come from the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education]. But Bobbi Fiedler got elected to [U.S.] Congress, and they called her a one issue congresswoman-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --bus stop. I didn't wanna be tagged as a one issue senator. I said, "Let me do something else." So here I go into health and human services. Now I had directed a program out at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], the Allied Health Professions Project. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that's the only, (laughter) only health experience I ever had. But anyway, that was a political thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--I've got-- Story_ID: 360629 Speaker 1: Now you said that Chief Davis [Edward M. Davis] trained-- Speaker 2: Trained my father [William Watson]. Speaker 1: As a law enforcement official? Speaker 2: Law enforcement officer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was one of the first blacks to go on LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department]-- Speaker 1: And that's what-- Speaker 2: --and my dad trained him [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And what year was that, that your father-- Speaker 2: Oh, boy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was way back in the early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: A little after you were born. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Right now we'll just put approximately (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me say it must have been like '38 [1938], '39 [1939], sometime around in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So you would have, you would have been six years old at that time-- Speaker 2: Yeah, six years, even-- Speaker 1: Okay. First black-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, one of the first blacks. Speaker 1: Oh, one of the first blacks. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were a couple of others and so on, but there were very few. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And his cousin became one of the first, Ali Drisdom [Albert H. Drisdom], became one of the first firefighters. And-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --I met up with a lieutenant in the fire department [Los Angeles Fire Department] last night, and he was Adam Burton's son, and he's heading up his department, and I said, "Oh, you know one of my cousins, deceased now, Ali Drisdom," he said, "Oh, yeah," 'cause he's doing the history, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: NOBLE [National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives] is the organization for black law enforcement officers. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So anyway, the reason why I went into that is that I ended up sitting next to the chief. And when I would make what they considered the wrong vote, he said, "Bill Watson wouldn't like that vote." And Presley, Bob Presley [Robert Presley] sat on the other side, so they had me kind of like in a vise, but I stood my ground. Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: And I could always raise questions. And I remember our attorney general was chairing, Bill Lockyer [William Westwood Lockyer], we fought for a solid fifteen years. We were in moral combat because I always raised the tough questions, you know, we analyze the bills. But anyway-- Speaker 1: Your father, what I was trying to do was establish that early '30s [1930s] history-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --through, through your dad and through your knowledge of what your dad was doing and what your mother was doing. Speaker 2: And by the way, they gave a fundraiser for Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] back in the '20s, [1920s] and-- Speaker 1: Back in the '20s [1920s]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when he first started in political life. And Gus is doing fine, I just talked to him on the phone, three or four weeks ago, they're gonna have a-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --big educational conference (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in Chicago [Illinois], I believe. But anyway, my, I wanted to tell you about my dad. And he got on the police department, and it was a perfect place for him to be, as strict as he was and as law-abiding as he was, that--and made us that way, that's where he needed to be. Story_ID: 360630 Speaker 1: Chief [Edward M. Davis] would always say, "Well, Bill Watson [William Watson] wouldn't like that," this that and the other. We ended up being bosom buddies, Chief Davis, if you can imagine-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --because later on I would attend all the meetings, and they'd say, "You don't have to come, Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson]," I said, "But yes I do." I wanna have this orientation along with him. And I heard him say, "This is the toughest job I've ever had, and I've had three." He said, "I don't know a thing about education," educational funding is very complicated. And it's one of the hardest products to deliver in this country today for a multiple number of reasons. But anyway, so we would talk all the time. And I said, who would ever think that I would be friendly with Ed "Hang 'Em At The Airport" Davis? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And, you know, we had so different philosophies. But anyway, we-- Speaker 2: The stories about him and relations, race relations are legendary, of course. Speaker 1: We competed for a position at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I won and he didn't. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And I was already working on a doctorate, you know. I, from the time I graduated from high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], I stayed in school and I, even when I was overseas teaching, I would find some university abroad and go. I was a student because my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson], my grandmother's sister, Pauline Slater, was the first black teacher in Los Angeles [California]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at Nevins [Nevin Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. Anyway, I stayed in touch with the chief and I went on to the Harvard program. He said, you know, and I went, I said, "I'm so sorry that you're not able to come, you know, into the program." He said, "I really wanted that." And then he started telling me, he said, "My wife [Virginia Osborne Davis] has been an invalid, psychosomatic invalid, for the last nineteen years. She hates my life and what I do. And when I go home every weekend," he said, "I have to take care of her, her eighty-four-year old mother, I have to do all the shopping," I said, "Ed, you can't do it and do this job." I said, "Get Maria [ph.]," and he looked at me, I said, "you go out and get Maria." I said, "Let somebody come and live in to take care of all that." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You will not be able to do it. So several weeks later he signaled to me across the chambers, he said, "I got Maria." So fast-forwarding, when the queen of England [Queen Elizabeth II] was coming to visit the capital [Sacramento, California], for two weeks in advance they gave us an orientation. So there were only two women, Rose Ann Vuich and I decided that we would talk about how we were to dress when she came. And she said, "You think we ought to wear hats and gloves?" And we talked about it. We said, "Wait a minute, she's coming to America, so she has to see us as we are here. We don't have to dress like her." So the day she came, I looked in the back of the chambers and here was this beautiful lady, she looked like Elizabeth Taylor, she had a black hat on, cream colored suit, gloves to match, and the chief is standing behind her and he's signaling me to come back. He said, "I want you to meet my friend, Bobbie [Bobbie Nash Davis]." I said, "I've been looking at you 'cause you're perfectly groomed." She said, "I'm from England." I said, "Oh." So we talked. Anyway, long story short, I told him, I said, let me give you a little bit--I'm a marriage counselor too I have a degree in psychology and I have a, I can get a license, in fact, I have it with my credentials. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I don't practice, of course. I said, "Let me give you the best advice I can give you," I said, "if the marriage is not working after nineteen plus years, and she's unhappy," I said, "you're gonna have to cut it." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I said, "You're going to have to cut it clean." I said, "You're making her sick and you're unhappy." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It doesn't make sense (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he would have made himself sick. Speaker 1: Why are you doing this? So you know what? He did just that. He married that woman Bobbie before his interlocutory was settled. And he said, "I want you to know." And so I sat next him at a Nick Petris [Nicholas C. Petris] dinner, he said, "We want you to come to our home so that we can celebrate with you because you really are the person who gave me the advice that I took, and it ended up this is the most wonderful woman." So I was friendly with her. And I sent her to a prayer group 'cause I thought, you know, she would be comfortable in that group, being as conservative as he was. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She came back to me and she said, "Why would you put me in a group of such conservative, like such conservative women?" I said, "I thought you'd be comfortable." She said, "Oh, no, honey, I'm from England." So we all became good friends. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They live in Bodega Bay [California]. And he has invited me to his home, many times, I've not gone 'cause I went on to other things. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 360631 Speaker 1: But let me just drag you for a moment back to the early '30s [1930s], and I wanna-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --get a sense of, you may not know the answer to this, but a sense of your father [William Watson] moving from a potato chip factory to elevator operator at City Hall [Los Angeles City Hall, Los Angeles, California], up to becoming one of the first black police officers here in the City of Los Angeles [California]. Do you have any details on how he moved up, how he was fortunate enough-- Speaker 2: Well, as I said he was an athlete. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he could pass the test, you know, physical ability test. And height, and a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he had a high degree of education also? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, you know, height and so on. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So he was perfect, and they were trying, as the Negro population at that time was increasing, they were bringing some officers, Negro officers on. And so he was a perfect specimen for that. Speaker 1: How far did your father go in school? Speaker 2: I think he did some college work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --he did not graduate? Speaker 2: Did not graduate with a-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --degree. Went on into law enforcement and that's where he stayed until he died. But-- Speaker 1: And your mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] went in-- Speaker 2: My mother went to school-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and registered for college and then dropped out to raise a family. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And went back and graduated with my youngest sister [Patricia Watson Bradfield]-- Speaker 1: Oh, wonderful. Speaker 2: --from City College [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California], yeah. Speaker 1: From City College? Speaker 2: Yeah, from City College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But my dad was the physical specimen, that. And at age seven my sister [Barbara Watson Coleman] and I were picked up from school and hustled off to a stranger's home. We didn't know where my mother was, my father, or their two younger siblings, my mother went to her family in Berkeley [California] and divorced. I used to answer the phone when Miss Eblon would call. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember one day I said, "Dad, Miss Eblon called." And he hit me across the face (laughter) and all, you know 'cause I let it out. Speaker 1: And she was calling from Kansas City [Missouri]? Speaker 2: She was calling from Kansas City. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then she moved out here. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Sought him out, and she's the one that broke up the marriage-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he married her-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --after the divorce. And I was seven years old when that happened. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were seven, this was the beginning of World War II [WWII]. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the nation-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was in a Depression [Great Depression]. Speaker 2: Yeah. So-- Speaker 1: Jobs are very difficult to come by. Speaker 2: My dad married her, she had money, she had, I guess, sold her theaters and came out to Los Angeles. And I remember going out to her house and it was beautiful. It was in a place called Blagic Tract [ph.]. Speaker 1: Blagic Tract. Speaker 2: Mr. Blagic [ph.] developed land on the west side of Watts [Los Angeles, California] and Enterprise [ph.], and in a new area. And it would be out towards 120th [Street], between 120th, 130th [Street] on this side of Central [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a whole new division. And they had a beautiful home and that's when I saw, you know, French provincial. She was from, part of that creole line out there in-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Louisiana. So and I remember the doors to the dining room, and the--so we lived very, very well during that period of time. We'd go out there. And she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But now your mother because of the break up, she went back to work? Speaker 2: My mother--and the war was going on, so she went to the post office and that's when they hired all the women. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 360632 Speaker 1: We lived very well because my father [William Watson] moved his family from the Eastside. He started out at Newton Street [Newton Community Police Station, Los Angeles, California], and then he got transferred to University Station [Los Angeles, California] Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: His partner was white (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a policeman? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: His partner was white. Speaker 1: This is when he was a policeman. And they were cruising down Cimarron [Street] and he saw this place for rent, he sent his partner in to rent it, and we became the first people of color on the block. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was another family-- Speaker 2: That was Cimarron, do you remember that address? Speaker 1: 3717 Cimarron. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Across the street from where Rochester [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson] built his home. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Rochester's drive. And that's a whole another story. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we went through there when I was taking the family, you know, after my aunt died. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But there was another family in the middle of block who were very, very, very fair. And they really were the first blacks, Buster Brown [ph.] was black. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Mrs. Brown [ph.] I think was white, I'm not sure she--and they had a daughter, Gloria [ph.], who is still alive now, you see. But anyway, we were the first people of color in our block. And then some people moved down the street and so on. Across the street from us, Rochester chose that land to build his home. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Jack (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)Let's bring the--Rochester was radio, somewhat television, movie star at the time as Jack Benny's-- Speaker 1: --and Jack Benny's-- Speaker 2: --comedian Jack Benny's-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --sidekick. Speaker 1: And he could not go, so he built the same kind of home Jack Benny had right there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we used to call it-- Speaker 2: On Cimarron? Speaker 1: On Cimarron, Rochester's drive, we used to call it. We watched them clear the land because we used to play in the lot across the street. And he was there, behind us were the Nicholas brothers [Harold Nicholas and HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas] when they were married to Gerri, Gerri Branton [Geraldine Pate Branton], and Diane, Diana Dandridge--Dorothy Dandridge. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we used to ride our tricycles around, I thought those were the most beautiful people I've ever seen, the women. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we called them the angels. So we would drive around, and say, and my good friend, Edmund R. [ph.], lived right next door to them. Down the street was Mantan Moreland, you know remember him? Speaker 2: I do, Mantan. Speaker 1: Louise Beavers was down this way. Speaker 2: I remember her. Speaker 1: And so, and so I took my constituents-- Speaker 2: 'Imitation of Life'-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --that she was well known for. Speaker 1: Um-hm. I took my constituents in February on, it was, we did Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] in black and white. So we had all these historical homes-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and we had a directory, and we went from Hollywood and took 'em down, I said, "I'm gonna take you where I grew up." Sugar Hill [Los Angeles, California], you remember that? Speaker 2: No, I don't, but-- Speaker 1: Sugar Hill is where Hattie McDaniel lived, and a lot of the stars at that time. That was the elite area, West Adams [Los Angeles, California] was elite in those days. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And they had the big mansions on Adams [Boulevard] and all, that are now rooming houses and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So is this West Adams and what, Western [Avenue] or-- Speaker 1: Western, and where FAME Church [First African Methodist Episcopal Church, Los Angeles, California] is-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that was Sugar Hill. Where the freeway [U.S. Route 101] is going was a very elegant, elegant, area. And they took all those homes, big, big, big battle over taking the homes. Berkeley Square [Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --elegant, beautiful. Speaker 2: Whites reluctantly did not wanna move because they're big beautiful homes. Speaker 1: Well the transition was starting-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and people were moving further west. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they came, and then blacks who had money were coming into those homes in Sugar Hill where all the actors and actresses lived. And-- Speaker 2: So the area where FAME is today was called-- Speaker 1: The area is FAME, they still have some homes up there. If you go down, you know, Harvard [Boulevard] and so on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --still homes. And then where the freeway crosses Western Avenue it was Berkeley Square. And on this side of it where the hospital and St. Mary's is--St. John's [St. John's Cathedral, Los Angeles, California], and, there are still a few of those big homes left on that side of the freeway. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But anyway, that was a really good area, so I took my constituents through there. But that's where we grew up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And because we were in what was considered a white neighborhood. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the only way we got in there is that my father sent, and I think rent was thirty-seven dollars a month or something like that. Speaker 2: Wow. Story_ID: 360633 Speaker 1: We went to Foshay Junior High School [James A. Foshay Junior High School; James A. Foshay Learning Center, Los Angeles, California] around 36th [Street], Foshay. And then Dorsey [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --we were in Dorsey's area, all white. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. The, that period of time your father [William Watson] now is a part of the Los Angeles [California] police force; the war [World War II, WWII] is beginning; you probably, even though you're still a young child, you know, seven or eight years old, you see people around you going off to war. Speaker 1: Yeah. My dad was in the police, on the police force. When they divorced, my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] went to work at the post office and raised us. She was there thirty-four years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they made a good salary 'cause she would always, she took the graveyard shift. And she had four children to raise. And she did time and a half, you know, I mean, when they needed somebody she was always there. So-- Speaker 2: Y'all were really middle income? Speaker 1: Yes, we were. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yes. And then with the fact that my father married again, he would do child support. And oh, I'll, the worst day in my life is when we were told we had to move 'cause they had sold, it was a series of duplexes, and we lived in the one on the north end and they had sold it. And so-- Speaker 2: Clear the way for the highway [U.S. Route 101]? Speaker 1: Well, no, they were just selling the whole complex. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we just loved it there. We had dear friends and we had, I had a wonderful childhood, I want you, even with the divorce and all. The only thing I remember is like a week being in that woman's home, and without any company, my sister [Barbara Watson Coleman] and I were like this, but without any interacting with family, and that was my mother was getting everything taken care of. And we never heard an argument. One time they argued, they got in the car and drove away so we wouldn't hear-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the argument. But Maggie Hathaway lived next door. You know, Maggie that had the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --golfing store. And she started the Hollywood NAACP [Beverly Hills Hollywood NAACP]--well she lived there too 'cause this is where all the celebrities lived. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My mother was an actress early on. Speaker 2: Oh, she was? We wanna hear about that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. And I remember she did a performance at the Mayan Theater [Los Angeles, California] and we all went, I was three years old, and I remember sitting there watching her and all. Speaker 2: What was that performance? Speaker 1: I remember she played the part of the witch stirring the cauldron. I have pictures (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --of her. Speaker 2: We wanna get those pictures. Speaker 1: She was a very beautiful woman during those days. And they did her face yellow on one side and almost green on the other side, and she had to stir the cauldrons and so on. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I remember Jayne Mansfield in something. Speaker 2: Jayne, right, right. Speaker 1: They had Jayne Mansfield. Story_ID: 360634 Speaker 1: And we used to go down to the theater. My father [William Watson] used to take me to the Olympic Auditorium [Grand Olympic Auditorium, Los Angeles, California] for boxing, too. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I had fallen and cut my chin open at the library on Central Avenue [Los Angeles, California], I fell on the metal grate and I had to go and have the stitches changed. And coming back from there, he'd take me in that Olympic Auditorium [Grand Olympic Auditorium, Los Angeles, California] to watch the boxing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I hate boxing today (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: Because-- Speaker 2: As a result of that. Speaker 1: --you know, I'm a little kid sitting there and I remember taking his handkerchief to put over my knees, I was cold and sitting up there, and nothing but men in that room. And then see my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] wouldn't allow it so he'd take me coming back from (laughter) the hospital and then we'd go on home. Speaker 2: Right. But he'd forget to mention that to your mom. Speaker 1: Oh, of course, of course, of course, of course. Speaker 2: Now but, now you're, you're beginning school, I guess. You are about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We began school in the-- Speaker 2: --in the second grade, first grade-- Speaker 1: No, at Hooper Avenue [Hooper Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] over, I began kindergarten at Hooper Avenue. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: When we moved over to the Westside I did kindergarten over at 36th Street School [Birdielee V. Bright Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Which I eventually-- Speaker 2: Was that the name of it, 36th Street School, or-- Speaker 1: And I eventually named it after our sixth grade teacher who is still alive, Birdielee Bright. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I could only name a hall because she wasn't dead when I was on the board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education]. Following me Barbara Boudreaux [Barbara Marie Boudreaux] was able to get compensation and name the school Bright Elementary. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But Birdielee Bright is still alive, and she celebrated a birthday, I don't know, it was ninety-some odd, just last, well this year. But anyway, my dad, as I said moved out to Blagic Tract [ph.], was married to Miss Eblon. And my mother, when we got ready to move, bought a house up on 27th [Street] and Arlington [Avenue]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we stayed there for several years. And then we moved over on 5th Avenue. And eventually she bought a big home on 4th Avenue in the West Adams [Los Angeles, California] district, one of those big old houses. And I think she brought the home on the corner of Arlington and 27th Street. It was 2789, for twelve thousand dollars, big money. Speaker 2: In those days, absolutely. Speaker 1: And then, well, when we moved off of Cimarron [Street] we stayed with somebody up on 20- on the other side of Washington [Boulevard], 20th [Street], or 23rd [Street], we stayed there just temporarily. And then we moved over on 5th Avenue and then she brought the house on 4th Avenue. And in 1961 they tore it down and built ten apartment units there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's, that, I'm fast-forwarding so let's go back. Speaker 2: Let's go back. What was church like for you when your family attended-- Speaker 1: What was-- Speaker 2: --churches in the neighborhood? Speaker 1: Yeah, we went to Holy Name [Holy Name of Jesus Church, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We made, we were christened at St. Odilia's [St. Odilia Catholic Church, Los Angeles, California] on the Eastside. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We moved to the west side, we went to Holy Name, which is on the corner of Cimarron and Jefferson [Boulevard]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --where I made my first communion. And my grandmother, Grandma Belle [Belle O'Neal], came to live with us-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so my mother could work. And she lived with us-- Speaker 2: But, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --finish your sentence. Speaker 1: Okay. She lived with us until she became, we used to call it senile during that time, until she became senile and my mother had to put her in a home. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But she was always there. My [paternal] grandmother, Edith [Edith Jacques (ph.)] would stay with us periodically when she was in Los Angeles [California]. And she died when I was fourteen years old. So she died back in the '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]. Story_ID: 360635 Speaker 1: We're at a point, your father [William Watson] has just remarried, but you and your sister [Barbara Coleman Watson] go to visit him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I have a younger brother [William Watson, III] and sister [Patricia Watson Bradfield]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they would go off from time to time. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, the four of you would-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --would go, go to visit. And I was just about to ask you about the, your life there at church because you're Catholic. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I know your grandmother [Belle O'Neal] does not put up with skipping-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Mass and-- Speaker 2: No, you go every Sunday. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were very devout Catholics, you know. You did the Stations of the Cross during Lent. You celebrated Easter and you celebrated all the religious holidays. He wouldn't let us go to the movies on Sundays. So we went to the movies on Saturday, my dad. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We went for rides on Sunday. And I remember sitting, you know, they had these cars where you sat in the back in that seat-- Speaker 1: The rumble seat. Speaker 2: --the rumble seat. Speaker 1: Right. And-- Speaker 2: And we would go to sleep on the way. You know, everything from Cimarron [Street, Los Angeles, California], our community, when you started to go west, it was undeveloped. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: So, yeah. You had Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] up there so we'd go out west, you know, we'd go to the beach. My father was a powerful swimmer. Story_ID: 360636 Speaker 1: Now, you're growing up. Let's get a little bit into your school life there growing up. You're in-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --elementary school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Are you an outstanding student or-- Speaker 2: I'm a very quiet student. And I have a way of learning that is different. You know, I have to be ready and when I learn something I learn it well and in depth. And it's more like teaching myself. You can put something in front of me, but unless I get into it and really concentrate on it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you would think that I would have learning difficulties, it's what, it's a readiness thing with me. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And when I start to concentrate, I learn. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If I'm not concentrating, then I'm not, you know. So anyway, I started off, and in school I was always a very responsible student. When I got into the sixth grade [at 36th Street School; Birdielee V. Bright Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], and our sixth grade teacher is still alive, Birdielee Bright [Birdielee V. Bright]. And she is responsible for the success of those students who came to, she had a reputation that you, everyone knew--and you got ready for Miss Bright 'cause she didn't take any nonsense or foolishness. And if you had any kind of talent or skill, she was the one to identify and pull it out of you. And I remember her saying, "That's what I like." She'd come to that door and she'd wait outside that door after recess or lunch for three minutes to see what was going on in the room, and she'd walk in there and we'd just, she said, "Now that's what I like." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So we always wanted to hear her say, "That's what I like." Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: If you disturbed in her class, you were out. She didn't tolerate any misbehavior in her class. And she set her room up, A, B, C, D, and F row. And I would strive to go between the A and the B. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I remember my seatmate, Barbara Floyd, one day she'd be on this side of me, one day I'd be on that side, you know. So we would go back, we would strive, she made us reach up. Then she'd come through the room and she'd look around, and she'd look the way you were dressed, and so we all wanted to be one of the five or six she'd call up in front of the room as samples of good grooming. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she'd tell you why you need to be well groomed. I would go home and wash my shoelaces every day. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Polish my shoes every day, iron my own dresses. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And comb my hair, everything in place, and I still do it today. Speaker 1: But Miss Bright was the one who motivated you? Speaker 2: She motivated us by example. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And just yesterday somebody was making an announcement over at Crenshaw High School [Los Angeles, California], day before yesterday, the library, and she would go to, she'd come in, she was educated at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], she'd come through the aisle and she'd say, "Library," and you had to repeat, "library." She'd just come from the back of the room, library, library. Or she'd come in the room, she'd say two plus two, minus three, divided by, you know, and she'd just come in there, no preparation and all, so you had to be on it. Speaker 1: Your mind had to be-- Speaker 2: And you had to be, and it was the little things that really stuck. And I became a good speller. So she would send her spelling tests home with me and I'd correct it, she'd send the master list and I'd correct it. I correct my staff's spelling, I correct their punctuation even today. And I said, "You know, you don't ever give me anything--" Speaker 1: Right. 'Cause you're still a-- Speaker 2: --that-- Speaker 1: --teacher? Speaker 2: I'm still a teacher. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But it came about because of Miss Bright. The late Teddy Alexander [Theodore T. Alexander, Jr.], who was a deputy superintendent of schools, went through Miss Bright. All the principals and so on that are now retired went through Miss Bright. School board members, black, went through Miss Bright. She got us ready (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ms. Floyd, Barbara Floyd, whatever happened to Barbara? Speaker 2: Barbara married into Reverend White's [Lanneau L. White] family. And I think that she's retired now, everybody's retired except me (laughter). But all of us went on to, you know, we became attorneys and judges and lawyers, and I went to school with Johnnie Cochran. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. What do you remember-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --do you, were you in elementary school with Johnnie Cochran? Speaker 2: No, college [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: College, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: We want to cover-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --cover that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 360637 Speaker 1: Now were there any other teachers besides Miss Bright [Birdielee V. Bright] that particularly impressed you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's the one that said now when we-- Speaker 1: --either positively or negatively? Speaker 2: Yeah. When we went over to Foshay [James A. Foshay Junior High School; James A. Foshay Learning Center, Los Angeles, California] her sister taught over there. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And she taught English. So if you didn't get it here, you got it over there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. But even today, and when I taught school, you don't make mistakes, you learn the correct way and you don't make mistakes, because your language speaks for you. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And I have to correct my staff often, you know, depending on where you were educated. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And how you pronounce your words. If you notice Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] always dropped his Gs, and that used to just strike at me, because Miss Bright--never married, still miss, never married, still miss--she would catch it and give you the correct, she taught by example. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's the, I set my classroom up the same way she did. I took off and went overseas and taught in Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] and in France. And I had the pleasure of teaching the gifted class in Okinawa. By the way, I taught Robert Guillaume's [HistoryMaker Robert Guillaume] wife, Donna Brown [Donna Brown Guillaume]. Speaker 1: Donna Brown. Speaker 2: She was in my gifted class, she was nine years old, the only black-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in the class in Okinawa, fifth grade. Speaker 1: I left a message for her the other day. Speaker 2: Yeah, ended up performing their marriage. Speaker 1: Um-hm, wow. The assumption that always--and maybe not in elementary school for you, there were, were there any teachers that left a negative impression on you? Speaker 2: I had good teachers. Miss Slight [ph.] taught us in the fourth grade. Miss Wilson [ph.] in the fifth, and then Miss Bright in the sixth [at 36th Street School; Birdielee V. Bright Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. And I remember Miss Slight she taught us all about the atmosphere, the stratosphere and all. And, you know, I could just ramble that stuff off-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in those days. Miss Wilson was a stickler for grammar too. I think she's still alive. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. My fourth grade teacher went away and never came back, and we had a series of substitutes, and we didn't learn anything. It was either third or fourth. And so we all failed that grade. It was like a lost grade. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so I was behind a year because of that. And then I caught up when I got into junior high school, and I went on the honor roll there. I used to get straight A's. And so I read, you know, I always advised my students, I said, read the manual. When I got to Dorsey High School [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], I went there on permit because we moved right on the boundary line, my sister [Barbara Watson Coleman] was there, I got a sibling permit. And I remember I said, "I'm gonna read," you know, they give you a book, and so, I caught up for the year I lost, so I got out of school a half year early, out of high school. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I got out of junior high school a half year early too. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I had fulfilled all the requirements. But I remember the devastation of not learning anything in a whole year's time. Speaker 1: Let me sneak in this question on, and you've answered some of it already. Any of the students, fellow students that particularly left an impression on you, for negative or positive? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Going back to elementary school, I was always so proud of Ted Alexander [Theodore T. Alexander, Jr.], he was behind me. His sister, I have friends today from elementary school, we have a little group, we stay together, and all of 'em were impressive. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All of 'em were achievers because of Miss Bright. And we all get together and have lunch. In fact, one is having a birthday party out in Beverly Hills [California]. She worked at the Beverly Hills Library [Beverly Hills Public Library, Beverly Hills, California], Janice Shelby. Her brother, Ernest Shelby, is in the industry, you might know him, do you know Ernest? Speaker 1: Ernest Shelby. Speaker 2: He does some producing. But oh, yeah, I had, everybody in our neighborhood just excelled. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yvonne [HistoryMaker Yvonne Brathwaite Burke] was one I really admired. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Yvonne and my sister were in the same grade. Speaker 1: Was that-- Speaker 2: She was Yvonne Watson then. Speaker 1: Right. Is, are we are talking about in junior high or-- Speaker 2: In junior high. Speaker 1: In junior high. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when she was running these oratorical contests, they would say, oh, congratulations. That's not my sister. And over the years, congratulations on your sister and I'd say, "Thank you." And that was a joke between Yvonne and I. So when I met this Sarah Jane Jackson [ph.] and found out that the Watsons came from Besaya County [sic.], Holly Springs, Mississippi, I said, "Yvonne does Besaya County, Holly Springs, ring a bell?" She said yes. Her father [James Watson] and my father [William Watson] could have been twins. So we do have a connection. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to London [England] and found my crest and clan, Scotch-Irish. And I said, there's a, 'cause whoever had the plantations gave us his name. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And her father was on this land (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did that influence you to support her the first time she-- Speaker 2: Well we were all very supportive of her before I knew that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was a Watson. So I just started taking credit for it (laughter). Story_ID: 360638 Speaker 1: How was junior high school [James A. Foshay Junior High School; James A. Foshay Learning Center, Los Angeles, California]? Eventful, uneventful? Speaker 2: For me it was eventful. Speaker 1: Okay. In what way? Speaker 2: And I became a--that's when I think I became a scholar. I have been this height since the sixth grade, well, since junior high school. I've been this same height since I was fourteen. And I always felt, you know, too tall, too big, and, you know, we'd have to-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --do these dances. And I was taller than the boys and they couldn't twirl me around-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --cause I so tall and they were short. And so I went to the books. And my sister [Barbara Watson Coleman] was very, very attractive, so she had the boyfriends, I had the books. So, you know, and I was shy all the way through elementary and junior high school. Speaker 1: Oh. You think your height had a little bit to do with that? Speaker 2: Oh, I know it did. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. And by the fact that I lost a grade, you know, there I had to gain it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --back. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And our whole class was kept behind, 'cause we never had a teacher, just had subs in there, you know, and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so we couldn't pass the test. And so I in junior high school joined all the organizations. And I used to chew gum (laughter), and I remember my homeroom teacher saying, "You're chewing that gum, you come back after school." Well, I never would come back. So when it came time for selecting, you know, you had one senior member and you would then be the big sister to a younger member, I couldn't do that. So I remember just hating that teacher. And I said, "You know, you should never punish kids that way." Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: 'Cause my best performance was never--but she'd call me if I'd leave the row and do all that. I was a dependable student but I chewed gum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that got me in trouble. And I remember since I got out of junior high school half a year early, I wanted to do the things that the graduates would do, and I came to school, there was a day you could wear pants and bring your dolls with you and so on, your pets. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I came to school with my pants and my pets and they sent me home. And it broke my heart. And I said, you know, things that happen along the way, can really affect children-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --all the way through their lives so you have to be very careful. So I went into school psychology and became a counselor and school psychologist because of that. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And those things stay with you. And I just hated that woman because she blocked my success. I had A, E, E, all the way down, and then I get to her and I have U, U. And anyway, you know, she said, "Don't you come," and I did, and I'd forget about it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --come in, and, you know. Then I'd forget to go back afterwards, and, you know, I wanna go with my classmates and all. But there was an impact it makes on you. But we had a very happy childhood, a very full childhood because my mother's [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] sisters and brothers always came around, and they lived with us or around the corner from us. Speaker 1: And your grandmother [Belle O'Neal] was there. Speaker 2: We grew up, and my grandmother was there. And that's why they all came. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And my mother, when she bought the big house on 4th Avenue, everybody came. My friends would come up from Louisiana, stay with us, (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: When I was on campus I'd bring my roommates home-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --stay with us. My mother said she never knew who was in those beds. I'd have--and it was the United Nations. Speaker 1: Right. But it was a happy time. Speaker 2: It was a happy time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean, only the good experiences. Story_ID: 360639 Speaker 1: What about going on from there to high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], same thing? Speaker 2: Went to--it was probably the most challenged time of my life when I found out we were having to move off Cimarron [Street]. We absolutely loved growing up on Cimarron. We had so many wonderful experiences. We would go swim over in Exposition [Exposition Park, Los Angeles, California]. My [maternal] grandmother [Belle O'Neal] believed in walking to the rose garden every Sunday. We'd have lunch in the rose garden, and we'd go through the museums. I don't really like museums today (laughter) 'cause we, every Sunday we went to the museums. But my grandmother was a-- Speaker 1: After church. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in the afternoons, yeah. My grandmother was a student of history, and grew up with people who made a real impact on the United States, and she taught us those. I could tell you more about Mahatma Gandhi than most people, 'cause she would sit there and talk. These are people she admired. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mary McLeod Bethune. Speaker 1: What were some of her memories about Mary McLeod Bethune? Speaker 2: Her emphasis on educating the black woman, her friendship and advice to Eleanor Roosevelt. Eleanor Roosevelt's picking up the challenge of black people in this country. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she just admired that so. And made it, and my grandmother would read the newspapers to us. And I remember when the war broke out, she could have read that newspaper upside down, sideways, as much as it meant to us. But I remember the day that the government came and picked up the Japanese people who lived next door to us, and put 'em in a truck at six o'clock in the morning, I remember mops and cans and so on. And these people going, all they could take with 'em was what they could carry in their hands. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And going off into the foggy morning, never to be seen again. And I thought that was so awful. And I remember when they showed the atomic bomb explosion, they had it on the front page, I remember her sitting us down and talking about that. She had, and I remember the day that Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] died. And we were coming home from school, my girlfriend and I, and this Mexican woman, I remember she ran out, she said something to him in Spanish and he stopped and started to cry and she cried and we went up there to hear, and it was Roosevelt had died. And my friend and I grabbed each other and said, we were little kids, what are we going to do now? He was like the big father. Speaker 1: At, exactly. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. So she would talk about his virtues and his strength. And see, her sons were in the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] programs. And, you know, they would go out and fight fires and help build the infrastructure and so on. They were all part of that. And these were all programs that he developed coming out of the, at that time, coming out of the, what do we call it? The-- Speaker 1: It was during World War II [WWII] but there was-- Speaker 2: Well prior to--Depression [Great Depression], coming out of the Depression. Speaker 1: Depression, Depression. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And-- Speaker 1: And then fighting our way out. Speaker 2: Yeah. And this friend, George [George Tate] that I told you about, who was gonna escort my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] when she met my father [William Watson], they would cook a big pot of beans and then all the families would come and eat together. And that's how you got through it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you shared. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 360640 Speaker 1: So my dad [William Watson] was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you were an urban family so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we were. Speaker 2: --a lot of the things that you were doing may have been a little bit different. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: We were always urban. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. But sharing-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --that pot of beans and so forth was-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's how the folks got through it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That was when I was just a baby. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I can remember back then, of course, I didn't eat any (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: I don't like beans particularly. Speaker 2: Okay. The, but the picture I'm getting is that junior high school [James A. Foshay Junior High School; James A. Foshay Learning Center, Los Angeles, California] was just as, even though you were very, very disappointed and all from moving off of Cimarron [Street], that family life support that you had was so very important. Speaker 1: And we had aunts that were there with us, my [maternal] grandmother [Belle O'Neal] was there, and we never missed my--my dad would come over and pick us up to be sure we got to Mass. He'd put us in the back of his black and white police car. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Drive us up to the church door, Barbara [Barbara Watson Coleman] and I would go in the front door, and wait until we saw his car was gone and go out the side door, and not knowing that he was looking in that rearview mirror and that car would spin, that police car, I'll never forget, spin around on Jefferson [Boulevard] and come back and pick us up, he'd say, "You're going back in there, and this time you're gonna stay, 'cause I'm gonna be outside the church watching." So we always thought our dad was watching. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we had a glass door, glass frame door and it had a shade that pulled down on it for night. And he'd come and shine his flashlight and we'd say, "Oh, Lord, there's daddy." And he'd come in with his police uniform, you know. In fact, he would wear it at home when he was there, and he would take his guns, and we always thought he'd put 'em up on that top shelf, and he'd say, "Don't you ever touch my guns." And I am so glad he said that, 'cause these kids who find their parents' weapons and kill each other. We would never even go up there and look. He would sit down across the table from us, he'd put his hands on his guns on his hips and sit there until we ate all of our cereal, now we never had cold cereal. I didn't know anything about eating this stuff that the kids eat now. We always had hot cereal, mush. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We hated it. And he would sit there and he'd talk about starving kids in China, you know, send it to them. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But he'd sit across the table with his guns on and we'd go, "Oh, Lord, daddy would shoot us if we don't eat all this." So, you know, you sit there as kids and you plot in your mind what you're not going to do when you become an adult. And to this day, I barely eat oatmeal, but I don't eat any cooked cereals-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --because of that. Very strict (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it was the cold cereals as a result? Speaker 1: No, we didn't eat cold cereals, we always ate-- Speaker 2: No, no, I meant today you-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I-- Speaker 2: --you have an aversion to cooked cereals. Speaker 1: Cooked cereals. And I eat cold cereals, grains and all, but I'm not a cereal person. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. My mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] prepared full meals and full breakfasts but she always fixed that mush, she believed in a hot, and so anyway-- Speaker 2: Some of the meals sometimes, did it contain grits? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We only ate grits--we did not eat grits in our house-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --we ate eggs-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and so on. And we had French toast, we had pancakes, you know, we had full meals. We didn't eat a whole lot of meat, but we had a meat every day. We had a cousin who had a chicken farm, and he would send chickens over to our cousins, they'd send 'em to us, so we had two chickens fried every single week. We didn't care for fried chicken, can you imagine? Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: So we fed everybody in the neighborhood. They would, they'd come to our house-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --on Sundays, 'cause they knew they could get fried chicken. And my mother said, "Oh, these kids really like this chicken," so she had then, I remember that metal bowl and they were chicken, all parts of the chicken fried-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in that bowl. She was at work. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Years and years later, they would say, "Ms. Watson, thank you for feeding us." Feeding you? And they will tell you today that they grew up on fried chicken in our home. Everything she'd fix for us we'd give away. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know what we'd do? Make tacos (laughter). Speaker 2: That's what you loved, tacos. Story_ID: 360641 Speaker 1: Now during that high school period, realization began to creep up on you that you may have wanted to go on to college. Speaker 2: Yes. I was one of five blacks in my class. When I went off to Dorsey [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], we lived right on Arlington [Avenue] and 27th Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On Cimarron [Street], my sister [Barbara Watson Coleman], who was a year or two ahead of me, was in the Dorsey catchment area. When we moved, it put us outside, it put me on the other side of the street. So my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] went over and got a sibling permit and I went to Dorsey too, and it was five in my entry class. The homes were new. And not all of Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California] or Leimert Park [Los Angeles, California] was developed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you see where the oil fields are out there, and so on? Well, they were developing on this side of the oil fields, so the people who lived up there were wealthy-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --supposedly. And I remember Poplar Motors [ph.], which was a new car company, and they sold new cars, the son went to our school, and he would come to school in a different car. When it would rain over there, it would flood, 'cause that was all swampland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if you notice that Dorsey is built still all on one level. And we had a reunion, a fifty-year reunion from the time it was opened, and the architects were there, and they designed that school to last the test of time. Well, when we got there, people were saying there were going to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. I didn't know what that meant. So they'd ask me where are you gonna go, UCLA? And I would see the white girls, they would have their activities and they would come and bring them flowers, and that meant that they took them into this sorority they had. And boy, we just looked at that and oh, we were so, we admired it, and envious and so on. So I started talking like they do, I took Latin, I didn't take Spanish, I took Latin and I took algebra and geometry and all the courses that would get me into UCLA. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I remember my counselor saying that you ought to take Spanish and you ought to go to City College [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California] rather than UCLA. Well, when I graduated I went to City, because it cost you a little bit, City was free. So I went there and that was some of my best education. And it really prepared you for taking on the university because our classes were small-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and you could interact with your professor. When I went to UCLA the first time I was one of 450 students, and there were two of us who were black. Speaker 1: Out of 450? Speaker 2: Out of 450. And I went right up to the front row, and when I looked down there was another young lady at the end of that row, and she waved to me, I waved to her, and she said, "I'm Connie White," and we're friends 'til today. She lived in Santa Monica [California]. And there must have been twenty-five of us on all that campus, out of twenty-five, thirty thousand. We all knew each other. And-- Speaker 1: Let me hear those figures again. Twenty-five out of-- Speaker 2: Thirty thousand, there must have been twenty-five of us. And that was--my aunt, my mother's next sister, was retired from the post office, and she got her retirement and paid for me to stay on campus at Stevens [Stevens House]. And that was like, once I was admitted to UCLA and I was staying on campus, it was like dying and going to heaven and it was Christmas. You know, it was just everything I ever wanted. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: 'Cause my mother's sister had gone there, my mother's brother had gone there, my mother's aunt had gone there, it was a tradition, and I went there. Speaker 1: Now you were following in that tradition. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And I had my brother [William Watson, III], my brother has eight kids. And I had, I took them out of 32nd Street School [32nd Street USC Visual and Performing Arts and Media Arts and Engineering Magnet, Los Angeles, California] here near USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], I was on the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], and put 'em in Warner Avenue [Warner Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. All those kids were gifted in school. In fact, the one that's a fireman, was tested, and tested a genius. Anything he touched electronically-- Speaker 1: He could fix? Speaker 2: He could fix, he could put together and all. So what did he do? He followed in the footsteps of relatives and became a firefighter. Story_ID: 360642 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. We are picking up an interview that we started October 5, 2005. Today is July 18, 2008 [sic. July 25, 2008]. And, ma'am, could you please give us your full name? Speaker 2: Diane, I use the middle name Edith, Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson]. Speaker 1: And you are congressman from California for-- Speaker 2: I represent Los Angeles, California, the 33rd congressional district, Los Angeles, Hollywood, Culver City [California]. Story_ID: 360643 Speaker 1: When we left off, I think, the first portion of the interview in 2005, we were talking about UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So I'll just pick up with UCLA. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you, well let's, how did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well why is it so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --important in my life? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: First, the first thing is, how did you choose UCLA? Speaker 2: Well, that's what I'll tell you. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: And, you know, it's our premier state funded university, probably the most prominent in the country with Nobel scholars and so on. My mother's aunt [Pauline Slater] went to UCLA when it was a normal school on Vermont [Avenue], which is almost Central Los Angeles [California]. Right after that it moved out to Westwood [Los Angeles, California] and occupied a great expanse of undeveloped land where it is today. And so following in that mode, she was the first black teacher in Los Angeles Unified School District. We looked up to her. She went to school in England for a time. And I remember her telling me, very tall, our family, and she had these long fingers and teacher fingers and she says, "Diane [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson]," perfect diction, "go east, go west but don't forget Mother Africa, go east, go west, so don't forget Mother Africa." So she planted the seed for travel and study. She went to UCLA, so we did too. Her sister, my grandmother [Belle O'Neal], was educated, in fact she was born in Chicago [Illinois], trained at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], and operated on the first open heart surgery with Dr. Williams. Speaker 1: Daniel Hale Williams, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now we have that in the first part, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'm leading to why UCLA. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Her nieces and nephews followed in her footsteps. My mother's [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] oldest sister [Juanita Rabouin Phillips] went to UCLA and started the first Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] chapter on UCLA's campus. And we just celebrated last week our hundredth birthday, as you know we were formed here in Washington, D.C. at Howard University, 1908. So following in that mode, my mother pledged the Ivy Leaf undergraduate group. And so it was just a natural that I would go to UCLA. My mother's younger brother went there and ran track with Jesse Owens. Then I went there, fourth generation. And my brother [William Watson, III] who has eight kids, I took his kids out of the local elementary school, put 'em out in Westwood, and they all went to UCLA. So it's been a tradition in our family. The Slater side of the family, my grandfather's step- my grandmother's stepfather, they went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. And, in fact, one of my mother's cousins had a school for colored girls going to Berkeley. And my generation went, my cousins. And they went to Boalt Hall [UC Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California], one is attorney representing Berkeley School District [Berkeley Unified School District]. So it's a tradition in our family to go to the University of California. Story_ID: 360644 Speaker 1: Now, what year did you graduate from high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you started up that fall of '52 [1952] at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: I went to LACC [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California], then I went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --to UCLA. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in 1954. Speaker 1: That's Los Angeles Community College [sic.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. Well, tell us about, how many black students were at UCLA in those days, I mean, proportionally (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, when I went in 1954, I said maybe there were twenty-five or thirty. And when I walked into my first class, there were 450 students. This great aunt of mine, Pauline Slater, said, "Always go to the top, there's room at the top." So I went to the front row, looked down, and I saw a smiling face, it was another black girl, Connie White, and we're friends today. There were only two out of 450 in the first class. Speaker 1: Now what class was that? Speaker 2: The sociological and psychological aspects of education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Four hundred and fifty students, I was an education undergrad. And we had various sororities represented, but we were like one. And all the students that were there knew each other, the black students that is. And it was quite a novel experience. I had an opportunity to stay on campus, my aunt, it was ninety dollars a year, the tuition at that time was forty dollars a semester. When I went to LACC there was no tuition, you paid like a $1.45 activities fee, that's why I went there, and then I transferred and went on to UCLA where my aunt was retiring-- Speaker 1: Now this is-- Speaker 2: --from the post office. Speaker 1: --I remember discussion in those days-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that California, State of California made, you know, education affordable, it was one of the few states that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --made college education virtually free. Speaker 2: Exactly. And it was always very progressive, the campus. And they were very selective. And it helped to go to the community college and transfer on in. And at the same time, I was able to stay on campus, it was a dream come true. My friends, my age peers, were leaving, going back to the historically black colleges [HBCUs], and I wanted to go so badly but (laughter) I went to UCLA because we couldn't afford those colleges, in that day forty dollars was nothing. My mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] had a good job, she worked at the post office in Los Angeles [California]. And so with staying on campus, I stayed at a place called Stevens House. And the religious council decided to do an experiment in interracial living. So there were so many black girls, the first Hispanic there in the house was my roommate, we became very close friends, I was in her wedding and her child, her first child is my godchild. But we learned to live together, and we had girls from abroad, and girls from Orange County [California], that was like being abroad for us. And we would have what we called a rap session on Wednesday nights, and we talked about ourselves and what we liked and what we disliked. And in talking casually there in the house, we found we had more in common, regardless of our colors, our ethnic backgrounds, our religious beliefs, we had more in common than we had that was uncommon. And we formed a bond, there were only twenty-six girls at the time. Well, long story short, over the years I went on their board. And over the years I went on into my professional career, and they disbanded the house, they moved it on, closer to campus, but now it's a foundation that raises money for girls in the same, with the same goal. But it was a wonderful experience. And because we were out at UCLA and I told you I could only count twenty-five, I'm sure there were more there, they would bring a lot of the black athletes coming out of high school in on a scholarship. We'd write the papers for them. They couldn't qualify scholastically, but they could qualify physically and sports wise. And so we all knew each other, and we would go up to the games at Berkeley [California]. Story_ID: 360645 Speaker 1: Who were some of the athletes, the black athletes at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in those days? I know there have been many greats that have come through UCLA (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sam Brown, if you remember. And the former student body president, after we left, I'm gonna have to pull up all these names, but there were several well-known athletes, black athletes, that went on to professional athletes after college. And we still stay in contact today, and I'll give you their names. But the beauty of that situation is we all became like a family. And when I made AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], there were only three of us on line, one was a judge deceased now, and the other is a minister, I just saw her last week. But I'm going to, some of their names are coming back as I speak but I'll give you the names of the athletes that were up on campus at the time. But we all became very close. And we didn't have classes together, but we'd see each other on campus, and student union, and we all joined fraternities and sororities, and we'd go to the frat games as we called them. Speaker 1: So were all the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rafer Johnson. Speaker 1: Rafer Johnson, right, okay, here we go. Speaker 2: Um-hm, he became student body president. Speaker 1: And Rafer Johnson was the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: --won the decathlon in 1960-- Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: --in the Olympics [1960 Summer Olympics, Rome, Italy]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --he's a super athlete. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, in fact, I have a cousin, Marilyn [Marilyn White]-- Speaker 1: Was Woody Strode there? I'm sorry, was Woody Strode there in those days? Speaker 2: Not when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. I think he was before you. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he was ahead of me. My cousin, Marilyn White, went to the 1964 Olympics [1964 Summer Olympics, Tokyo, Japan] in Japan and won [sic.] the hundred meter run. Her mother went to UCLA and played tennis. So we have a family tradition of going there, because it was the university you could go to, and once you qualified, you know, it didn't cost much. My aunt, Juanita Rabouin [Juanita Rabouin Phillips], started the AKA chapter Alpha Gamma, at UCLA and dated Ralph Bunche, so I was almost his niece. But anyway, so we have a long tradition at the university. And we had-- Speaker 1: Now it goes back to (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) very wonderful experiences. Speaker 1: --Jackie Robinson, and, you know, he was there-- Speaker 2: That, my uncle-- Speaker 1: --in that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, knew Jackie Robinson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, he was over in Pasadena [California]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and he was considered a commuter. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So there were commuters and those who, and, you know, we were the prestigious ones because we were on campus. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, what-- Speaker 2: --I still have those-- Speaker 1: Yeah, what you describe is sort of a liberal campus-- Speaker 2: Very progressive, very on the cutting edge at the time. [HistoryMaker] Willard Johnson, who was a commuter from Pasadena, became a student body president. Vivian Robinson [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson] was Girls' League president, they married. We attended their fiftieth wedding anniversary last year. They went back to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], got scholarships, did their graduate work there. Speaker 1: Now that's remarkable. So Willard Johnson became student body president for UCLA while you were there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, and we were there and we campaigned-- Speaker 1: Was he the first, I suppose, he was the first black to-- Speaker 2: No, he wasn't. One of our judges, and I'll give you his name in a minute, see we're pulling up this history, but we had the first judge, and then student, first is a judge, and he was the first black student body president. His mother is the one who got me into Stevens House, she was a good friend of my great aunt's [Pauline Slater]. And there was a circle, a small circle, of blacks who were well educated, who were in Los Angeles [California], I guess, from the '20s [1920s]. My father [William Watson], grandfather [James O'Neal], and his wife, my grandmother [Belle O'Neal], came in the '20s [1920s], and because my grandmother wanted her children to have an education. And, you know, that train that went from the South up to the North, they all jumped off of it in Chicago [Illinois]. And then some on my mother's [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] side went on up to Minnesota, Iowa. In fact, I just came back from my family reunion this weekend in Des Moines, Iowa. And then some of 'em went over to the Northwest, Washington and Oregon. So there was a tradition in my family of moving to more progressive sites where their children could be educated. Story_ID: 360646 Speaker 1: Now what was your major? Speaker 2: Education (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Education. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Of course, right. And-- Speaker 2: And I, when I graduated in '56 [1956], I had taught out in Venice [Los Angeles, California], I was called into the office and someone said, we took our exams there at the, they really catered to their students, and their students, graduates, I didn't have to go downtown to the district office to take the exam, they brought it to us out at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and I got this call to come out to Venice, and I was hired on the spot. I was the second black teacher there, in an all-white school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is 1956? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This would be--I have to interject the dates and that sort of thing, so. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956], okay. So-- Speaker 2: And I went to an elementary school called Coeur d'Alene [Coeur d'Alene Avenue School, Venice, California], C-O-R-D [sic.], it's a French spelling, D'Alene, D-E-L-E-N-E [sic.]. The name has changed since then, because it was located on Coeur d'Alene [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A small school, we had thirteen teachers, five hundred students. And what was so interesting, I met another black woman, Clarissa Washington [ph.], who was the only one there. We became good friends and she just passed away about three years ago. But I went away, I taught for three years and a day, and took off and went to Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] with the Department of Army [U.S. Department of the Army]. And I saw a sign, I was driving and I saw this sign recruiting for overseas teaching. And because of that great-aunt, and because of an uncle who was a merchant seaman, and we'd sit at his feet and listen to tales of Calcutta [India] and Shanghai [China] and so on. I saw that sign, I went in and signed up, came back and told her to go down and sign up, thinking we could go together. No, she went to Germany, I went to Okinawa. When I went to France, she went to Japan. So I never taught again. And I would come back and recruit my friends and sorority sisters, and they would sign up. We never worked together, I was always thrown into the majority. So I've been able to be a blockbuster, let's say it, and very comfortable with it. Speaker 1: So did you, now, okay. I just wanted to go back a little bit now. Now was there, you were teaching at elementary school at Venice Beach? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And this is like a-- Speaker 2: It-- Speaker 1: --mostly white school, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. And there were only two black teachers? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 360647 Speaker 1: You signed up to go to Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you go? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I said (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Now, I just wanted to establish that you actually went. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And then so, I mean, was it just a yearning for travel, or had, had you traveled broadly before (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was very young, adventuresome. I had this aunt that planted the seed. I had an uncle. And my grandmother [Belle O'Neal] was in the Spanish American War. Met her husband, my mother's oldest sister's [Juanita Rabouin Phillips] dad, who was French, Rabouin. And so she would tell us these stories, we'd have to sit at her feet. And I remember Alex Haley always saying, "Listen to your elders." So we did. And when I saw that up on the building, I went in and I went to Okinawa, loved it, Kadena Air Force Base [Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, Japan]. And let me tell you something interesting about it. I had no black students until one day I had a black student who's come in, this was an [U.S.] Air Force base, her name was Donna Brown [Donna Brown Guillaume], and her father was an Air Force pilot. Fast-forwarding about thirty years, Donna Brown found me in, and I had the gifted class, she found me in the California Senate [California State Senate], and we became friends. She came up and did a story on me. She was a freelance writer, wrote for 'All in the Family,' wrote for [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume's series when he was the valet-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and so on. Long story short, she ended up marrying him and I performed, that was the first marriage I performed. Speaker 1: Oh, she married Robert Guillaume? Speaker 2: Robert Guillaume. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: She was nine years old. The lowest IQ in my class was 121, and she was sailing around up there. And I would say, write a paper on osmosis. She would write a paper on space travel. She reminded me, "Miss Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], remember I wrote that paper and I told you we were gonna be traveling to the moon, and we did." And she was very, she would write twelve pages without a grammatical error, without a punctuation error. And she talked all the time. And after-- Speaker 1: She was a writer on 'Benson,' I guess, yeah, 'Benson' was the show, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Benson' was the show she wrote for. And many others too. Speaker 1: Yeah, and-- Speaker 2: She still does. Speaker 1: She was his last wife, I guess, right the last one? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had sons that brought her down the aisle (laughter) that were older than she was. But they met on a mental plane. Very bright, very articulate, and we're friends today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She does fundraising for me. Speaker 1: And you met her in Okinawa, right? Speaker 2: She was in my class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was my fifth grade gifted class, she was nine years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right. So you started teaching at Venice Beach [Venice, Los Angeles, California] in '56 [1956], and you went to Okinawa in, was it '59 [1959]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Well, okay. Speaker 2: I went, no, '60 [1960]-- Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay. Speaker 2: I went to Okinawa in 1960. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960], okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And I met friends there that are friends today. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there, you taught the children of the servicemen basically, right, the, Air Force-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. I was at Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And then I went to France and I was on a base there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So you went to, so how long were you in Okinawa? Speaker 2: Two years. Story_ID: 360648 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you go to France in '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: And I went to France in '62 [1962]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and spent a year there. Then I came home '63 [1963], '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. Any stories from France? Speaker 2: Very interesting stories from France. We were in a place called Coeur d'Alene [ph.], we were nineteen k's [kilometers] below the Maginot Line. And in France, I would come home during the summers and talk my friends, signing up, and they were all sent up to Germany, so every weekend I would go to Germany. And one of my friends was very, very, very, very dark. And we would sit in these compartments and people would look at us, and they'd see our hands one color, and the back of our skin another color, and the French just couldn't help, you know, why, and the Germans too, why are you black on this side, you know, white on--and white. We met some Canadian Air Force [Royal Canadian Air Force] men, and the Canadians seemed to be unbiased, and they were very friendly and all. And we would, Wilma [ph.] and I would go up to visit these guys on their base up near the North Sea. And they would move out of their apartment and give us their apartment, I just saw Wilma last week here at our, she's an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] too. But people would come out of their homes to look at us, here were these two black girls against the white snow. And I remember we had a gathering in Frankfurt [Germany]. And we came from all over the continent at the time, black, twelve of us, and then we'd have southern food and enjoy ourselves, 'cause I was the only black on my base, Wilma was the only, and Frankie [ph.], my good friend, was there and we'd go out and do the clubs. And there was a place that we went to, and I'll never forget this, it was Fats and His Cats, Fats Domino. And when we walked in there as twelve black people, the music stopped, the dancers stopped, and they all looked at us. So we got on the floor, music started up again, and, you know, that's when you did the big strong line, the 'Mississippi Mud.' And the Germans would look at us, and they had a little fast step they would do, and they looked, pretty soon the whole place was up following our dancing. And we, and the darker you were, the more they liked you, because you were different. Speaker 1: Well, this is just the opposite of the American experience. I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here, yeah. Speaker 1: --well, it was in those days, I would guess in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah. Now when I was in Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], every Saturday we'd go on a little small boat to another island, the Ryukyu Islands are a chain of over four hundred islands. And I remember going to a place called Kudaka-Jima [Japan], and this is the island they believed populated the rest of the world, they sent the prince and princess out. And every one on the island, about five hundred, came out, and guess who they were looking at? (Points) And number one I'm taller than most people, and certainly the Ryukyuans. And they would look at me and we'd have shorts on and T-shirts, you know, and gaiters. And they'd look at my legs, my legs were longer than they were tall (laughter). So I had unique experiences. I had to get used to that, being stared at and being touched and all. About three or four months it wore off and I became used to it. But they'd look at my feet and they would laugh. And, you know, the Asians, they, (speaking Japanese) you know. And they'd laugh at you because they've never seen anything that looked like you. But we were told by the little boatsmen that there was a temple on the island and there was a well where the water bubbled up and that 125 years prior, they used to tattoo the women's faces to keep the invaders from taking off their wives and their daughters and all, but it had been outlawed for 125 years. When we got to the temple, there were two women guarding the temple squatting with their faces tattooed. So there was proof that longevity was a part of that environment. And, you know, drinking that natural water, eating what was in the sea and what came off the ground, no pollution, and not dealing with the stresses and strains, promoted life, and these women were older than a 125 years. So it was quite an experience down there. And I took the language and I learned a lot about the customs and I made Hakata dolls and we did the tea service and all. And I had a real appreciation for foreign cultures. And that's why I say I'm a diplomat today. I was appointed by Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] as an ambassador, as you know. And I went to the Pacific, the North Pacific and but I have a great appreciation for, I'm on the Foreign Affairs Committee [House Foreign Affairs Committee], for foreign customs and foreign (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think the Korean affairs-- Speaker 2: --beliefs and so on. Speaker 1: --committee [Congressional Caucus on Korea] too, right, weren't you? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I am. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm co-chair. Story_ID: 360649 Speaker 1: You came back here in '63 [1963]. Now this is-- Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], really. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, 1964. All right. Had things in the United States changed a great deal for you? I mean, could you notice a, was there a noticeable change, here? Speaker 2: There were noticeable changes and particularly with my family. We got into building projects and being young and adventuresome, and hard workers all of us, you know, we jumped in and we became entrepreneurs and we built an apartment unit with ten units in all. There were more opportunities. I had a global view and I always wanted to go back, I was assigned to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, but my sister fell gravely ill, my father [William Watson] fell ill and died, my uncle died, so there were things that kept me there with the family, and I never got a chance to go back, but I always yearned to go abroad as an ambassador and my dream did come true. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was because I had been around the world before I was out of my twenties and I would take off with groups of people and travel with them into all parts of the Orient and India and-- Speaker 1: Now did the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --news on the Civil Rights Movement air, 'cause it was, now those were the big days, when, the days when you were actually out of the country. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did the news of it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when it got started, when it was starting-- Speaker 1: --reach abroad, I mean? Speaker 2: --I was still on campus and then it did reach abroad. And, you know, when the Kennedys were elected that was very interesting, I didn't know who Kennedy was. And I remember I was home, and one of my friends called me down from the Ambassador Hotel [Los Angeles, California] and said, "Oh, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was just shot." And the world went into a whirl. Story_ID: 360650 Speaker 1: I was asking you if you news of the Civil Rights Movement and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it did, and-- Speaker 1: --all the changes here were, you know, were easily obtained-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --abroad, you know? Speaker 2: And just to relate that to, we had a celebration for the integration, the fortieth year of integration of the [U.S.] Armed Forces. And so when-- Speaker 1: Just recently? Speaker 2: Yeah, day before yesterday. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were aware, but we were not part of it because we were out west. And it was the advent of television that showed you the faces and the anger of whites, and, you know, the dogs, the water hoses, and the cruelty of man towards man. And it was really hard for us to see people using themselves to integrate. We saw [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and we saw the beatings that he took. And we then watched Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and saw him, but it was from afar. And we had great wonder about people who would subject themselves to that kind of treatment, being so far removed. And, of course, we relished it because there were places that you just didn't go. The Bullock's [Bullock's Wilshire, Los Angeles, California] tea room located on Wilshire [Boulevard] and Western [Avenue]. Bullock's department store had a tea room that probably didn't allow blacks in, but we wouldn't go there anyway. Our socioeconomic situation did not allow you to go to tea rooms. And that was not our interest, you know, at the time. And so we experienced it vicariously, from a distance, and we commented and had discussions. And as I said in the house where I stayed in the '60s [1960s], no, in the '50s [1950s], we would have discussion with the white students, and find out, and we bonded. And so our experience was without the violence, it was associated to the kind of Civil Rights Movement that we all read about. But yes, things did change widely. But, however, the more things changed the more they stayed the same 'cause it wasn't until I was elected to the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education] in 1975 that we had a mandate that came down from the California supreme court [Supreme Court of California] to integrate L.A. Unified [Los Angeles Unified School District]. And I was elected to the board at the time. And it was 19--June of 1976. I was seated next to the governor's sister, Kathleen Brown-Rice, Jerry Brown was the governor at the time. And I remember the superintendent was Bill Johnston, William Johnston [William J. Johnston], who gave us the announcement, and the Times [Los Angeles Times] shot a picture of Kathleen and myself sitting next to each other and the expressions on our face. Next morning in the L.A. Times, my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] called me, and she said, "Regardless of what you see, I still love you." They must have twirled that paper, they stretched my nose across my face (laughter) my lips were focused on, you know. And Kathleen looked very petite. Well, the fight was on then. And I was the only black at first. In fact, I was the first elected African American woman, elected African American woman. There was another appointed African American, but when they appointed her they thought that she was Indian, Native American. And when they found out, that was 1939, and when they found out that she was black, they ran another woman with her name and she lost. She never was elected, she was appointed. I was the first elected-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --fast-forward to-- Speaker 1: Elected as a member of the Los Angeles Unified School-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --District board? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 360651 Speaker 1: Let's go back to, well, '64 [1964] when you, so when you came back, you had an assignment to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, but your family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I, I didn't take it. Speaker 1: --yeah, family-- Speaker 2: I stayed home and I-- Speaker 1: --issues kept you here. Speaker 2: --yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: So what did you do in '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Well, I went back to the board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], and applied, and I was called out to a school because the clerk at Coeur D'Alene's [Coeur D'Alene Avenue School, Venice, California] sister was principal of this school, and they called me up and I didn't have to hardly go through an interview, and I was hired at Selma Avenue [Selma Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] in Hollywood. And I taught there until I left the classroom. Speaker 1: Okay. So how many years-- Speaker 2: Which is in 19--I left the classroom in 1968. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's three-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean, a four year, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yeah. And I went back to school, I went to Cal State LA [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and got a degree in school guidance and-- Speaker 1: Okay. I don't wanna race too fast. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to bring you-- Speaker 1: --some people might wanna know, what's it like to teach in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]? Is it glamorous? Speaker 2: It was, listen I'm gonna write a book, but I decided to do it in volumes. I could write a book that no one would believe. There was a, many years ago, 'Up the Down Staircase' [Bel Kaufman], which was a kind of parody on, you know, teaching. And this, being in Hollywood, being right behind Frederick's of Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], you walk down the street and there was Hollywood High School [Los Angeles, California]. And we had children, I had the sixth grade, and my buddy, Les Usome [ph.], had the fifth grade. And we had, we were in a bungalow, this school was damaged by the 1933, '32 [1932] earthquake, and it was a series of bungalows, it has never been built back as a permanent school, it was bricks, bricks came down. So anyway (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they divided it up into a series of bungalows on the campus. Speaker 2: Yeah, on the same land where the school came down, yeah. Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Selma, S-E-L-M-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Avenue. It's Selma Avenue, then it's Hollywood Boulevard. And Les Usome was my partner, and we had a door in between. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So if he had to run out, I'd watch his class, and if I--I became assistant to the principal, so whenever there was a case for the principal to leave, I'd yell into Les, "Watch my classroom," and I'd run out. They'd send a book down or there was a certain bell ring meaning rush down to the office. Well, I got this call to rush down to the office and the, Sally Cole [ph.], she's deceased now, was about this tall, she was Jewish, and she said, "Miss Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], there's a complaint from a parent, would you take care of it?" And I only saw the parent's back, and she went down to her office, and I saw her bending over with laughter. When I came around the counter, I looked into the face of a dart board, this woman had painted a red circle here, a green circle around that, a, I guess, a yellow circle around that, and she had two mops on her head. And she came in to complain, she lived across the street, there was a person, a television personality called Criswell [Jeron Criswell King], and he used to have a show, 'Criswell Predicts.' And he owned that property. And underneath was a bomb shelter because in that day, you know, we'd have to have these bomb alert drills. Anyway, she came across, she lived right there across from the school, and she says, "The children are taunting my son and they're throwing rocks at him, so I have to run out and pull him inside the house, they wanna throw rocks at me." And when I looked at her face, I saw why. Speaker 1: She had a target on her face. Speaker 2: She had a (laughter) target on her face. And Sally was-- Speaker 1: So, well, did her son, did she paint her son up the same way or-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --no but they would start throwing rocks at the house, you know, and she'd poke her head out the door, and they were really targeting her. And I, and Sally was just bending over with laughter. And I looked down there at her. But we were buddies. Story_ID: 360652 Speaker 1: We had the traveling white gypsies that would come to Los Angeles [California] for the winter, they would come to Hollywood, and she [Sally Cole (ph.)] would give them all her birthdate. She would give any foreigner, like we had one kid called Fuk Lee, F-U-K, Lee. And she said, "Oh, no," so she called him Peter. And so she would send me a note, that this is Peter, you know. And she would come in to identify the white gypsies. And she would send down a book with a purple cover, and that meant that somebody important was coming in, the principal was coming or somebody was in my class [at Selma Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. And when I got that book, then I knew something was up. And she'd come in and she would say, "Miss Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], would you like to take your children out for an early recess?" And I would take my children out on the yard. And our bungalows were like this, the yard was in the center and behind the yard was Frederick's of Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. She would come down to look through the desks because she knew the white gypsies were in and she would look for things that were reported stolen. So she would send us out to the yard and then she would identify who they were. One day we had a kid in the third grade break her leg, and the message went out, would all brothers or sisters, and then all these white gypsies would run on the yard, and we would identify who they were in the school, and then she would come down and search their desks for stolen items. Uh-- Speaker 2: I mean, were they usually guilty of stealing something? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. And she'd find out, and she was like a sleuth-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a detective. Speaker 2: When you say white gypsies what, is there a distinction between another kind of gypsy or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, the original ones that came from Europe, and they were in the United States, and we'd call them the white gypsies 'cause usually the gypsies were very dark, these were lighter skin with lighter eyes. And they had European roots, but born here. And she would just label them the white gypsies. And she could identify them, looks in their eyes and anyone who came in with a suspicious birthdate she gave 'em her birthday. Oh, she was something, she was really sharp and we became very good friends. And I had a case where when I came on campus, a former military officer became a school principal, and they sent him to our school. And I said, there were only thirteen teachers. And so I always got identified as the assistant principal because I was in school taking advanced education courses, and I was the sixth grade, it was the last teacher before they went on to the middle school, the high, junior high. And so I was called in. Story_ID: 360653 Speaker 1: The principal and the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], and it was during the assassination of John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. The PTA principal came-- Speaker 2: Of Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy], you mean? Speaker 1: No, John Kennedy. Speaker 2: John, oh-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --this is '63 [1963]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --John was '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, yeah, I got back in '63 [1963], '64 [1964], I say (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. So 'cause you said it was really '64 [1964], so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, I said it was '63 [1963], '64 [1964] and that's the way-- Speaker 2: Oh, all right. Speaker 1: --our semesters run. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so she came in and she said, the president was shot. And I looked at her, I said, "What does she mean, the president was shot? She's the PTA president." And then we turned on the intercom, and it was John Kennedy, so everything stopped. Anyway, she lived up in the Hollywood Hills [Los Angeles, California]. Her husband was a psychiatrist. And out in front of his house, her brother, this was a big thing, right under the Hollywood sign, was found impaled on a fence, tied up. So it was strange things, husband was a psychiatrist, that hit the front page of the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times]. Anyway, this was his wife, the psychiatrist's wife, that was her brother that was found impaled on a bush and tied up. She came in and told me that she would always go to the principal's office, and they'd have long conversations and she would talk about how in fear she was of her husband, and how strange things happened, he was the psychiatrist. So she'd spend most of her time on campus [of Selma Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. They formed a relationship. And I will not use any names, but they would say, "We have a meeting to go to, can we use your car?" And so one day, the husband came on the campus, he had a long Cadillac, two-tone brown, never forget it, and pulled into our parking lot, we parked towards the bungalows like this, and he parked in the space where I had my car. And he came with a shotgun looking for the principal and his wife. And I said, "Sir, they're not here. They might be in the area office, they went off to a meeting, praying every day, every hour that they would not come in in my car." And he pulled in my parking place and I just prayed they, so he left. Anyway word got to the area office about this relationship. So they moved him to Broadway Elementary [Broadway Elementary School, Venice, California]. And I was out of the classroom, but I heard about it, and that he had parked across the street from Broadway in a Safeway parking lot, the father, the husband, and he had a shotgun, a box boy saw this man sitting there with this shotgun over his knees, called the police. Our principal, former, would come in in his pickup truck in the back, wouldn't park in the front, he was waiting to see him go in, I guess, getting ready to kill him. So anyway, that broke that up. I had gone and I was no longer there, no longer in the classroom, but they did marry, and years later they came up to visit me in Sacramento [California]. They divorced, he was married to a--his wife had been in the [U.S.] military and he had been an officer in the military and they divorced and he married the PTA president and so on. There were so many stories I could write about. And I remember coming in one day and he said, "Miss Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], would," no, he didn't say that, well, he said, "would you go to your room," 'cause I was right there on the driveway and they'd open the gates, the milk trucks, to deliver our milk. He said, "Go to your room and just peer out your window," because he said, "I've gotta go and investigate, there's a milk truck in the driveway and lights are on, motor running, the big baskets of milk down on the ground, and no driver, so go and monitor and when I go around the other way, I'll come back and let you know." Well, he looked around and I was looking and we couldn't find the driver. And so he called the company, and you see it was mixed, milk trucks come at six in the morning and they make their deliveries from that driveway right by my room. And it wasn't until, he called all around, no one saw the driver. Eleven o'clock, the company said the driver came running in out of breath. When he went to take the milk cartons out, put 'em on the ground and bent over, some guy ran up to him, right to his back, I guess, gonna attempt to try to rape him and he started running, never stopped (laughter). This is a true story. I mean, I have more stories like that. How was it to teach there? It was a drama every day. Speaker 2: So Hollywood was-- Speaker 1: Hollywood was Hollywood. Story_ID: 360654 Speaker 1: And we had a lot of children of the actresses. And Les [Les Usome (ph.)] would say, "Watch my room," he'd have to run out and get a student who had come in late, because his mother was doing business at night with her beaus, and he would open the door 'til four o'clock in the morning. So we had all these, and we'd have to go into the homes. I'd have to go in, at that time, when you had a consistently tardy or chronic absentee student, you'd have to follow up by going to their homes. I went into that business, Child Welfare and Attendance [Child Welfare and Attendance Unit], where we'd go in the homes to find out, but prior to that we'd have to follow up, go talk to the parents and I'd walk into situations that could only be made up by Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. So anyway, I don't need to get into all the other stories (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You don't wanna get into any specific stories? Speaker 1: But I-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I can tell you, there, every day there was a drama played out in our school [Selma Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. And I will end up telling you that there was a Miss Singh [ph.] teaching there. She was real, real white skinned, and red cheeks and all, and wore her hair with a kind of like a pancake on the top, married to an East Indian. And I came into the office, went to the box, got my mail, and I talked to two ladies that were out there. And I remember what they had on as I stood there. And then they went down for an appointment with Ms. Singh. And about ten minutes later, here comes Miss Singh running back to the office, and I remember her pink cheeks were, her whole face was red, and she was out of breath and she said to the principal, "You must come real quick." I was, I won't call the name of the family, I'm gonna put them in my book as a fictitious name, but I was looking for Mr. and Mrs. B and I went in and I started my conference with the parent, and there was a person with the parent, and she was introduced as Aunt Sweet Thing. And the daughter was four going on five and really acting out in the classroom, and that's why they're in for a parent conference. And she said, "I started talking to Mrs. B, and I looked over at Sweet Thing, and I saw hair on the chest and then I looked down at the hands, I saw hair on the hands and I realized that Sweet Thing was Mr. B." And that's when she lit out of the room and got the principal. "So, Miss Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], would you bring," the kids were coming in on campus, "would you get everyone and get them to go to their rooms." So it was always my job to fill in and take care. And so he said, "And tell them pull the blinds." And so I did, I got 'em all in but I went and stood over near the door and I'm looking out through the blinds, and he was walking back with the two ladies. She had a dark coat on, a black skirt, white blouse, and black pumps, and I stood there and talked to them about two minutes and didn't realize that was Mr. B. So I couldn't wait for school to be over 'cause he called a faculty meeting. And he wrote up there, in the language of the investigators and the scientists, if you bring the negative ions together with the positive ions into one person, it would solve the human problem, and he wrote that up. Then he went to tell us, that there in Hollywood was a group, and they believe that you bring these two forces together, and it will blow out any of the negatives, and they were out of Arizona and so on. But we had that group on campus represented by Mr. B., dressed in drag. Every day there was a Hollywood type drama that could be played out, and many, many more. And I won't take your valuable time to tell you anymore, but it was like living in a movie at that school. And that is the reason why I went into school psychology because I had a student that had a 121 IQ, depending on the day, couldn't read the word the, and I realized he was really emotionally disturbed. I had another student that was thin as a rail, dressed in black, T-shirt, white as a sheet, with striking blue eyes, sat there like a zombie. And about two months later the police came to my room and said, "Is so and so in your classroom?" "Yes." They went up to him and arrested him. And what he was doing, his father was driving through the alleys in Hollywood hoisting him up to come through the transits, to open the doors and they were stealing merchandise out. And they came in to arrest him out of my classroom. They arrested his father, and they went in and found all these stolen goods. And that's why he was so pale, and he operated at night, and, you know, in the day he was just a zombie, he was probably tired, exhausted, and he never was, I sat him in the back of the room because I didn't want the other children to question why he wasn't doing the assignments. And, you know, I had story after story like that. And I said, "One day I'm going to write a book on that experience." Of course, you know, be part fiction based on the truth. Story_ID: 360655 Speaker 1: So you went-- Speaker 2: But it motivated me to go to get an advanced degree (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And you went back to-- Speaker 2: --to know how to work with these children, so I went back-- Speaker 1: --to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: No, I went to Cal State LA [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Cal State, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. UCLA did not have night classes. So I went to Cal State LA, and took and got the first degree in the master's of science and counseling and guidance. And when I left the classroom and worked in Child Welfare and Attendance [Child Welfare and Attendance Unit], someone found out I had this new master's [degree] and I got called down to the director's office. He said, "I understand you have this master's of science and counseling and guidance," and I said yes. He said, "I want you to come into my department," and that's how I got into school psychology. And I really took it so I could help these kids. Speaker 1: Okay. So you got your master's, and what year was it? Speaker 2: I got my master's from Cal State in 1969. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. I understand. Speaker 2: I gotta check all these. Speaker 1: Was it '67 [1967] by any chance? Speaker 2: Um-- Speaker 1: 'Cause I've got a note here it was '67 [1967], I just, I was looking for it and I just found it but-- Speaker 2: You might be right. Speaker 1: One of 'em might be wrong-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: --in '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: You might be right 'cause I've gotta follow those-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --periods and I'm just-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --been so long ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It says '67 [1967] here-- Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], yeah-- Story_ID: 360656 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I worked in school psychology and, of course, they sent me out to the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California] and so on. I had some schools in inner city, and I really wanted to work with disturbed youth, that's where my interests came. Because at school I had in my classrooms, these kids had the IQ, but they had emotional and psychological challenges because of the lives they had to lead and the atmosphere in which they led them. Speaker 2: Did any of your students become stars, or Hollywood stars? Speaker 1: I, some of 'em were on stage at the time I had them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They would go to summer stock in New York, come back and tell us about it. But one of the things I set up in my classroom in talking to a good friend who worked for a judge, and the first day of class I'd give 'em all this, you know, big round piece of bubble gum wrapped, and I said, "Boys and girls," I said, "unwrap it and chew it." "Oh, Miss Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], can we chew it?" "Yeah, chew the bubble gum." And they started to chew. I said, "Now let's go out on the yard." And they were so happy, you know, I let 'em chew gum. And I said, "Spit the gum out." "Oh, Miss Watson, we just started chewing." "Spit it out." They'd spit it out. "Now walk in it." "Oh, we can't walk in it." I said, "Why can't you walk in it?" "Well, it would be sticking to our shoes and this old dirty ground." And so I said, "Okay, come on back in the classroom. Now why is it that you don't chew gum?" "Because we could walk in it." I said, "And what else do you do when you go into your desk?" "It's all stuck underneath." "Where does it come from?" "The mouth." "What's in the mouth?" "Germs." I let them figure it out. I said, "Okay, what's our first rule?" We don't chew gum. Why? Justified. And the kids, they can come up with all the reasons, you don't have to lay down those hard cold rules, get 'em to understand. So I said okay, Johnny goes out next week and he chews gum and he spits on the ground. "Oh, he's in trouble Miss Watson." I said, "Okay, somebody came in and said Johnny broke our law. Well, it's a law in this classroom, is there anybody who'd like to defend him?" Yeah. I said okay, and anybody that'd liked to say that he broke the law? Yeah. I said, okay. Do we need someone to determine if Johnny was right or wrong? Yeah. Who's that? The judge. So we set up a classroom, we had attorneys for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The court, they had a courtroom, huh? Speaker 1: --the defense, attorneys, and a judge. And I took the guy, I steered 'em towards the guy who was the most talkative 'cause he had to sit there and listen. I think he's tapping you, shall I stop? Speaker 2: Yeah, he taps me when there's a minute to go so we can try to finish it here. Speaker 1: Oh, anyway-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We set up a trial in our classroom with the attorneys and the judge and all. And they would interpret the law and the rules that we made and the reasons why we made 'em, and what should the punishment be. "Well, I think we ought to send him home, he ought to not come to school." I said, "Why should he lose out on education for chewing gum or whatever? Don't you think the penalty ought to fit the crime?" And they would do it and, you know, they had it down pat. Well fast-forwarding about twenty years later, I was on the board of Blue Shield [Blue Shield of California] in San Francisco [California] and we were having cocktails in the lounge in a hotel at the top of--Mark Hopkins [InterContenental Mark Hopkins, San Francisco, California]--and this woman came in and was looking at me. She'd go out and come in again. I felt very comfortable in San Francisco, uncomfortable, you know. And she kept looking at me. So as we were leaving, she said, "Are you Miss Watson?" She said, I said, "Yes." She said, "I was one of your students, and I was one of the attorneys in your class, and I'm an attorney now because of that experience," so yes-- Story_ID: 360657 Speaker 1: All right. So you got your master's degree in '67 [1967] from Cal State Los Angeles [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], we've, and you've served as a counselor, a guidance counselor in the schools? Speaker 2: Counselor and guidance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Good. And, you know, stop me because I can tell you, I can expand it for, to use up all your time, so I am just hitting the things that you ask about, (laughter) how was it teaching in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure, I'm sure that people would-- Speaker 2: But anyway I've got story after story after story that I can write, and I will do two or three volumes. Speaker 1: Okay. So after you got your degree you, the guidance counselor, was that in the same school district, and how--you said you went into the inner city schools I think, right? Speaker 2: Well, L.A. Unified [Los Angeles Unified School District] covered 910 square miles [sic.] at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it went all the way from Pasadena [California], all the way out to the shoreline, all the way up through the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California], and all the way down to San Pedro [Los Angeles, California], that was all L.A. Unified. So you, they have six different areas now, but I taught out in the area west at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the Hollywood area. And then when I went into Child Welfare and Attendance [Child Welfare and Attendance Unit] and counseling and guidance, then I taught out in the Valley, I didn't teach out in the Valley, I was the attendance officer or I was a school psychologist out in the Valley, and then inner city. Speaker 1: Okay. And any stories from that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you don't want those stories. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I don't know-- Speaker 2: I walked into, I went into a classroom and the teacher said, "All these kids are retarded." I said, "What makes you think they're retarded?" And, they cannot speak a sentence. I said well, could you, you know, the, what she said is they couldn't speak more than two words in a sentence. I said, "Well, you're a product of your environment. And if you were spoken to in two word sentences, you know, you hear and then you speak." And-- Speaker 1: Now what nationality were these kids? Were these- Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Black kids. Speaker 2: Black, white teacher in a black classroom. Speaker 1: Okay. Is this in-- Speaker 2: It's in L.A. Unified. Speaker 1: --South Central L.A. [South Central, Los Angeles, California], or-- Speaker 2: Well, no, it was just center L.A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Near the freeway, near USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I said, "Well, you would reflect and echo what you heard," get up, shut up, get out, sit down. That's the way parents speak to their kids. And that's what they hear and that's what they know. We call it encoding and decoding. So I would have to go in and test these kids. And very few of them came out retarded. It's just that they're products of their environment. And so I had to train them. And then we went into integration mode, and that was really an experience. I'll have to write a book on that. Because we had teachers, and then I was elected to the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], who came to the board and said they can't teach these kids. I said, "Well, where on your permit does it say that you can only teach kids at grade level?" You know, and they said these kids are retarded 'cause we had to bus 'em out there and that was a huge incident. But, and there's many stories on the busing issue. And that's when Bus Stop started and Bobbi Fiedler got elected. Speaker 1: You said the busing started in '76 [1976], I mean the integration order came out in '76 [1976] you said? Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And we started the integration plan and there was a lot of blocking. Speaker 1: Now, I'm sorry, what, what year were you elected to the-- Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: --school board? Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. School board in '75 [1975]. And the integration order came out in '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: And I ran in '72 [1972] and didn't make it. I ran against a conservative incumbent. And two weeks before that election my campaign manager was murdered and they never, and Tom Bradley was just coming in, and that's a whole another story. And I don't even wanna go into it. Speaker 1: That sounds like a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's too painful. Speaker 1: Well, okay. Speaker 2: Anyway-- Speaker 1: That sounds like a story we ought to talk about at some point. Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll talk about it at another time. Story_ID: 360658 Speaker 1: It was right after the original Watts riots [Los Angeles, California]. And if you remember, that's when-- Speaker 2: That's like '66 [sic. 1965]? Speaker 1: --Johnnie, yeah, Johnnie Cochran came to fame because of the Deadwyler [Leonard Deadwyler] case. And-- Speaker 2: Well, just tell us what that was. I mean 'cause people watching this are not gonna necessarily know what that is. Tell us what was the Deadwyler case, and this is 1966 or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's see the-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Los Angeles [California] riots were about '66 [1966], right? I think the original-- Speaker 1: Yeah, around about that time. And it was a young man from Watts [Los Angeles, California] rushing over the freeway, the Harbor Freeway, his wife [Barbara Deadwyler] was pregnant, getting ready to deliver. Got stopped by the police and he said, "I gotta go, my wife," and they said, "Give us your driver's license and your registration," you know, routine. And he said, "But I gotta get my wife, I gotta get my wife to, I gotta get my," he kept saying that. And they were saying no, give us your--so he rushed to reach in to the glove compartment, see he never complied, he just rushed to do it and they were, and they shot him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If you remember that story, you might not. Speaker 2: No, no, I know but they, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. This is how the riot began. They held him up, she delivered there in the car, he fell into her lap or she, yeah, she was over here and he was rushing her. And because he made that quick movement into the dark compartment, they shot him. It was Johnnie Cochran, who was in the office with Tom Bradley, or Officer Tom Bradley, and another famous attorney. And it was-- Speaker 2: Is this, the other attorney-- Speaker 1: Charles [ph.], they were all together, they had an office on Crenshaw [Boulevard]. But as you know-- Speaker 2: Were they with Leo Branton [HistoryMaker Leo Branton, Jr.], I mean, was he-- Speaker 1: Leo came later. You know, Leo's brother was involved in, I guess, some cases down Mississippi and so on. He was very famous in that movement. But this was Johnnie Cochran, and this is when Johnnie Cochran's name be- Johnnie and I were in school together [at University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and he lived down the street from me. So-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --we knew him and all. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is the Deadwyler case then? Speaker 1: The Deadwyler case, yeah, that brought him to fame and that's what started the Watts riots [sic.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Back in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Did Johnnie Cochran win damages for the Deadwylers? Speaker 1: Yes, yes [sic.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she won a million dollars and blew it. Things never turned out smoothly. Businesses were burned and destroyed, and never came back to the Watts area. And that is one of the reasons why we have not broken up the district, the school district [Los Angeles Unified School District]. Remember I told you it was 710 square miles? We never broke it up. It's a district that should have been broken up. But it was land value, taxes that funded the Local Education Agency, LEA. And you'd have to have a district out in Watts alone, it didn't have the value, all the businesses moved out. And so we've always resisted it for that reason. But anyway, Johnnie made his name on that case, won for the wife, but things were never right after that, they were never right after that. We've always had a problem with our police officers, we had an almost all-white force. My father [William Watson] was part of that force prior to that incident. And my father died right after I came back from overseas. Speaker 2: Okay. So it was-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --he died in '64 [1964], just before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah around in that period of time. But he would always tell us that this riot will not go further than Washington [Boulevard] because they have ammunition, guns and so on, that if you come up to that area, it'll be over for you. As long as it stays down in Watts, and he warned us, and he was a police officer. He died of emotional injuries attached to his job. He had to shoot a young man, and that young man fell dead on my brother's [William Watson, III] godmother's lawn. And so there's a lot connected to this. Story_ID: 360659 Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock] asked you questions about the police department and how your father [William Watson] felt about it 'cause Los Angeles [California] historically has had one of the most racist police departments in the country. And I think everybody knows that. Speaker 1: My father came out to Los Angeles to be the next Joe Louis. He was going to run on the beach with his trainer, and his several cousins came with him, they're the Wallers [ph.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I think this story was told, he's from Kansas City [Kansas], right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, but did he, I mean, did he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so when he met my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] and got married, that was the end of his boxing career. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She was absolutely against boxing. My dad at three years old used to take me (laughter) down to watch the boxing matches. I hated it, but I'm with my dad. And so anyway he was chosen, he went to Newton Street [Newton Community Police Station, Los Angeles, California], he became a police officer at Newton Street where all the blacks--my cousin was the first black detective, they were at Newton Street. When they built this new police station near USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], University police station [University Station, Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --they chose my father 'cause he had the physique and so on. They chose what they called their best, and he was one of 'em. And he's the one that had the white partner that found this place for rent over on the Westside, and that's how we broke the color line. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: Sent his white partner in. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that's-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --how he got, and he would tell us things all the time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so he warned you, what you're saying is that-- Speaker 1: He said-- Speaker 2: --he warned you about-- Speaker 1: He said-- Speaker 2: --the readiness of the Los Angeles Police Department [LAPD] to deal with an unruly--or a situation what they considered-- Speaker 1: A mob. Speaker 2: --unruly situation or a rebellion or riot of black people, right? Speaker 1: He said that there were depots. In fact, I've been fighting to close down this gun shop in Leimert Park [Los Angeles, California] that has been so well protected that they gave them these, their license for another period of time. And they were not complying with local ordinances but that goes into a whole different set of facts. About what we've been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Leimert Park's a famous shopping district in the black community. Speaker 1: And it was built in 1947 to be the first in the nation decentralized shopping mall or shopping area. We used to all go around to 7th [Street] and Broadway, center of the city for shopping. Some of the most elite like Philip's Department Store [ph.] was there and all. So in 1947 they built Crenshaw shopping plaza [Broadway-Crenshaw Center; Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Plaza, Los Angeles, California] to be an example of decentralized shopping, to take shopping out of the center part of urban areas to the suburbs. And they were building the Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California] at the time. And we were there. And my sister [Barbara Watson Coleman] started off at Dorsey High School [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], brand new high school. And when I went there, I got a sibling permit to go 'cause we had moved up on 27th [Street] and Arlington [Avenue], it was right on the line, that side went to Dorsey, this side went to Poly Emanuel [ph.], whatever. But because my sister was there and she went there when we were on Cimarron [Street], which is on that side. So, you know, all these are geographical and things. Anyway, there were five blacks in my graduating class. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, well back to '66 [1966] so the riot, we were talking about the riot and the-- Speaker 1: The people felt that they had been oppressed by LAPD. LAPD shot first and asked questions later. He [Leonard Deadwyler] was reaching in a hurry for his license, and his permit, his registration, and they shot him, killed him. She [Barbara Deadwyler] had the baby and the riots started. Speaker 2: Okay. Well it sounds like there's a developing set of issues here, we've got like police/community issues (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Brutality and so on. Speaker 2: --we've got education issues. Speaker 1: And you had the riots with Johnnie Cochran, who is a legal icon at this point, The Cochran Firm [Los Angeles, California], several affiliates across the country, he set it up. And that gets into, I just saw on TV this morning they were talking about the relationship, this was a repeat from last night, cellphones and brain cancer, brain tumors. And Johnnie was the topic of--his wife, Dale Cochran [Sylvia Dale Mason Cochran] is a good friend. And she was on when they diagnosed Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], she was on with Dr. Black [HistoryMaker Dr. Keith L. Black], one of the most prominent neurosurgeons in the country, he's out at Cedars [Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California]. So I'm just recalling Johnnie Cochran's wife now becomes a, let's say a celebrity and a consultant because she was talking about the relationship between use of the cell phone and brain cancer and that she noted with her husband. And Johnnie was the first one to carry one of those men's packets or purses and every place he went he had it over his hand, you know, or he'd have it around his waist and he'd zip it open and bring out that cell phone. Story_ID: 360660 Speaker 1: Were you encouraged to run for office in the early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or how did you, how did that come about? Speaker 2: You know, I told you, I went back and I picked up other degrees. And I then was appointed to a position at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] to head up the Allied Health Occupations, Allied Health Occupations Project [Allied Health Professions Project]. And then I was made the state director and would have to go up and down the state. A group of community people came to me, very well respected, and one was a city councilman, Dave Cunningham [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.], the other person was Portia Craig [E. Portia Craig]. And they came to me and asked me to run for the board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education]. We were looking for someone to replace, it was Reverend Jones [James E. Jones], who was elected, and then went off the board after four years, and they wanted me to run for the board. I was an educator, and I told 'em no. And I was directing this program at UCLA, enjoying it, we're training young people for allied health occupations, no. So they waited two years later and they came to me, this was in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s], and they came to me, and a friend of Portia's, a older man that I respected very much, and they were like my mentors. And I was always taken under the wing of older people because they saw some potential in me, you know, and I was nose to the grindstone, education all the way, and opening up new vistas in our community, you know, let's look at the social psychological aspect of our children. So he said, "Would you do me a favor?" And I said, yes. He said, "Would you go down and talk to my friend at the school board?" And I went down and talked to him and he said, "I'd like you to run--I'd like you to run for, against Dr. John Newman [sic. Donald Newman]." They both had gotten elected together, both conservative. Once he got on the school board, he softened up his position and moved towards the center. And they didn't believe that black and white students should go to school together. And they didn't believe that we should have girls going to the same schools as boys. But once he was elected, Dr. Newman, and he saw the situation, and we had such a large district, he was moving towards and understood some of these issues. And so he laid out this scenario and he said, "You can even be home at five o'clock and I'll give you the first fifty thousand, one condition," you have to change, and these were nonpartisan offices, but you have to change your registration from Democrat to Republican. Well, that was so offensive to me, I said, "Thank you very much, sir," and got up and walked out. And I said, "I'm gonna run, and I'm gonna run on my own." And I went down and filed to run. Didn't know what I was doing, didn't have any, educator, and really, with a master's degree, what am I gonna do in the political field? We had just gotten Yvonne Burke [HistoryMaker Yvonne Brathwaite Burke] elected to the assembly [California State Assembly], and that's all the politics I wanted to get involved in. And I went down and I was scared to death. Came home, doorbell rung, and it was a friend of mine. And his father was the head of the Church of God In Christ for the State of California, they had a big house in the old Berkeley Square [Los Angeles, California] where a lot of the celebrities lived, it's now the freeway [U.S. Route 101] and Western [Avenue], and FAME [First African Methodist Episcopal Church, Los Angeles, California] is in that area. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: First AME. And he was the first one I told. He was a black education commissioner for the district. Had he responded any other way I wouldn't be sitting here talking to you. I said, "Tom [Tom Stewart], I'm gonna run for the board of education." He said, "Well then I have to help you get elected." Had he said, well what, what are you gonna do, how much money do you have, I would have pulled out of it, scared, I didn't know what I was talking about. And so he said, "I'm gonna set you up with the Hispanic education commission, the Native American, and so on, I'll have that ready for you." And he's the one that got murdered. And right after the Watts riot [Los Angeles, California], he was on Kenny Hahn's [Kenneth Hahn] Gang Task Force [Watts Gang Task Force]. He started the, do you remember the 103rd Street Band [Charles Wright and the Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band]? Speaker 1: Yeah, the Watts 103rd Street Band. Speaker 2: He's the one that started it. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Tom Stewart. And he was working on the gang task, I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Their hit was 'Express Yourself,' now-- Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 360661 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think what started, what really was at the bottom of this is that he [Tom Stewart] found out who was bringing the guns into the community and the drugs. Because when I went on the board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], they would ask me about drug users I said, "Oh, no, our kids can't afford--what, cocaine, they can't afford that, they're not into that." But somebody brought it in. And if you wanna destroy a community, you do three things, you bring guns, ammunition, and drugs, come back in ten years, and that's what happened. And I think, Tom found out because he told me one day in my living room, he's sitting way across the room and he was whispering, he said, "My life has been threatened." He said, "I'm gonna get out of this." And he said, "One of our friends is being asked to become the president of one of the community colleges, he asked me to go with him. If he goes over there, would you come?" And we were whispering. I said, "Why are we whispering?" And we got in the car to go somewhere and we again approached that, but when he said my life was threatened I didn't take it seriously but now as I look back, I see the tone of his voice and his countenance, and there was something there and he said, "I just have to get out of this, I have to get out of this." Speaker 2: Now, now, what, what's his name again? Speaker 1: Tom Stewart. Speaker 2: Tom Stewart. And he was, his occupation was, he was a-- Speaker 1: He was the black education commissioner-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --for L.A. Unified [Los Angeles Unified School District]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Good friend. We studied in school--he went away to the Korean War, I went into teaching. And I felt so sorry for the guys because they had to go to war, and we could go on into our careers. But we stayed friends, and he had put on a fundraiser for me, and right near Manual Arts High School [Los Angeles, California], that's considered South Central [Los Angeles, California] now, I represent it by the way. And-- Speaker 2: But it wasn't considered South Central then? Speaker 1: Well, we didn't have those designations. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. All right. Speaker 1: And so it was just Los Angeles [California], you know. So they started designating on demographics, South Central. And there's always something about South (laughter) relative to black people that tells you the story. Story_ID: 360662 Speaker 1: I think that whatever he [Tom Stewart] knew took his life or caused his death. And the night that he had the fundraiser at Mrs. Netherfield's [ph.] daughter's house, she was a community activist around then, I just went to an event for her where she got a prestigious award for her activism. And I saw three men standing on the porch and I saw my cousin leaning out the door talking to them, and we were pulling up going to the back, and I wondered why they weren't going on the inside, you know 'cause usually, dollar to come in the door, and a dollar for each drink, that's how we made our money, and he put this fundraiser on there for me. And so we went to the back, came in. And Mrs. Netherfield came looking through the window, she said, "You know, I'm security minded." She said, "You just stay back here until it's time for you to come up and speak." So I stayed in the back and then they called me to come forth. And I looked at Tom, he was dancing, and there was like a gray mist over him, and you call it being psychic or whatever but I felt something, I said he must be tired. And I was frowning up, and he came over to me he said you look so uptight, he says, "Come on let's dance." That's why I could describe for the police what he had on and his behavior because he had the same behavior, they were wearing those formfitting pants and formfitting shirts and he, his was floral, his pants were brown, and he had on brown suede shoes, and he loved to dance. He would take his wallet and everything out of his back pocket, and lock them in, lock it in the trunk of the car, that was his MO [modus operandi] because the way the pants fit. And so we danced. He said, "Okay, now stand up on that chair, there's a guy that's going to be in a big record company," gave me $225, that was big money. And he said, "As soon as you do that you can leave." So I left at 1:30 and he left right after I left, Mrs. Netherfield told the story of going down, this is her daughter's house, she went down about six doors, but some, there were three cars, and somebody called her name, when she looked back those three cars were gone. So she associated that with Tom getting in his car, and three cars either following him. A woman called and said that a car had hit her car, and then somebody ran and drove it around, and the car was on the next block parked in towards the curb. That's where they found Tom's body, it was Tom's car, just happened someone called and reported that a car hit her car and somebody ran in and drove it away. So he was shot three times from the right side. The police took my sister, who was on the door, her best friend, Willette Murray [Willette B. Murray], whose son ran against me for this seat, and another friend of mine, in under police custody and from this they were able to direct the drawing of the suspects. They had come in and signed in, and they were living out in Cucamonga [Rancho Cucamonga, California], we used to always joke about Cucamonga, don't nobody live (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that's a Jack Benny joke, all the trains-- Speaker 1: Yes, to Cucamonga. Speaker 2: --going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], so and so, and Cucamonga. Speaker 1: Well, they all signed, and we knew that these were fictitious names, but they had to call 'em. And they didn't know whether they're after them, after me. And they said, "Another robbery over the weekend." No, it wasn't because Tom's wallet, I said, "Oh, you found it, didn't you find his wallet in the trunk of the car?" Yeah. "And they had his keys on it?" Yeah. I knew his MO. And I said, "I'll tell you what he had on." And that was all. So anyway they questioned my sister and all of them, and those were those three guys, and I knew something was wrong because they had overcoats and felt hats, no one in Los Angeles does an overcoat and a felt hat. That's just not the way we dress, never gets that cold. They were out of Chicago [Illinois]. So it was a hit. And probably, you know, a mob hit, probably had something to do with the drugs and he knew who was doing it, shot him three times. Speaker 2: These are black people? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, they were black. But they didn't fit in with our culture, the way we dress, and people who came to our fundraisers. They were immediately, I, you know, I felt really strange because they weren't big, but they looked like mobsters, kind of rotund, overcoats and these hats pulled down. And Eddie [ph.] was looking out, my cousin, Eddie, was looking out the door, talking to them, I thought that was strange. They came in asking for Tom. You have to sign in, pay your dollar. And they all signed Cucamonga, I said, "That was a hit," and disappeared. And all these years, when Tom Bradley was just coming into office, he put four special detectives, never, questioned 157 people, brought them in, questioned them, never a lead, even today we don't know who killed--I have my theories, I'll put 'em in my book. Story_ID: 360663 Speaker 1: We were talking about the murder of Tom Stewart in 1972 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I just wanna tell you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --fast-forwarding that, I was appointed to the judiciary committee [California Senate Committee on Judiciary] and who should be sitting on my left, no, my right, was Ed Davis [Edward M. Davis], the chief of police, who said, "Hang 'em at the airport," that famous chief of police, this is all a part of police impression-- Speaker 1: Put that story into context there, I mean, hang 'em at the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what's that? Speaker 2: I said that my father [William Watson] was a police officer, trained by Ed Davis-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --prior to Tom Bradley going on the police force. And I would end up being his seatmate, on one side of me, and Bob Presley [Robert Presley] the undersheriff on the other side. And so when I would make a vote, I was the first black, first woman, when I left there after twenty years, there was not another black and not another woman on judiciary. And I would end up sitting next to the guy who trained my dad, and he would say to me, now, you know, "Bill Watson wouldn't like that vote." But my dad was brainwashed, he went along with him, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is on the, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the side of irony, this-- Speaker 1: This in the California, this is in the California Assembly [California State Assembly]? Speaker 2: No, I went to the Senate [California State Senate], direct. Speaker 1: The senate, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: I was the first direct, I went directly from the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education] to the Senate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never went to the Assembly. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. Speaker 2: Never served under Brown, Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I served under David Roberti. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 360664 Speaker 1: We've touched on them a little bit, but what were the issues when you were elected to the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], and what did, what happened? Speaker 2: The issues were the disparities in the district [Los Angeles Unified School District]. And as I said, there were attempts to break up our district, but we never did because, and I told you the reason why. And so the issues at that time, how could we provide quality education for all children, how could we secure them in our schools, and now you see the shootings take place on campus now, and quality education, and health delivery. You know, we took our nurses out, took our school doctors out, budgeting and so on. And those were the issues then. After I got elected, '75 [1975], '76 [1976], and it was near the end of the year anyway, when they came out with this, they mandated that we require our schools to be integrated. That meant because we had such a humongous school district, we had to bus our students, and busing became the issue. And I was the spokesperson for the black children. Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit, and I failed to ask this question, but what kind of a coalition did you have to put together to get elected to the school board in the first place? Speaker 2: Good question. Community activist groups, and who were they? The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], the ministers, and remember the black ministers were the key to the Civil Rights Movement in the South, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], so we would meet in church basements. And one of those people was the original president of the NAACP, and very revered in Los Angeles [California], and I would say to them, "Guess what they're doing to you today?" And you see, I was inside of the executive meetings. But NAACP, Urban League, John Mack [HistoryMaker John W. Mack], you remember John Mack and, and he is now I think still on the police commission, but he was one of the national presidents, well he wasn't the national president but he was known nationally. SCLC, community based groups, the community coalitions, labor, United Teachers of Los Angeles, UTLA, and NEA [National Education Association]. And it was the activist groups, the labor groups, the clergy groups, healthcare, Golden State Medical Society [Golden State Medical Association], and Westsiders. And when I say Westsiders, these are the people that lived out west. These, the Beverly Hills [Los Angeles, California] group, the Brentwood [Los Angeles, California] group, and my office now is in Hancock Park [Los Angeles, California], these are very prestigious and wealthy locations. And so when I say the Westside women, the Jewish women who were the leaders, the feminist movement and so on. These were my core support groups. And I still have a very strong relationship with them, they still support me. And so what we did, we put all these different coalitions together. I had no money but in my first campaign I spent sixteen thousand dollars. And we raised it by giving Friday night parties, a dollar to get in, a dollar per drink. And I built up a following. And my sister in the back of her car would carry the goods, she would galvanized trucks, the little tickets, the roll of tickets, the liquor and the chasers, and we'd move 'em, and we'd get our friends up in Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California] to put on these fundraisers. She'd move all that in. She and her good friend would take their kids, the money they were gonna use for their kids (laughter) to put in the campaign so we could get through. I paid five hundred dollars a month for my campaign headquarters. And we did it. We spent forty thousand dollars in the primary and the general put together, that's no money for a race today. And but we did it, I mean, I walked door to door. I had a large family, you know, cousins, we recognize our tenth and twelfth cousins, we recognize our in-laws, and so I put them together. I had my teenage nephews going putting up my placards at night. And I had my three year old niece carrying messages. You know, I got everyone involved. We had a people's campaign. Lost the first time, stayed in that mode for two years, and went in with over 80 percent of the vote. Story_ID: 360665 Speaker 1: Out in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California], I was attacked in the eastern, northeastern end of the Valley by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. Speaker 2: Is that the, I have to ask this, that's not the Simi Valley [California] area is it? Speaker 1: No, no, no. That, Simi Valley is north-- Speaker 2: North. Speaker 1: --northwestern. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But this was down in the eastern, southeastern part of the Valley. I-- Speaker 2: And we don't think of the Klan as being in California but-- Speaker 1: Well, they had little niches there. And like they had little niches out in the desert and so on. But they were not an organized group. You'd see KKK on their hands, they had probably came up from the South and all and, and they'd get the Bubbas, you know. And they tried to turn my car over, they started rocking my car. Well, our drivers were my security. There was always a move to get us out of the chauffeur driven limousines. They were not chauffeur driven limousines, they were Oldsmobiles and Lincolns with drivers that were security. Because we're mandated to go to every school once in a year. We had over five hundred schools, we could never do. I headed up the educational development subcommittee [of the Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], and I tried to take the board members three times a week, you just couldn't do it because we didn't get a salary, we got a stipend, and so you'd have to work (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you were expected to visit every school of five hundred schools? Speaker 1: You were expected, that's in, yeah, and you got, and you couldn't-- Speaker 2: And there are only 340 school days in every year so-- Speaker 1: No, 180 school days. Speaker 2: No, that's 180 school days. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right 'cause you don't go on the weekend. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: So that's-- Speaker 1: So I tried to do three a week, we could never meet that. But anyway, you know, I'm single, by myself, so I always had a driver. We all had drivers, and you had to because if you had to go to those schools, you can't park in front of the school, we had to have a driver that could park and so we could go in there and spend the appropriate amount of time and come out. And they all, there was always a movement to get rid of the chauffeur driven limousines. But just happened that my driver was a former athlete, had played football, and so he got in that car, they were trying to turn it, he got in that car, foot on the gas and we got out of there. Story_ID: 360666 Speaker 1: But we had many adventures. We were the truth squad when the Bus Stop group was formed, Bobbi Fiedler. And by the way over the, she came here and we became, the chief of police, Ed [Edward M. Davis], was going to run against her, so he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, tell us who she is, I mean that's-- Speaker 1: Bobbi Fiedler was the founder of Bus Stop. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If, if you follow the history. I did my dissertation for my doctorate on that period of time. So she loomed up as one of, let me go back and give you, who she is. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She was Roberta Rowanowitz [sic. Roberta Horowitz], at Santa Monica High School [Santa Monica, California], we called it SanMo. So when I was over teaching in Venice [California], she was going to high school at SanMo High, Santa Monica High School. She married a guy, Fiedler, who was a pharmacist, and he moved her out to the San Fernando Valley [California]. She was Jewish. And, you know, she said, never again would she go back to the inner city or in- well, Santa Monica wasn't inner city, but just the thought of putting her kids on the bus into a black area was offensive to her. So that's when she started, she rounded up all the mothers, and they would come to her crying, and say, "Bobbi, I would have committed suicide had it not been for you." So she would come in and attack me. I'll never forget she was this, she was thin and she had these long arms, and, "You're the one that's pulling babies away from their mother's breasts in the dark of night and sending them into," and so, and let me just tell you this story and I'll put a period (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they called her Bus Stop Bobbi Fiedler? Speaker 1: Bobbi Fiedler. Speaker 2: Fiedler, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. F-I-E-D-L-E-R. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She was Roberta Rowanawitz [sic.]. Okay. Speaker 2: Her married name was Fiedler. He was a pharmacist. Speaker 1: She has, I, she has parallel-- Speaker 2: And you can look her up, you can-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there are parallel personalities in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: You can google her-- Speaker 1: --in Boston [Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: --Bus Stop, um-hm. Speaker 1: --and those other areas had similar people. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Then it formed, yeah. Speaker 1: And formed women's, mothers' movements. Speaker 2: And when I would, I was on the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], she was elected to the school board. Speaker 1: She was against busing? Speaker 2: And she was antibusing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's a whole story in that, and I told you I wrote my dissertation, we don't have time to go into it, but that's another volume, that period of time. I got 125 death threats, and they had security with me and so on, but I never had any fear. God gave me the gift of being fearless. The only thing I ever feared was failing an examination, and I never did. But the fear you build up when you had to go in and take your exams. But I never had any fear. And I moved in 1970 to where I live today. And it's a Spanish style stucco with a big stained glass window that the decorator, decorator said, "That's gonna be the focal point, we're not gonna cover it." So you could look from the other side of the street, from the street, straight through my house. And I never covered that window, and today it's never covered. It's never been covered. No fear. And so I went about doing, we got threats. In fact, they got so ugly, my secretary would not even show them to me but I have a collection of them now. They've asked me for my collection, UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], they did an oral history. They asked me for my collection at Cal State [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] where I graduated with my master's [degree]. And I'm sure I can put 'em in Claremont [Claremont Graduate University, Claremont, California] where I got my Ph.D. But I have all this stuff, it's scattered, all over the place. But one day I'll gather it together and all. But there's some things there that would frighten even the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. Story_ID: 360667 Speaker 1: So the mandate for the Los Angeles Unified School District required students from the white areas to be bused into the inner city (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two-way busing. Speaker 1: --as well. Two-way? Speaker 2: Yeah. We did not-- Speaker 1: And this is different from a lot of places. Speaker 2: --we did not really implement that part because I went to court against my own colleagues and they put me out of the executive sessions. I don't even wanna call any names, but the president of that board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education] did everything he could to block it. And that's a whole story within itself. They tried to block their own mandate, you know. So we did one way busing most of the time, we never moved. And my uncle who went to UCLA's [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] wife, on her death bed told me not to classify her as white. She was very fair. She said, "I am black," and died. And that's how, we were going to bring teachers into inner city and move inner city teachers into the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California]. And it got rough and we had tough, tough, tough days. And Ed Davis [Edward M. Davis] had a file on me, and I found out about it, you know, with the law that passed where you have to, the press had to get a hold of that, but they had a file on me 'cause I would lead the marches, from, to the school board (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the Freedom of Information Act [Freedom of Information Act of 1967], you were able to look at the file? Speaker 2: It was a big file on me. Speaker 1: Through--now this is, so the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] had-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I ended up being his seatmate on judiciary [California Senate Committee on Judiciary]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: And his good friend. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm just trying to make the Los Angeles-- Speaker 2: He trained my dad [William Watson]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --at LAPD. Speaker 1: Los Angeles Police Department had-- Speaker 2: They were the oppressors. Speaker 1: --a squad, I guess, similar to the Red Squad in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I don't know what they, what do they call their unit that was doing surveillance on citizens? Did they have a name for it? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: 'Cause I know in Chicago they called it the Red Squad (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: And it was formed ostensibly to observe Communist-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --activity. But-- Speaker 2: But, you know, you can-- Speaker 1: --they tracked everybody, especially black people. Story_ID: 360668 Speaker 1: --You can go back to the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times] file and get all that stuff on Ed Davis [Edward M. Davis]. And he's the one who said, "Oh, let's just hang 'em at the airport," you know, the terrorists and so on. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: "Let's hang 'em at the airport," was a favorite saying of his. I ended up being his seatmate. How did I become his good friend? They offered a chance for us to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] under the executive program and I put my name in. And they chose one person to go out of all those, me. And I went over to him, I said, "Ed, I'm really sorry that you couldn't go." Because I followed him out of an educational committee [California Senate Committee on Education] meeting and he said, "This is my third career, and I don't understand a thing about educational financing," and that was a shock, you know. This super white police chief, and he said to me he didn't understand a thing, so we started to talk. So I went over to him, he said, "You know, I really wanted to go." He said, "For nineteen years my wife [Virginia Osborne Davis] has had psychosomatic illnesses where she can't even walk, she's in the bed. We take care of her eighty-four-year old mother. And I have to go home, I have to take care of her, the mother, I have to do the washing." I said, "You can't do that, get Maria [ph.]." "Maria?" I said, "Yes. Get a live-in housekeeper, Maria." And so two weeks later he said, got Maria. And then the day the queen [Queen Elizabeth II] came to Sacramento [California], and they had prepared us for two weeks for her coming. And I looked in the back, the other woman, Rose Ann Vuich and myself talked about what we should wear, the queen is coming, should we have, wear hats and gloves and all. So we said no, she's coming to California let's just dress in our business suits, no hats, no gloves. Well, I looked in the back of the chambers, and there was a woman [Bobbie Nash Davis], beautifully dressed with a black hat, gloves, a cream colored suit, just beautiful. She looked like Elizabeth Taylor, and he was standing behind. And he signaled to me to come back. He said, "I want you to know that I am divorcing my wife and this is my lady." I said, "You know, I was admiring you, and you're dressed so British." She said, "I am dressed for the queen, I'm English." So he asked me, he said, "Would you talk to her and, and can you get her into some groups?" I said, "Yeah, we have a prayer group that we meet in a certain time at a friend's home." And so I sent her and she came back to me and she said, "Diane [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], I don't want to go to that kind of conservative prayer group." So I'm shocked. Do you know I was invited to their wedding? Of course, I couldn't go, it was up north, and they said, you know, we married even before the interlocutory degree was settled and all. So I became her friend and he asked me to take her to some of the receptions to introduce her, she's from England. We became very good friends and confidants. And he would tell me he was gonna run against Bobbi [Bobbi Fiedler], and I would tell Bobbi, I said, "Watch out, you got the chief of police in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] running against you." And all, you know, I was always the center, and got the information coming from all sides, and became very dear friends of both of them. Speaker 2: Did your friendship change his politics any? Speaker 1: My friendship changed his politics and changed hers too. Story_ID: 360669 Speaker 1: And I'll tell you what happened real quickly. On the first day of the official integration program, we had a kid killed at one of our high schools out in the southeast [in Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Was it related to the program? Speaker 1: Let me tell you. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: The first day, the superintendent called us into an emergency executive session and he told her, us the story. He said, it had nothing to do with integration but it was a black kid who killed a Hispanic kid, nothing to do with integration. But he lived out in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California], and the gangs were building up, and he called his sister and asked if he could spend the summer with her out in the south district, way out, the southern end of our district, and on the other side of Watts [Los Angeles, California]. And he liked it so much that he asked her if he could stay there and go to school, and she said yes. And she bought him all these new clothes, remember I said the formfitting shirts and the pants and all. And so he's the new kid on campus, right? And he was walking, and three Mexican kids came up behind him and said, "You think you're so sharp," he never turned around. And you, you new boy on campus, who are you and blah, blah, blah. He never did, he kept walking. Well, those little cartons of milk, they kicked one up, and he had on gabardine pants, you know, you don't mess with our clothes. And they kicked it up, and they rushed him, and he pulled out a knife, and the guy ran into his knife and tipped his heart, and that's what killed him. He was protecting himself and they rushed him, you see. He turned around with the knife in his hand, they ran, he didn't do this, the kid did that. So they explained, the police were out there and all. So I thought about it, I said this could ruin everything we put into place, our going out and getting the communities ready and so on, and getting the schools ready, me going out talking to the teachers and all. And I went to Bobbi [Bobbi Fiedler], I said "Bobbi, I'm gonna go out to the high school." Speaker 2: This is Bob-- Speaker 1: Bobbi Fiedler. Speaker 2: --Bob, okay. Speaker 1: Went to her office. I said, "You've been the voice of Bus Stop. You have completely destroyed the hope in our community that our schools will ever provide the kind of quality education that will take these kids into a success pattern, you alone with your Bus Stop." I said, "But I'm gonna go out there, it's gonna be two hours going down, and two hours coming back and an hour there, so we'll be together five hours. Will you go with me?" She said yes. And we started talking. And I said, "Bobbi, I'm gonna tell you," she said, "You know, out of the seven members on the board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], you are the one I like the best because the governor's sister is an elitist and you represent the people." I was floored, I would have run into a tree (laughter) had I not been under control. I was floored over. And then she told me the story of her background. She said, "I was a little Jewish girl, Roberta Rowanowitz [sic. Roberta Horowitz], SanMo High School [Santa Monica High School, Santa Monica, California]. This guy comes and takes me out of that and takes me into the Valley, and this new home and he's a pharmacist, I got a new identity, my kids are going to school with the best. Why would I wanna send them back?" I said, "I understand." I said, "You need to understand where I'm coming from. I represent those kids that you would deny a quality education." Bobbi, we talked all the way out. When we got to the school, the principals looked and said, "Oh, my God help me," when they saw the two of us coming in. We sat down side by side, we said to him, "We are here to help you. We are here to support you. We are here to hear your plans for keeping the lid on this." I'll never forget, he went back and he said, whew. So he said, "I've called all the OGs, who are the older brothers and the uncles of these kids, the gang members, and I'm bringing 'em in for a conference tomorrow. And I think through them, I can keep our community from exploding." And we said, "We are 100 percent behind you, you tell us what you need and we're there for you." We spent our hour, we went back, we told the other members. And the superintendent, who had Wednesday golf games with the publisher of the Times [Los Angeles Times], all the newspaper and the top executives of business, he made a call to all ninety of them, he said, "We're not going to go to press on," he asked the press not to go, let us settle it in the school, in the community, with the parents, with the police. And that's what we did, and not a whole lot of people know that story. And we were able to go on in spite of. And we sent a peace squad out to the Valley. When Fiedler would have her Bus Stop, we'd go right in behind them. We might have six people in the audience, there were five of us, and I was one of those five. I went to people's homes, if there were three people, I was one of the three. And didn't care about the threats, went. Story_ID: 360670 Speaker 1: We finally ran out of time. We started in 1953 as you know. And our schools, parents took their kids and did home schooling, they moved out of our district [Los Angeles Unified School District], new cities were built in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California], Santa Clarita [California], and they moved up there out of our district, and so on. We just ran out of schools to integrate. The rest is history. But-- Speaker 2: So did the school system become mostly black as a result? Speaker 1: Hispanic. Speaker 2: Hispanic, okay. Speaker 1: Seventy-two percent Hispanic now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Black is our smallest percentage. Speaker 2: In the Los Angeles Unified School District? Speaker 1: Because they're in Compton [California]. Speaker 2: Okay. Um-hm. Speaker 1: They moved out to the Inland Empire. So our school district is basically Hispanic. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we've seen the demographic change over the years. Bobbi [Bobbi Fiedler] and I talked and we watched, and the guy who would, her friend, who was her consultant, would come in after hours and go through the papers on my secretary's desk. And the way we found out about it, is that there were cigarette butts in her trash can. And, you know, now in California, I was in the Senate [California State Senate] fourteen years, and I chaired health and human services [California Senate Committee on Health and Human Services], and we worked on the antismoking thing, but at that time you could smoke, and I found these. So I said to my secretary, I said, "That meeting that we were to have on Thursday at two, make it Thursday at five." And so we'd give misleading, you know, things on the desk 'cause he'd rifle through my schedule to find out where I was gonna be and all, to be prepared to block and all. She ended up marrying him, he got cancer, my sister was diagnosed with cancer. She would call me and say, "This is Bobbi Fiedler," because I would let her know what Ed Davis [Edward M. Davis], who trained my dad [William Watson] on the police force and became my colleague and I his friend, what he was telling me about running against her. And I said you ought to know this as you plan your campaign, this is what he's doing, dat, dat, dat, dat, dat. So I was both of their friends, and I knew more than either one of them knew. And I just worked it psychologically on both sides, you know, and to my benefit and the benefit of our kids. And so we had kids, one of our, we had a tipping point. And, you know, we'd send kids out to Palisades High School [Palisades Charter High School, Pacific Palisades, California], and they were at that tipping point so we'd have to hold 'em back because there were more black kids at Palisades than kids who lived within the vicinity, out in Malibu [California], Pacific Palisades [California], and all. So anyway it finally worked. We sent kids out, and they graduated from those schools, including my niece. I moved all my brother's [William Watson, III] kids out, put 'em in Warner Avenue [Warner Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] right near UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], these are experimental schools, they all went to UCLA, gifted kids. One was declared genius. They had opportunity. And that's what I talked to her, I said, "Just like you had an opportunity to get out of your conditions, moved to the Valley, new life, why would you do that to kids of color?" And she understood over the long run. She came here. And she, I remember Corman [James C. Corman], and I would tell him what she was planning, he would never do anything about it. He had that much integrity. I said, "You need to know these things 'cause I hear them." She took his seat, but she didn't stay long. When they were drawing the plans, I guess it was 1980, the guy who was doing the planning called her in, and he said, "Bobbi, I'll give you a district, you're in your mother's arms," (laughter). So he gave her a Valley district that was safe. But she was defeated, and she came back home and, you know, we continued our communications. I was communicating with him. He left after term limits, moved to the Bodega Bay [California], invited me to come and spend some time with, with him and his wife [Bobbie Nash Davis]. And so, you know, I talk to the enemy as well as our friends because you have to know what they're doing if you're going to be successful in what you do. End of story. Story_ID: 360671 Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Diane, D-I-A-N-E, Edith, E-D-I-T-H, Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Eleven, twelve, thirty-three [November 12, 1933], Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I am a congresswoman, retired. Speaker 1: Okay. When did you retire? Speaker 2: I retired last year-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in January. Well, I guess it really was this year. Speaker 1: All right. So that's January of 2012? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, this year. All right. Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is 11/25 [sic. November 26], and it's 2012. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And we're here in the Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California] area. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, we are finishing an interview that we started in 2005-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --picked up on in 2008. And we're, you know, getting towards the finish now in 2012. Story_ID: 360672 Speaker 1: I think when we left off, you were just about to run for [U.S.] Congress, and you had been appointed by President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] as ambassador to Micro (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Federated States-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --of Micronesia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what are the Federated States of Micronesia? Speaker 2: It's a group of 402 islands out in the Pacific [Pacific Ocean], the southwest Pacific. And these were islands where we fought the last war [World War II, WWII] in 1942. And what we do is, we have the ability for strategic denial. What does that mean? That means that we can deny that use of islands, strategically, as the United States. In turn, we fund their government. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So basically the U.S. maintains control of these islands but through-- Speaker 2: We don't maintain control of the islands, we maintain control of the waters, and we can use the islands. They have a president-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --duly elected. And they have a house [Congress of the Federated States of Micronesia], and the house and senate is combined in the lateral government. And we fund them for the use of those islands. Speaker 1: So are these like, these islands, Guam, Marshall Islands, or what-- Speaker 2: No, Guam is about a thousand miles from the islands. In fact, when I was going down there, I'd fly from LAX [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California], Los Angeles [California] to San Francisco [California], to Hawaii, to Guam, and then from Guam down to Micronesia. Speaker 1: Okay. So Micronesia are islands that, would we know the name of any of those islands (laughter)? Or-- Speaker 2: Well, yes. The really, I guess, most popular island, it would be, well, Yap, have you heard of Yap? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Any, these islands are remote, but they're strategic. They're not on the tourists' line. And they're very, very important to us if we ever get into a war in that part of the world again. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So Yap is the biggest island or the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --biggest developed island? Speaker 2: It's developed somewhat. But they're the most traditional island. Kosrae is the most known. And it's very interesting, because you can see the Western world in these islands, and the primitive world. And the reason why I mentioned Yap is because they all dress in their historic outfits, that is the grass skirt and bare on the top. And we had one young lady who came over here to the United States on scholarship, and they told her she could dress on a particular day in her traditional outfit, traditional dress. And so she came traditionally and she said, everyone was looking at her, where they bare the top, they have a grass skirt and they wear beads out of shells and all. And she didn't realize that you, in the United States you cannot go around with a bare breast. And so it's a, but that's a very special island, because the old traditions are still practiced today, blended in with Western traditions. Speaker 1: Okay. So do the people there, are they related, I guess, physiologically and culturally, to say the Samoans or the people in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Guam or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They, well, you need to know if you can visualize the map, geography, you can see the tip of Africa and you can go right across the waters and you can get into South Africa. Then you can go from there into the Federated States of Micronesia across the Pacific Ocean. And so they're Chamorros. And Chamorros are mixtures of Spanish and then English and African. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because, you know, we used to have the shipping and the silk trail and so on, going way over to the Far West or the East, now the Middle East. And so many Africans would sail the waters prior to Leif Erikson, prior to Christopher Columbus in North America. So you have to know this is way out in the Pacific. In fact, Micronesia is an hour away from Guam going south [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So well, could you just talk about some of your duties there as ambassador-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and what it was like? Speaker 2: Yes. I was appointed by Bill Clinton and-- Speaker 1: This is in 1999, I think, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. And when I went over I took fourteen people with me. Took my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson], my sister [Patricia Watson Bradfield], some cousins, my mother's cousins-- Story_ID: 360673 Speaker 1: All right. Well, you were describing who you took with you. Speaker 2: Yeah. I took quite a few relatives and friends to open up their view of the world. And there were fourteen of us, and I had them all staying in my home. And they will go over prior to the new ambassador, I'm talking about the state department [U.S. Department of State]. And they find the residence, they decorate it for you, and you walk into a brand, almost a brand new facility. These houses might be decades old. And I had space for everyone that I took to stay in my residence. When they left, I was left alone. I don't have a husband or children. And then, of course, we have the housekeepers and so on. They wanted me to have a cook but I said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no cook." "You must have a cook." And I said, "No, I don't want a cook. I don't wanna be obligated to eating three prepared meals per day," because I'm away during the day usually and I don't want that food stacked up or wasted. Plus they only paid the cook two dollars and fifteen cents an hour. And as a really labor minded person, I would not accept that. And I figured that, you know, let them work somewhere else where they can make more money, and I really didn't need to have someone cook for me. And so my staff finally said, "Well, we want you to have a cook, because we don't wanna have to come over and cook when you have people over." I said, "Don't worry about it unless I ask you." So (laughter) anyway it was interesting. Most ambassadors have a full service team in their homes, and I did not. I didn't think that the government needed to go along with the low wages, and I didn't need to have someone preparing food that I was not going to eat. So it was very interesting working that through. These islands [in the Federated States of Micronesia] are such interesting places because they still retain their older customs. And right behind the island I was on, you go across a, it's not even a river, it's just part of the ocean that flows in there, and you go to one of the islands and you can look down and see a whole village underwater. So, you know, hundreds of thousands of years ago, there were people on this globe doing things. And it was so interesting, because I could look out my front door and see a mountain that was cut so straight and evenly, and the same type of rocks were over kind of like in a temple, behind the island where I was on, and same rocks. And so I said, "Well, if they cut them off that mountain, how did they get over there?" And they said, "Through the air." I said, through the air? And there were rocks as large as half of this room that made up this temple and were under the water by maybe twenty to forty feet down. You could, water so clear, you could see down. And I heard a scientist say that, you know, the Chinese started the kites and they said, "If you get the velocity right, and you get the weight right, and you have strong enough cables, you can raise them and drop them where you want." Now this was beyond my understanding, but I viewed it, and I've been a teacher and all. But they worked out, the Chinese worked out a, as, you know, a formula, and they used them down in the islands, not the Chinese but the Micronesians, to move rocks. It's very similar to the pyramids of Egypt. But it was amazing things that I saw there. Speaker 1: Now, what island was this edifice on? I mean, and, well, I guess, back to, what island was the embassy on? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was on the island of--not Palau, but let me give you the name in just a minute. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there were four main islands in that chain. And they were Kosrae, Yap, and Palau is a little ways up, and then the island that I was on. And it was just so fascinating to see them retaining their ancient culture in a modern society. And they did quite well. So, and I'll give you the exact name-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of the island. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I just wondered what-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 360674 Speaker 1: Does the U.S. have a naval base or a [U.S.] Air Force base close by? Speaker 2: What we have is an Air Force base, and we have a [U.S.] Coast Guard. And we, the United States, trains the people in the other islands [of the Federated States of Micronesia] to provide Coast Guard services. If there's a ship somewhere around that goes down, then the Coast Guard goes into action. So we had Coast Guard and a small Air Force base on the islands. And this is where we are, in case, as I said, a war would break out, then we could then get and muster our service people and go into action without having to send people from continental United States or Hawaii, which is one of the fifty states. We're so far down that, so far down south, that we needed to have a Coast Guard station. Not large, an Air Force station, not large. And I would say there might have been a hundred military people on the island. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any, I guess, I need to ask like, were there any specific issues that came up when you were there that you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The major issue, well let me tell you something about the training. I had to be trained twice because when my name was presented there was a great amount of acrimony in [U.S.] Congress against Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. And so I went through, and Congress would not confirm any of his appointees, so we had to do another round. And we had to go in to an area in Virginia on a helicopter, we were blindfolded, there were eight of us, and they had wives and children, but only the ambassador and nominees could go on the training mission. And they blindfolded us, and when we landed, it was like the surface of the moon. And we saw a structure over there, and we walked over and went up some steps, and we looked over, and it was like prison cells. And they had people in them, and on some signal they came in, in three minutes, they had broken in and gotten the people out, and so on. And as we were walking, we walked passed a river bed. And when the signal went out (laughter) all of these targets came to life as real people, and they broke in and got the people out of the prison, that was part of our training. Then we went into a building that looked like Galactica [Battlestar Galactica] 3000. And-- Speaker 1: The movie (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, with marines guarding it, walls like this, all concrete, you see people walking through just like you'd see in the movies, with lights coming up from the floor and briefcases and all. And they took us in a room that had an iron door. And no one said anything, you sat down by the name of your country, your post. And there was a general standing over in the corner. And there was a red notebook in front of the sign for your post. He said, "I want you to read it, I want you to close it, I want you to give it to me." And we did that, one by one, and he burned them. In there was whatever was going on in your post, secretly, undercover and all, it was described in that. And so when the wives would ask, "What happened?" They said, "We can tell you but we'd have to kill you," that phrase. But anyway the biggest problem in Micronesia were the mainland Chinese coming over on boats and then taking small boats that would hold one or two people, and paddling into the mangrove, we had mangrove, these are plants that grow out of the water rather than sand, and they would hide in the mangroves, and leave their boats there, then they would get out, and walk through the town, and come to the embassy for visas into the U.S. And that was our biggest issue, is to be able to spot them. And I had staff that had been there for years, and the councilors were able to spot and stop them from getting into the mangroves. Very little crime on the island. You know, you could sleep with your doors open. Where are they going to go? It's not like stealing a car and driving it, you know, on the freeway. No, there's nowhere to go. So very, very little crime. And the only thing that we had to watch out was for people who were trying to get into the United States and get a visa from us. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting, yeah. Story_ID: 360675 Speaker 1: Any particular thing that--of interest before we get you to [U.S.] Congress (laughter)? Speaker 2: Oh. Well, on the island, I thought it would be interesting to organize a parade down the main street and of the ancients--and by the way, there was an island called Kudaka-Jima [Japan]. And this was, let me go back to when I was in Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan]. There was an island called Kudaka-Jima, and they had one temple on the island, and they had one watering hole. They drank the water that came out from between the rocks, pure. And they used to tattoo the women's faces, so if there was an invading tribe, they wouldn't take the women away, 'cause they had their faces tattooed. Well, when we got in on the island we saw two women, squatting, guarding the temple with their faces tattooed. So the point I'm making is, in that area of the ocean, people live for a hundred and something years. And over in Micronesia, I saw things that, and, you know, they don't record births, they probably do now, but they didn't at that time. And I know that there were Micronesians over a hundred years old, 150 and so on. It's the water they drink that's natural, and they eat what is in the sea, and the sea is clear blue when you get over as far away as we were. And it takes about thirty-nine hours, you know, to get there. And they eat what runs on the ground and what grows from the ground. So there's something to that in eating, you know, natural foods and drinking pure water-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --that bubbles up. Story_ID: 360676 Speaker 1: Their longevity, is that something that, I mean, you said it's not, it really can't be confirmed by anybody because of the lack of records or-- Speaker 2: You know, National Geographic did a review of the white Caucasus Mountains in Russia. And I remember reading it, I used to, there was a husband and wife that would babysit my sister [Barbara Coleman Watson] and I when we were four, five years old. And they traveled with some great hunters into Africa. So they had all these National Geographics, and I remember reading one, and this is a couple of decades ago, about the young women working in the fields in Russia, in the Caucasus Mountains and they would be 125 years old and they looked like sixteen. And they too would eat only what grew out of the ground at five thousand feet up. And there was a plant that would give off an oil, and they ate that plant. And they could confirm that they were in their hundreds, and they looked like maidens. And you can look it up in, with the National Geographic and white Caucasus Mountains. But, you know, we don't really know how long many people live. We try to study, because they don't record, at that time they wouldn't record births. But when they talked about the great flood or the storm or the snow fall at a certain time, different geographical events that happened, natural events and they said, "Well that was back in eighteen [1800s], 1700s or whatever." So that's the way they determined. And there are a lot of things that happen on this globe that are inexplicable to us. And one thing is the pyramids. And we have studied the pyramids, but if you've ever gone to Egypt to see them, you will know that it took a master race of masterminds to do that. And when I went over early on in the '60s [1960s], we had a man there, very old, ancient, who took us through the Valley of the Kings [Luxor, Egypt]. And he showed us along the Nile [Nile River], these stones, and what they would do, they would make perforations about, I would say, two inches wide all along in a square and then they would put cedar wood down in them. And when the river, the Nile River, would rise and cover this area, the water would soak into the cedar and start cracking along those perforations. And then they would have a raft there with maybe a hundred thousand men, and they would take that as it cracked and slide it on to the raft and take it to the Gaza Strip. And that's how they built the base of the pyramids. No glue, no nails, no brackets. And even, you know, corners and even angles, going up this way. And, you know, the pyramids were built for the pharaohs. And they would start building them when a pharaoh was in office, and that's where they would bury them. But we still have not been able to break the code of how, and just as smooth along the edges. So it's just fascinating. And when you go into areas of the globe that are not tourist spots and you see these things, they are remarkable, they're fantastic. And this was done, you know, B.C. Story_ID: 360677 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about, now, Julian Dixon [Julian C. Dixon]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --passed away, I guess, in 2001 [sic. 2000]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was it? Speaker 2: And I got the call, it was 4:38 a.m. when my phone rung, and I looked around, that's how I could tell the time. And one of my former staff persons said that Julian Dixon died. Well, it was December 9th, and I was coming home anyway. Well I went down to Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] to visit Fern Cunningham, who was teaching down there, and then to go on to San Francisco [California] and come on home for Christmas. (Laughter) And so when I got home they said, Julian Dixon has passed, we have an office, we want you to run for his seat. They had an office, they had staff, they had placards. There was no way I could say no. And I was, you know, pulled into it. And I won that race, there were nine of us running. And I took Julian Dixon's unexpired term and then had to turn around and run for it for the full time. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And that was before term limits. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had to be elected to the unexpired term first? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then, and that was for-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what, about a-- Speaker 2: For-- Speaker 1: --a year? Speaker 2: And it was the 26th district [sic. California's 32nd congressional district] at that time. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And-- Speaker 1: It's the 33rd [California's 33rd congressional district] today, right? Speaker 2: It's the 33rd. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Karen Bass is in my former seat. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And yeah, we'll talk about that, I guess, in a minute. But, so was it pretty much an easy election? Speaker 2: For me it was easy, because of the fact that in the early '70s [1970s] I ran for the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education]. And I was directing a project for, at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] called the Allied Health Professions Project. And I was happy in doing that. And David Cunningham [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.], who was councilman at the time, Portia Craig [E. Portia Craig], who was a community activist, came to my office and they said, "We want you to run for the board." Well, I, kicking and screaming, I said, I don't want, I do not want to be a politician. I don't wanna do that, 'cause we had just gotten [HistoryMaker] Yvonne Brathwaite Burke elected in 1967 to the assembly [California State Assembly]. Speaker 1: Now, we covered this in the last two interviews. Speaker 2: Yeah, we covered this, uh-huh. Speaker 1: But I just wanted to find out if it was easy to be elected to-- Speaker 2: Well, because I ran for the board and lost the first time and kept running for two years, my name was known. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at that time you ran at-large rather than in a particular district. So because my name had been out there since the early '70s [1970s], it was easy to win. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I would get something like over 80 percent of the vote. Story_ID: 360678 Speaker 1: Julian [Julian C. Dixon] and I went to high school together, Dorsey High [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California]. And we were always very supportive. And so I ran for his seat upon his death. And by the way, [HistoryMaker] Yvonne Brathwaite Burke was in high school, when I was in junior high, and our last names were the same. So she was Yvonne Watson Brathwaite Burke. And when she started to win the oratorical contests and the debates and all, I would get the congratulations. My sister was Barbara Watson [Barbara Watson Coleman], and they were probably in the same age group. And so I'd get all the congratulations at junior high school which was Foshay [James A. Foshay Junior High School; James A. Foshay Learning Center, Los Angeles, California]. And I'd say, "But that is not my sister, and she's a friend but not my sister." And then after a while I'd say thank you (laughter). It happened so often. But anyway, Julian was a year behind me graduating from Dorsey in the '50s [1950s]. And as, you know, he went into the Assembly [California State Assembly], and then from there into [U.S.] Congress. And so I kind of followed him and the people who ran. And as one of the members, early members of the New Frontier Democratic Club, there were other members there who ran too, but they were not people who got a lot of attention, they were just good Democrats. So I did not have a difficult time at all winning the seat in Congress. Speaker 2: Now, we probably talked about this before, but just to make sure, can you tell us, like who were the, I guess, the leaders in the New Frontier Democratic Club during the time that you went to the state house [California State Senate] and then, you know, up to the-- Speaker 1: Well, it was certainly Julian and you had Nate Holden [Nathaniel N. Holden], you had David Cunningham [HistoryMaker David S. Cunningham, Jr.], these are people who went on to city offices. And I think you know that I took the seat that Bill Greene, well, no, I took the seat, I was the third one to take the seat that Merv Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] had. He was the first African American in the California State Senate. And then Nate Holden and then myself. So they were all active members of New Frontier in our community here. And they were standout members that went into public office. Speaker 2: Okay. Now did New Frontier include, now I'm from the Midwest so I'm-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --I'm asking an uninformed question. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But did Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] and Tom Bradley and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) they didn't necessarily-- Speaker 2: I guess, [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters-- Speaker 1: --come out of those groups because as you know, Tom Bradley was a police officer, and then he was mayor. And so he had a constituency in community service. Gus Hawkins already had a constituency, and he formed a group. But New Frontier was a different age level of people who considered themselves democratic activists here in the City of Los Angeles [California]. And so they were a little younger, a few decades younger, and they started up, and it was a very effective and in some ways powerful group. When you said New Frontier Democratic Club, it meant something and it still does. Speaker 2: Now, New Frontier, I would just have to guess, having grown up during the '60s [1960s], refers to the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: --I guess, on some level, the New Frontier. Speaker 1: Well, you know, California being the last frontier. And we are what you call a blue state, and so the, I would say we were high school, and then we were coming into community colleges and then into universities, and New Frontier grew out of the need to organize parties and party support structures. And certainly New Frontier, and there are a lot of other people who were instrumental, and, in forming the New Frontier club and raising money and building up quite a name for itself throughout the State of California, and it was from this group that many of the elected officials were spawned. Story_ID: 360679 Speaker 1: Two thousand and one [2001] was the election, and you said you were elected. Was the Democratic primary the toughest part of the race? Speaker 2: Yes. The general was never tough for me because there weren't that many hardcore Republicans in my district. And when I ran at large for the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], it was tough, real tough because the school district at that time was 710 square miles, going to the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California], going down to San Pedro [Los Angeles, California], and going almost over to the line of Pasadena [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so they warned me not to go into the Valley, San Fernando Valley, well, I went anyway. And if there were two people in the room, I was the second. And I remember one time we went to a high school auditorium that sat up on a hill. And I had a driver who was a former football player, and four men tried to come with KKK [Ku Klux Klan] written across their T-shirts, and turn my car over, they got to rocking it. Well, he got in the car, I got in the car and we zoomed away and went down the hill. And I had so many death threats, my secretary at the board would not even let me know about them. And not only were there verbal threats but there were written threats as well. We got over 125. That was tough. Speaker 1: This is back in '75 [1975] when you ran for the school board? Speaker 2: Back in '72 [1972] really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-two [1972], okay. Speaker 2: --when I got started. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And I didn't win the first time, it was the second time. And I just kept going for two years. But the first time, two weeks before the election that's when my quasi campaign leader was murdered. I think I told you about that, Tom Stewart. Speaker 1: Um-hm, right, right, right. Speaker 2: And that was something that really stopped me, and I said, "I don't wanna be part of this, I'm not going to run." And I'll never forget, Chappie Chappelle [ph.], who was very active in the New Frontiers [New Frontier Democratic Club] by the way, pulled me up by the collar and he said, "Let me tell you something, Tom Stewart was acting in your behalf, don't let him down, you go ahead and win this." Well because we ran at-large, I did not win, but I kept going. And I did win 'cause, you know, you'll get, oh, twenty-one names, vote for seven, and, you know, most people don't follow these campaigns, particularly for the school board. And so they would go down the list, and oh, that name I heard. So that's how I won the second time. And then we went from at-large elections to particular district elections. Speaker 1: So the election that you won was in '75 [1975]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, that I remember that story-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --of Tom Stewart, that's a-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: His father was the state chair of the Church of God In Christ and he lived over in Berkeley Square [Los Angeles, California]. Do you know that area? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Berkeley Square, like West Adams [Los Angeles, California], they were very elite areas, right in the core of the community, and they had big huge homes over there where the freeway is. And they had to tear those homes down to build the 101 Freeway [U.S. Route 101]. And because his father's position and his mother, they had a huge, huge home there, and we used to go and study when we were out at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], in the hallway, the entry hall of his home. You know, he was a dear, dear, dear friend. They never solved that murder. He was shot three times coming from my event. Speaker 1: Yeah. So they tore their family home down to build the 101? Speaker 2: Yeah, they tore all those homes within Berkeley Square. The only thing that is left, if you've ever been at the corner of Western [Avenue] and Adams [Boulevard], there are brick walls, there's a brick wall, and it's a Catholic house in there, I won't say a convent, but it's a Catholic house in there. That was one of the remaining homes from Berkeley Square. And the West Adams District was very elite. And then the freeway came through. Story_ID: 360680 Speaker 1: Okay, so you're elected to [U.S.] Congress in 2001. And you're representing then the 26th district [sic.], they called it then? Speaker 2: No, I represented the 26th district in the Senate. Speaker 1: Oh, in the Senate. Speaker 2: I was in the California State Senate-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for twenty years. Speaker 1: But this is the 33rd district, congressional district that you-- Speaker 2: And then I went overseas-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --as the ambassador [to the Federated States of Micronesia]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: When I came back, I ran for Congress, and it was the, it is the 33rd district now. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right. So-- Speaker 2: And, you know, Karen Bass started in southeast L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and she was able to organize the community. And so when I came home because I got a call on the floor of Congress that my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] had to be moved from one nursing home to another, and I said, "All right," and I sent my cousins over to look at this place in Pasadena [California], and they did, and they moved my mother there. And my mother lived right on that side of the house, and I had caregivers. But anyway I got a call, about 1:30 in the morning, that my mother was brought over to this new facility, and I said, "How is she doing?" And they're saying her breathing is labored. And so the person who called me said, "Let me go in and take a look." And so he went in and, and came back and said, "She's gone." I said, "Did they leave?" He said, "No, she's gone." I said, "What do you mean?" She died. And I was shocked. So I was, before I could get on the plane, the next day, she was gone. Well, I came on home, and I had to take care of everything. And my mother had money, but all the money was gone and (laughter) anyhow, I came home, and I took care of everything, and I decided that I would stay home, and I would have this knee taken care of. I had, I was bone on bone, it was very, very painful and on and off every five days, forty-eight hours in the district, back on the plane going back to Washington [D.C.]. It was quite a hassle. Speaker 1: So when did your mother pass, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: She passed last year. Speaker 1: Last year. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I was getting the chronology mixed up here. Speaker 2: Yeah, last year. Speaker 1: But we can, I'm sorry. So that was just before you retired, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. But-- Speaker 2: I decided not to go back. Story_ID: 360681 Speaker 1: When you started in [U.S.] Congress in 2001, George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] was the president-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --right? And I think Congress at that time was controlled by the Democrats [sic.]. Speaker 2: Right. And we lost twenty-six seats in the Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] election-- Speaker 1: Well, I don't wanna skip to that yet. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But when you started-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in 2001-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we had both houses. Speaker 1: --the Democrats had both houses of Congress. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: --the [U.S.] Senate and the Congress [U.S. House of Representatives]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, so what was it like, but, but there was a Republican president, right? Speaker 2: Yes, Bush. Speaker 1: So, yes. And 2001 is the year that the--now you were elected in, was that November of 2001? Speaker 2: November [sic.], um-hm. Speaker 1: So that's right after 9/11 [September 11, 2001]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and all of that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --excitement around that. Speaker 2: No, we were there, I was there during 9/11. We were in the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.], we had an early morning meeting that started around seven. Speaker 1: You were up, I'm sorry, you were already in Congress? Speaker 2: I was already in Congress, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were elected in 2000-- Speaker 2: I'm, I-- Speaker 1: --in 2000 then, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Two thousand [2000] because-- Speaker 1: To the unexpired term-- Speaker 2: --I was already there, to the unexpired term-- Speaker 1: Right, oh, okay. Speaker 2: --of Julian Dixon [Julian C. Dixon]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm just trying to-- Speaker 2: And we can get the dates down, and I've got them in my resume that I gave you, the exact dates. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: I'm coming out of memory and sometimes that's a little faulty. But anyway (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Well, we've got it straight now, so you were elected in 2000 [sic.]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So then in two--so you were there-- Speaker 2: I was there. Speaker 1: --during 9/11. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And now, I don't wanna jump ahead of something else that happened in 2000 but or 2000, I mean the election was in 2000 and that's, okay now this is something that was a, had a lot of impact on the black community, the election-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --of George W. Bush-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the defeat of Al Gore. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It was a contested election. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And many people thought it was not, that Bush wasn't really elected. And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well let me say this. That Florida is the one, and it was the first time the [U.S.] Supreme Court ever stopped the counting of votes. There were a 175,000 uncounted ballots. Within that 175,000 votes was the victory for Gore but when they stopped the count, of course, Bush won and Gore was deprived of his rightful office. So that needs to be looked at very closely because it was the first time in the history of the Supreme Court. Speaker 1: I remember, and I don't have all the details in my mind, but I remember on C-SPAN and on CNN and some of the other stations-- Speaker 2: They called it for him. Speaker 1: --black women-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --from Congress-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --were the ones who did not want to concede the election. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They, there was a meeting of black-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --were you a part, part of that group of black women? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 360682 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us how that that came because it seemed like there were just black women involved in this. So kind of explain what happened (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we took the leadership, you know, as the women's movement way back in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], and we came out of that group. And when I was in the Senate [California State Senate], there were, there was [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters, Gwen Moore and I ran together, Marguerite Archie-Hudson, Yvonne [HistoryMaker Yvonne Brathwaite Burke] had been there but she wasn't there. Speaker 1: Yvonne Brathwaite Burke. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so we, and this is a large country, you know, would join with the women there in the Senate. And the women, Shirley [Shirley Chisholm], well, the women in [U.S.] Congress. Speaker 1: Shirley Chisholm. Speaker 2: Let's see, it was Shirley Chisholm and so on. And we put up a valiant fight. And we said, "There's something wrong with this." And, you know, the [U.S.] Supreme Court was conservative because of the appointments by the preceding presidents, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so we kind of revved up things, and to, we were trying to get those votes counted [in the 2000 presidential election Florida recount]. And so the women really became activists, and tried to get our constituents to write letters, to call their members, and all. But it was the awakening of the women's and women votes, you know, and we outvote men (laughter), in particular in this current election. And 'cause it became all about women, you know, some of the issues, and shall I say contraceptives and that kind of thing. So the women had cause to rise up and say, there's something wrong with this. And I was part of that group. Speaker 1: Was it-- Speaker 2: And it really started over on the Westside. You know, it was the center part of Los Angeles [California], the Westside. And Westside women were prominent and had money and very liberal, that's why we're a blue state. So it's like we took over to try to tell these guys, and mainly white guys, that, you know, you need to allow because down in Florida, at the time, you know, there were a lot of Hispanics that came over from Puerto Rico and some came up from Cuba, and so on. And we understood that if we were ever going to get presidents that recognize the diversity of the U.S., we had to come out swinging. Story_ID: 360683 Speaker 1: That group that I saw in the media seemed to be mostly black women. I don't know who else was in the group, but was there, is there, how, I, so I'm talking about in 2000, right after the election-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that stand they were taking-- Speaker 2: Well, I was giving you background-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --way, way back. Speaker 1: Yeah, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but was that, was that group, I mean, why was it, you know, mainly black women that stood up for Al Gore, when it didn't seem that Al Gore was really as strident about his own election-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --as the women? Speaker 2: --number one, we wanted Al Gore. Number two, Al Gore was from the South. And we wanted, and women were just now being recognized as real players. And we were there, you know. I mean, no one could outplay [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters. And then Shirley Chisholm was the one that really started a women's movement, if you remember. And as she said-- Speaker 1: Yeah, historically-- Speaker 2: Historically. Speaker 1: --but I'm talking about in 2000. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I'm saying. Speaker 1: Was Shirley Chisholm-- Speaker 2: Women, more women were coming in to [U.S.] Congress, and we wanted to keep that flow. You know, we stand on the shoulders of real fighters. And so we had to come together in 2000, 2001, to get the women behind us. And it was black women 'cause we have greater challenges than the others, you know. And so we just bound together and said, "We want Gore rather than Bush [President George Walker Bush]," 'cause Bush wasn't moving in our direction and our interests. So we kind of took over and pushed the guys to really put up a valiant challenge, which the courts took over from there. But it was women looking at how Shirley Chisholm rose and we said, "We're going to get the guys aboard to protest this." But it came from us because we wanted to be sure that more black women, African American women, had a track into Congress. Speaker 1: Okay. And just for clarification, you're talking about the legacy of Shirley Chisholm who was not-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --she was not there in 2000. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, no. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. 'Cause people watching this in the future (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But this was motivating-- Speaker 1: --might be confused. Speaker 2: -- motivating to us. And I know how it was when I went into the Senate [California State Senate], I was the first black woman. Teresa Hughes [Teresa Patterson Hughes] was the second, and she came in in the last few years I was there, term limits had set in. But our motivation was to keep the door open for more African American women to come into Congress. And we did it because we knew that Gore would be the one that would assist in this effort, and certainly not Bush. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered though when I saw that, I just wondered, it seemed as though the women were out front of the-- Speaker 2: Well, that's what I said in the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --tradition of Shirley Chisholm who was the first and a few others, we had to be out there and, you know, calling the guys together. Sometimes you succumb to what's happening. You know, the reality of what's happening. But it was just the opening of the door for women that started out here in the West and a few on the East Coast. And so it was the black women who had pretty much fought those battles and wanted to provide the leadership to the guys that are already sitting in Congress, and those who had passed, and we kind of took over the leadership in that move at that time. Story_ID: 360684 Speaker 1: Now what was the, I guess, the tone in [U.S.] Congress in 2000 when you were elected [sic.]? Was, I mean, in terms of the different, I guess, dichotomies, Republican, Democrat, black and white, women, men, what was the general tone? Speaker 2: It was leading towards a more liberal Congress. And Nancy Pelosi, you know, was elected leader. So we were coming out of a different mode because it had been men, white men, and here we have a woman from San Francisco, California. And we got behind her, and Nancy is an excellent leader and strategist. So things were changing, we could see the change. And that's the reason why we fought so hard for Gore [Al Gore]. We had to do that because sitting at the top, you know, three branches of government, and all the president can do is start a movement, we advise and consent, and then the courts are there to confirm and to back us up. And so women started coming, coming into the forefront. And we elected Nancy, and she's still, just a few days ago, said that she will run and she, to be leader of the Democrats. But our House is full of Republicans. Now, I'm talking about the [U.S.] House of Representatives. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And fewer women over in the [U.S.] Senate but the House of Representatives has quite a few now. I guess the number might be up to about thirty some odd. I haven't kept track with the actual figures. But it was a movement among us, and many of us black because we saw the gains if Gore would come in. We saw the losses if, you know, the Republicans continued to out strategize us and government would continue to be a white men's bastion. And so we as women, and going through that women's liberation and so on, took and controlled to determine our destiny. And so this continues today, and Nancy Pelosi is still in the leadership now. And, you know, we've got the Hou- the Senate, we don't have the House but we have the presidency, the other branch of government. So we have a chance to get some things really done on behalf of all people, all Americans. Speaker 1: Okay. So in 2000 then, how did you, I know the, the Republicans boasted that George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] had appointed more black people to high positions than any other president, and well, what's your, what was your impression then, and I guess, in reflection now, of the George W. Bush administration? Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you this. Around that same time, they took a poll across the country to find the sharpest political minds in the country. Now on a IQ scale, Bush came out ninety, which is what we call educable. Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], and the scale at that time only went to a 190, the IQ scale, but Willie Brown came out with a 175 IQ. Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] came out with 212, unheard of. Story_ID: 360685 Speaker 1: We were discussing the political IQ of certain major politicians in those days and you were telling us that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] had a political IQ, I guess, according to what might be a Pew Research [Pew Research Center, Washington, D.C.] poll or something of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a national research poll, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Independent, nonpartisan type? Speaker 2: --and to find the most, shall I say acutely political minds, and they used the IQ scale. Speaker 1: Was there a university involved in this or-- Speaker 2: I don't know, I'll have to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --look it up. It was some time ago. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: But it was 90 IQ for the president-- Speaker 1: Which was George-- Speaker 2: --George W. Bush. And 175 for Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], the former speaker [speaker of the California State Assembly] who was the longest serving speaker, fourteen years. And then to get him out, term limits came in here in California. And then Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president at the time, and he was 212, unheard of intelligence. And he's known for that. Speaker 1: Okay. So I was asking you about your impression of the Bush administration in terms of, and their, I guess, their-- Speaker 2: They, the Bush-- Speaker 1: --activities in terms of black people. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did they, were they, do you see, I mean they, as I said they bragged that they had, they appointed more black folks to positions than anybody else. But how do you see the Bush administration? Speaker 2: I see it very poorly. And I see it not really pushing our issue and our causes. And, for full integration, and I mean at every level. And I didn't feel--he took us into a war that was very costly. And if you remember, they were looking for weapons of mass destruction. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in Iraq. Speaker 2: --Condoleezza Rice was appointed. And, you know, she's from California, from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. But Condoleezza Rice bought into that philosophy. And I had gone to the Middle East, and I came back and told her in the White House [Washington, D.C.], I said "You need to get over there," and Somalia was exploding. And they had people who were brilliant, but people who did not try to elevate all Americans. And I don't think there was any real racism, but I didn't feel that George W. Bush was competent enough to understand that there were still underclasses here in America. And I do know that Bill Clinton, when I would go to the White House, and he would bring at least thirty or forty others who either headed health and human services committees or sat on them. And he would say, "I wanna know how I can help the underclasses in your state." And he told me in 1996, this is Clinton, he said, "I'm going to sign the welfare reform bill [Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996] and you're gonna tell me how to fix it." So I went and wrote it up and gave it to my staff, and a lot of what I wrote because of California being the largest state, got into that. Well, I didn't feel that Bush was inclusive enough. I didn't feel that he really understood how disparate benefits were. And he wasn't the worst, but he wasn't the best either in understanding the plight of minorities and women. Speaker 1: Who is the worst that you saw in terms-- Speaker 2: Oh (laughter). Speaker 1: --of that? Speaker 2: There were so many. In terms of members or in terms of presidents? Speaker 1: Well, in terms of presidents, I guess. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I think you were talking about presidents but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. Yeah. Well, I don't think that Bush did enough. I don't care about the appointments because he chose people that carried their same philosophy. Condoleezza Rice could have done a lot more for minorities in this country, but, you know, she was fashioned and educated and brilliant. And I thought that she should have done more. And I would go to the White House when I got a chance to, and tell her, you need to go over and see what's happening here, what's happening there. I didn't feel that under the Bush administration, his moves and his influence was broad enough to cover the problems we were having right here. Story_ID: 360686 Speaker 1: And, you know, we found that there was a period when we appeared to be isolated from the rest of the world, and we knew we had to get involved in foreign policy. So I was on the Foreign Affairs Committee [House Foreign Affairs Committee], and we traveled all of the time on CODELs, congressional delegations. And we would go into the trouble spots, and I'd come back and tell Condoleezza Rice, who was the secretary of state at the time. She tried, but it didn't have the force behind her because I really felt that Bush [President George Walker Bush] too didn't really understand the magnitude of trying to bring benefits and services to the underclasses. And, you know, they now are accusing today's president, Barack Hussein Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], as growing government, and increasing the deficit. Well, we spent money under Bush on a war that we did not have to fight. It was the first time in the history of the United States that we went to war against Iraq unprovoked. And that war, and it's now costing us $2 billion a week to maintain the activities in Pakistan and Afghanistan and the threats of Iran. We pretty much finished up with Iraq, but that was because of Bush determining we need to go to war in Iraq, and it was very costly in terms of human capital and in terms of capital. Speaker 2: Let's go back a little bit now. In 2001, September the 11th, the twin towers, World Trade towers [World Trade Center] were blown up in New York City [New York, New York]. Then George W. Bush declares a war on terrorism, which he declared to be over I think about a year later except, well it wasn't a year later, it was in 2003-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --he declared the war on Iraq to be over. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, the war in Iraq started in 2003-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I think it was, right. Speaker 1: And you see, and now we're in two wars. And I was told by the president of Egypt, he said, "If you go into Iraq," and he did his finger just like this, pointed it towards me, Mubarak [Hosni Mubarak], he said, "If you go into Iraq, you'll never come out of the area." And he was so right because, you know, ten years, and we were able to deal with Iraq, but we have the great threat coming from Iran, and they do have nuclear power. So I felt going back to the Bush administration that we didn't feel enough comprehension of what threats we were under. And then for him to go into Iraq was very costly. Where do you think the deficit came from? And it cost to send troops overseas, maintain their families here at home, and continue to afford all the equipment, you know, everything that's needed to fight a war. And so I felt that the president at that time was misguided. And I found that we gave him a resolution, and it said whatever means you need to, well that wasn't, only [U.S.] Congress can declare war. We went to a war against Iraq without a declaration from Congress. Speaker 2: Now, was there any kind of a vote in Congress in support of the war? Speaker 1: We voted a resolution [Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002]. Speaker 2: Resolution, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And but that was not a vote for a war. It went into a war and now we're in two other places. And there's a possibility of a fourth, which is Iran. Speaker 2: Yeah. So did, did you vote in favor of the resolution during that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I voted in favor of the resolution, we all did [sic.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And to give the powers to the president, but it was not a war and you have to make that distinction. The [U.S.] Constitution says, only Congress can declare war. We went in looking for WMD [weapons of mass destruction] and, you know. And state department [U.S. Department of State], Condoleezza Rice, says there's methods of mass destruction, and we went in, WMD, looking and ended up really getting into a shooting war in Iraq that was never declared by Congress, that's the difference. Speaker 2: Okay. So in retrospect when you look back at it, do you think that you did the right thing in 2003? I mean-- Speaker 1: We did the right thing, but we did not follow the Constitution requirement. We went in there and struck before we were provoked. Story_ID: 360687 Speaker 1: Now you served on-- Speaker 2: Foreign affairs [House Foreign Affairs Committee]. Speaker 1: --as you said the Foreign Affairs-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the House [U.S. House of Representatives] foreign relations committee, and you were on the African, global health-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --committees? Speaker 2: I had a subcommittee. Speaker 1: But you were on the African committee, I guess, the global health committee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --the Asia committee, the Pacific committee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and the Global Environment]-- Speaker 2: Well, those are all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --subcommittees-- Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, sub-- Speaker 2: --of foreign affairs. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And I sat on them. Speaker 1: Global environment-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --subcommittee on terrorism [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade]. Speaker 2: Yeah, now these are, be sure-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you say subcommittees. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Because you had one committee and that was foreign affairs. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then you had all these subgroups-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --underneath it. Speaker 1: So the subcommittees are Africa, right? Global health, Asia and the Pacific, global environment, terrorism, nonproliferation and trade, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And those are all subcommittees of the House-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: --foreign relations committee. And-- Speaker 2: And there might have been four to six of us on those committees. Speaker 1: Okay. So what were the, some of the priorities on these committees in those days that you remember that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they ranged in different areas. We wanted to continue and broaden two-way trade. We wanted to curb the instigation of wars on that subcommittee. We wanted to really delve into the problems which we had to confront, say in Europe, in Africa, and in Asia and other places around the globe. We wanted to strengthen our relationships with these countries. We also wanted to increase trade, two-way trade. And so we wanted to maintain America's openness. We wanted to show that we had interest and that we would support like Israel, if Israel has to go to war, and it looks like they're that close. And so each one of these subcommittees had a major goal, and that was to improve relationships with the various subject matter and the various countries where these were major issues. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And bring the American way. Story_ID: 360688 Speaker 1: Just expand a little bit on the Africa subcommittee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations]. Speaker 2: You know, it's really a vibrant and interesting committee because the continent of Africa has fifty-four nations, 22,000 tribes, speaking 16,000 languages. It's our next frontier because on that continent they have all the natural resources the world needs for the next hundreds of years. And so it's becoming more and more in focus, if you notice. And South Africa is just like New York [New York], Chicago [Illinois], San Diego [California], and so on. And as, you know, when Mandela [Nelson Mandela] became president, it really opened the doors. And we go over every year to South Africa. I absolutely love it, it's like being in the states. However, you know, the Sahara Desert, sub-Sahara is more developed than northern Sahara. But the elements that we need, worldwide, are located on that continent. And there're more and more, shall I say, elections that are bringing good people. Let me give you an example. Nigeria elected Goodluck Jonathan. Now his wife [Patience Jonathan] is becoming a major figure. A friend of mine who had a business here, that I introduced to President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], Aniva Aniva [ph.], has gone over there and she assists the first lady in Nigeria to, she has like TGIF parties, receptions and so on, Aniva directs those. Going a little bit back, after Karen [Karen Bass] was elected or became a candidate for my district [California's 33rd congressional district]-- Speaker 1: That's Karen Bass, right? Speaker 2: Karen Bass, the current congresswoman. The president's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] office offered me two ambassadorships, one to Jamaica and one to, was it Liberia, but anyway I said, "I won't take Jamaica, it's too corrupt and it's gonna take years to bring it back into focus. But I would consider the other one." Well, the president had to pull back because he was being accused of growing government. So they had a policy that elevations would be within the state department [U.S. Department of State] rather than new hires from outside, and I no longer was in [U.S.] Congress. So they had to take their offers back because they said, we're going to have to move within the state department. They tried to curb the president's powers. And as you know, in this last election that he won, thank God, he was accused of growing government too large and increasing the deficit. Well, this president was doing more, as you notice he just went to Cambodia, he was doing more to enhance our foreign influence and bring the country of the U.S. back up to its status in the past. And so with the election just a few Tuesdays ago, and President Barack Obama, there is a different view of America than it was a few weeks before then. America has always been viewed and envied as the most progressive country on the globe. Now we were losing a little bit of that under Bush [President George Walker Bush]; we gained more under Clinton, and we're back. And it's a decline because we could not generate the monies to fill the deficit, and we were fighting against powers that were far to the right, and this is a country that goes middle and moves to the left, that's what this election showed. Story_ID: 360689 Speaker 1: From 9/11 [September 11, 2001], and getting back to that, and you need to stop me when I stray because I am trying to give you the background of what it was like. We were in a meeting in the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] and we heard a lot of noise outside of our meeting. And I said, gee, we have students coming every day to sit in and watch what happens in [U.S.] Congress. And I thought this was exceptionally loud. Well, the meeting broke up, we went out in the hall, and there were Capitol officers saying, "Get out of here, get out of here, get out of here. There's a plane headed this way." Well, we didn't even know what he was talking about. So they said, "Run across the lawn," and that's when they hadn't built all the way out. And they said, "Get behind those cars, no, get behind that wall." And as we were running, I was running backwards because they had evacuated all of our buildings. And, you know, this is early in the morning, I said, "What's the staff doing? Where are they going? Can they get away quick enough?" So I was running to see if any of my staff was on the streets, you know. And so I saw a cam and I looked in there, and I saw a plane hitting a building [of the World Trade Center] in New York [New York]. And then as we ran, there was another plane. So there was a hotel a block away from the Capitol, I said, "Let's go in and set it up as a headquarters." So my chief of staff, who was with me, said, "I'll go down to the Democratic headquarters and we can go there." And when he got down there, he was a tall fellow and ran real fast, it was locked and sealed up. As he was coming back, I saw Reverend Shelton [ph.], who was from California, very conservative minister, and he was standing there with his arms out and says, "Daughter, come, come here." So we went into the row house where he was. And that's the first time I really saw the planes hit the building. So I called to my office out here, which was right at the corner of Crenshaw [Boulevard] and Vernon [Avenue], and I said, "We're okay, but I don't know about staff." And they said, "Oh, staff is over in this person's apartment." And I said, "You call them and you tell them to stay put. Do not come to the outside because we don't know if this is over or not." And so I went back and we watched what was going on and, you know, everyone was just overcome with awe, and how could this happen to us in the United States? We had never been attacked like this, even during the Second World War [World War II, WWII], it might have been some offshore with some ships coming in, but not a direct attack by plane. So we stayed there, and I said, "What should we do?" I'm asking my staff here because there was no connections anywhere. And she said, "Call the [U.S.] Capitol Police," my field deputy. So we called the Capitol, they said, "Where are you, we've been looking for you." And it was on a Tuesday when everyone comes in. And, you know, we're all over the place, all over the United States coming in for session. And so I told him where I was, and a Capitol Police officer came with a dog in the back. And I told my chief, I said, "Walk over to the Capitol Police headquarters," and when I got in there a lot of members were in there. And Dana Rohrabacher from Orange County [California] came in, and he was standing up on a chair and he said, oh, (unclear), so on and so forth. And I said, "Dana, sit down." He said, "Okay," (laughter). But they were hysterical, you know, no one knew what to do. So finally Steny Hoyer came in. He said that apparently the plane [United Airlines Flight 93], one of the planes was taken down in the fields, in a field in Pennsylvania; that was the one that was headed towards us. But for all we knew at the time, that plane was still on its way. But we sat there and we watched for them. And then I told my chief of staff, I said, "You go back and you find our people and see that they all, tell 'em not to come back, if they can, to go to their respective homes, but don't come back here to the Capitol." So that's what was happening on 9/11. And it was the first time, and you really didn't know what to do. So Steny Hoyer, who is the floor leader, said, "By tomorrow morning, we will have a directory of where you can go if something happens like this again." The evacuation process and how it will proceed and all of that was laid out in twenty-four hours. Story_ID: 360690 Speaker 1: When you look back on it, you think that, 9/11 [September 11, 2001], how do you think it influenced, you know, policy here in the United States? Speaker 2: It changed our way of thinking about America and how vulnerable we are to outside forces. So I mean, every level. You know, the perpetrators had been in this country for ten years. Some of 'em had come through the northern, west, northwest part, you know, through Canada and down. And we had one young man in San Diego [California], and then I think the others were in Florida. But they went in and they said, and laid out ten thousand dollars to be taught how to take off, how to fly a plane, how to take off, we don't need to know how to land. And that should have sparked something in, with the owners of the flight school, there's something strange about this. They don't wanna learn--landing is the most critical part of a flight. And they just wanted to know how to take off and fly the plane, but they gave 'em ten thousand dollars. So what, any bank in this country, when there are ten thousand dollar withdrawals or ten thousand dollars coming in, in one lump sum, you have to notify the feds. It also strengthened our [U.S.] Coast Guard, strengthened the protections on the borders of this country. You know, this is all North America. And so we have not completed a secured border in the South, and you hear the complaints about that all the time. And people can come in to the United States from Canada, they have what we call an open border. But it tightened up a lot of that security. Border security is a result of 9/11, heightened border security. But for us to secure the whole border between America, and middle America, and South America, would cost millions of dollars, you have to be able to raise revenues to continue to pay that kind, you know, for every mile, it's several million dollars. So we can't have it both ways. So the [U.S.] Congress as composed today is going to have to deal with, how do we get the revenues to secure our border? And, you know, the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is proposing that people making over $250,000 should pay their fair share. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If you want to protect the United States, it will cost you. Israel has the iron dome, okay. So, and we're their allies, so it's gonna cost us to have that kind of security. Story_ID: 360691 Speaker 1: We talked about the Africa Committee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations], the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, Africa is now a continent where there's tremendous interest. You know, you have your zinc. You have your gold deposits. You have, you know, your other metals and so on. And we're recognizing now, within the next ten years, you just watch, Africa will be one of the most important continents on the globe, if it's not already becoming important. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you mentioned Goodluck Jonathan in Nigeria. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. He's the new president of Nigeria. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. And you, you were saying his wife [Patience Jonathan] is becoming more influential. Speaker 2: Yes. And I have a good friend that's over, in fact, we're going to meet at the inauguration, Aniva Aniva [ph.], and I told her I would go back with her and stay a little while in Nigeria. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about the Asia and Pacific Island Committee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and the Global Environment]? Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: Subcommittee rather. Speaker 2: Yeah. I am not doing much in terms of the committee's content. But we were trying to shed light on what we needed to do in developing in that area. And, you know, Hawaii is our main country (laughter) outside the continental United States. And so we wanted to be sure that the educational programs, you know, stayed strong, University of Hawaii. And that we had the kind of protection in that area. So we dealt with those things and exchanges, and having students come from the South Pacific into the United States to pick up the skills to go back and further develop their island nations. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were also on the subcommittee on global health? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What were some of the activities on that committee? Speaker 2: Okay. As you know, we just succeeded in getting our health access program. And they fought [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama over it, as you know. Story_ID: 360692 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking you about the global health committee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations] of the, subcommittee, of the House Foreign Relations Committee [sic. House Foreign Affairs Committee]. Speaker 2: Yeah. As you know, nations such as Canada has developed a health program where everyone is eligible and you have to have health insurance. Europe doing the same, even Australia, and we were the only first world nation without a health insurance protection for its citizens. And as the public knows, it was a great fight, but we won that battle because we realize we can't be the most powerful nation on the globe if we can't control illness and disease and train people for the future. And you know we're an IT [information technology] society and we have to be sure that the new techniques, you know, you can sit at a computer, and you can find out about a particular patient, and you can consult with the doctors in other hospitals and so on at the click of a key. And so we, being a nation of over 300 million people, three hundred thousand million people [sic.], we have to insure the health of our masses. And we finally are on our way, we're beginning the process now of guaranteeing people can get health insurance. And, you know, it would be the first time that preexisting conditions can be covered, and that your children can stay on the parents policies until age twenty-six, and that the benefits will not be taken away from you as you age. And so we feel that this is essential, it's essential to keep the United States rising. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now does, did this committee have anything to do with the foreign health activities generated by the United States in other countries? Speaker 2: Well, what we do is, we cover our people if they're stationed over there, their families and so on. But interestingly enough, if I can associate this with the race for president, it was the State of Massachusetts (laughter) that developed a health proposal that Romney [Mitt Romney] ran on until he got through the primary and became, and he said, "Repeal and replace Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010]," but we patterned it off of what they were doing in Massachusetts so everyone will be covered by health insurance. And then he turns against his own policy that we modeled ours on. Other countries like England, Australia, Canada, are ahead of us because they have provided these provisions, these programs and these benefits to their citizens long before we came aboard. Story_ID: 360693 Speaker 1: I was asking about the House Foreign Relations Committee's [sic. House Foreign Affairs Committee] global health subcommittee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations] and what, you know-- Speaker 2: We looked at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) not the domestic, I wasn't asking about the domestic health policy. Speaker 2: No, we looked at global health-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we saw the needs, and in our embassies we try to promote improving and putting top dollars into providing health services for the people of that particular country, and that's what we were really involved with on that subcommittee. As far as foreign affairs went, we wanted to promote what they were doing or trying to instigate, covering all their citizens. The deeper you get into Africa, the more rural and the more ancient it is. So we tried to promote global health services and help them improve using some of our programs. Now we have Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] as models. But remember they have to generate resources in order to do it. And you get a lot of poor countries, and so we try to go in there, and help and promote, and instigate, and help them design a system regardless of what their means are. Speaker 1: Now, I've heard now, and you correct me if I'm wrong, that even the, for some reason that doesn't jibe with the rest of the activities of the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration, that there was more resources put into fighting AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in Africa during those days, the Bush years, than-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --at any other time. Speaker 2: Because that's when it rose, it was under the Bush administration. And the number of people that would contract AIDS, and it started really up in the northeastern part of the continent. And it was, I remember being up in Kenya, and there was a gray monkey that sat on the side of the road, and they said those, if they bite you, you develop these conditions. And so we had to go all the way back to why AIDS was spreading. And, you know, it was, I guess, in the '80s [1980s], when we identified what the AIDS virus [human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)] was, and that was at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] where they identified the virus, and we used AIDS as, you know, it's an attack on the immune system. And they said that it came from Africa, but it came from a monkey bite, and probably they carried it to Europe whatever came, you know, as a result of that monkey bite. And then it spread because men out in the bush and so on, they would come back to their villages, and maybe being bitten or something, and have sex with their partners, and that's how it spread. And it spread most rapidly on the continent of Africa because, A, they didn't have the technical understanding about how it spread, and they didn't have the resources to stop it. And that means that a lot of Americans going over there were having sex with the natives, don't get that wrong. And we thought in the beginning it was a disease that only affected men, white men, and we found out 'cause, you know, right here in San Francisco [California], we had a real epidemic and then it was spreading but, and it was spread from male to male to female, not the other way around, not female to male. And so anyway, we had to do a lot of research, and they said it started in Africa only because the sailors and other personnel over there from Europe would be having sex, and it was male to female. Story_ID: 360694 Speaker 1: Well, were you involved in any policy, I guess, activity, I mean, did you create any policy, or to, you know, I guess, deal with global health when you were on the subcommittee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started when I chaired the health and human services committee [California Senate Committee on Health and Human Services] here in Sacramento [California]. And I was very, very effective in saying to them that number one, when we identify a patient that has this syndrome, the thing to do is not to put them in jail, and not to put their name in the newspapers, it's to guarantee them treatment. And we really don't know how to stop AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], the AIDS virus [human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)], but we can get it under control in an individual, and that was our doings off of my committee when I was chairing the health and human services committee in Sacramento. And we said, "AIDS is a virus, we don't need to print people's names," but we also made it the law that if you were a carrier of AIDS you had to inform your partner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And to curtail the spread of it was the most important thing. We didn't wanna list names, we didn't wanna destroy lives that way. And so we fought real hard on our committee, and as the chair of the committee all that legislation had to pass through. And we said, "Yes, you can test." And we set up testing for the AIDS virus. But we weren't going to list people's names on the front page of our newspapers. What we were going to do is concentrate on treating. We have not found a cure yet, but we can sustain life. Speaker 1: Okay. But I was asking about the foreign affairs committee [House Foreign Affairs Committee], the foreign relations committee (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know but I chaired-- Speaker 1: --activities in global health, yeah. Speaker 2: --I'm going back to Sacramento when I was there in the Senate [California State Senate], we started out, and so on the congressional subcommittee we were concerned about how to stem the spread of AIDS, particularly in southern Africa. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And how to inform the people as to the behavior that spreads AIDS, and how to prevent that behavior. That's what we were involved in, in the [U.S.] Congress, on that subcommittee. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were using activities that you were involved in here in California as a model for how to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --deal with it on a global-- Speaker 2: And, you know, they had so many ancient and traditional ideas about it. And things like having sex with a baby, and so on and so forth, that kind of stuff-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the-- Speaker 2: --gets bizarre when there's little understanding. So what we were trying to do-- Speaker 1: Was that Thabo Mbeki that came up with that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What we were trying to do was to inform and train the doctors, the nurses, the health providers, as to what the virus was, and how it is spread, and what medications you could take. We still have no cure for it, but we have the cocktail as we call it, a combination of drugs that will slow down the spread of the virus. In (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think that that's correct what I said about Mbeki he was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he doubted the importance of dealing with it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Rather than, he didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. And, you know, it was something that people were hushed about because of the way it was spread in the beginning. And so they really didn't want to highlight that, and it cost a lot of money. But now there are institutions, in fact, we've gone, I've taken visits, I've taken people over to South Africa, and we're taking them into the various native and rural and community health groups, and that is so that we can educate the people, and try to bring over the proper drugs that can be effective. So it's a difficult process when you have groups of people at different stages of development and the main thing is educating them. Story_ID: 360695 Speaker 1: Now you were also on the subcommittee [House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade] of the House Foreign Relations Committee [sic. House Foreign Affairs Committee] on terrorism, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what do you remember about that committee? Speaker 2: Well, it's recognizing the behavior of terrorists, going to the causes, you know, why are people so concerned about democracy that they would want to attack America. So we discussed what nations want to attack America, wanna terrorize America. You know, what's in their minds, what are their beliefs? And, you know, Islamic beliefs and Western beliefs are like this, and they still are coming out of very ancient ways of thinking. And you have to destroy the devil, we appear as the devil, and because we allow certain things to occur here in this country. And so, what we would do on that committee is look at what's happening in other nations that are less developed, and how we could change and educate, and how we do global educating to be more effective, so that we are not victimized. But it's two different and opposite views of religion and what role it played, plays, and, you know, curtailing women, putting burkas on them where only the eyes, you know, it's a whole different thing, and we're the great sinners in the world because we have nude beaches. You know, we have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you think terrorism is basically-- Speaker 2: Well, you have to consider, why would somebody come and attack America? Why are they--because they are veering away from the religious thought that they had. And we are the devil in terms of the way the Islamics think. Story_ID: 360696 Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about the house oversight and government reform (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what we-- Speaker 1: --committee [House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform]? Speaker 2: --what we try to do, we look at all the branches of government, and see where there's waste and abuse, and trying to curtail that waste, and that's what we focused in most of the time. And is there a more effective way, less costly, to do things. And, are we wasting our money by doing this versus doing that. And that's what we concerned ourselves with. Speaker 1: Now that's one, one of the big Republican talking points is always, the Democrats are wasting tax dollars, one way or another, so what were those discussions like, and was that the same thing that happens in those (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, those discussions were very interesting, and they'd get very hot. Right here in our own blue state, the Orange County [California] members versus, I would say, central California, you know, this state could be broken up by three different, say the southern part, the middle part where you have San Francisco [California], the leading group in terms of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and so on, and then northern, which is more rural. But anyway, our discussions would include all these different attitudes about the State of California. It's very interesting. And, but we are the most progressive state in the nation in spite of that but we had plenty of time to talk, to argue, to debate, and then to, you know, I could stop bills in my committee, I would just never place it for hearing. And so we tried to work them out with the right, I'm on the left. But as chair I tried to work with the right so they could go back, you know, reasonable people would find a way to compromise. But they would get real hot. Speaker 1: And you were on the subcommittee on domestic policy [House Oversight and Government Reform Subcommittee on Domestic Policy] and information policy [House Oversight and Government Reform Subcommittee on Information Technology], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Also census [House Subcommittee on the Census], and the National Archives [House Oversight and Government Reform Subcommittee on Information Policy, Census, and National Archives]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Well, it's a way of forming programs that will help each individual. And as, you know, our rate of immigration is huge, and so we tried to get to people to help them learn the American way of doing things. To vote, number one. To become aware of the issues, number two, so you can be part of that decision-making. And so we would meet and talk about ways to be more effective with our new immigrants. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what's meant by information policy? Speaker 2: Well, how do you get information out to people? And, you know, we used to always say that we in the black community are the last to get the information that's needed. So we wanted to provide public health services, and that's costly, but you need to decide on what your state stands for and how you reach the people who have been neglected in the past, not unreachable but neglected. So what we did, we formed a series of health centers where doctors would come from the major cities and serve the people in rural areas, that's the kind of thing, to spread information, to give them telephone numbers that they could call if they had any question. How do you get information out to groups that are on the edge and groups that are unrepresented in a state the size of California. Speaker 1: Okay. But this is on a national level though? Speaker 2: On a national level, you begin with California. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 360697 Speaker 1: Now, you were also chair of the entertainment issues caucus [Congressional Entertainment Industries Caucus]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And tell us about that. Speaker 2: And we would, well what we did, during the inauguration, we had Hollywood on the Potomac [Potomac River]. We wanted to bring the Hollywood community, which is known globally. As I traveled, I would say, "I'm from Los Angeles, California," and people would nod their heads and smile. And if I said I represented Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], you should see, they would explode because our movies go around the globe and can be very influential. So I tried to bring Hollywood into conformity with what this nation tries to do, and how we try to influence governments to go democratic, well become democratic. And, you know, to be a representative government of all its people rather than a dictator at the top. And Hollywood is the best way to do that. So we bring movies in and, you know, provide them with the information. And, of course, some of our movies we hope don't go and try the influence in a negative way. But the Hollywood community can be very, very helpful in demonstrating the best of America and the best of democracy, and that's what we did. And because I represented the area I could get various celebrities to participate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And to travel with us. And when we go overseas, when we go into a lot of areas that were under, shall I say, under informed and we'd have a celebrity with us, and they had a movie theater somewhere, and they saw those movies and it would really, Denzel Washington for instance, he traveled with us. And, you know, all he has to do is step on the scene and people listen, you know 'cause they saw in the theater somewhere his movie, what it was. So it was a great way, using the communications that come through movies in informing people in remote areas. Speaker 1: So, so where did Denzel go? I mean, where, where did you take him? Speaker 2: We went to South Africa together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So he's part of the entertainment issues caucus of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Well, he wouldn't be part of that. We would have him, we would contact him through that vehicle and he would travel. And, you know, when they travel on [U.S.] Air Force planes, they have to pay their own way. We have a series of Air Force planes that are used for the president and for [U.S.] Congress. Air Force One is the plane that the president uses exclusively, then you have two, three, and four. And we can, if you contract to use one of the Air Force planes that are reserved for congressional representatives, you have to have a diversified group fly on there, you can't just have all Republicans or all Democrats, you have to have Republicans and Democrats, Independents, on your plane. And when we go in, we go in as a CODEL, a congressional delegation, regardless of whether you have an R, D, I, or whatever behind your name. And you go in that way, you're represented, and you get on those Air Force planes and they have everything, they have kitchens, galleys, as they call 'em, in the back. You are served the best food. And you can, you have seats that fold out into beds, and covers that go over them so you can sleep, depending on how long the flight is. But we could use, and usually the chair of a committee will ask to use an Air Force plane to go on a CODEL, a congressional delegation. Story_ID: 360698 Speaker 1: You were co-chair of the Korean Caucus [Congressional Caucus on Korea]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Because as you know, Koreatown [Los Angeles, California] was a major part of my district [California's 33rd congressional district]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were also, you're a member of, or you were a member when you were a congressman, of the Women's Caucus [Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the Progressive Caucus [Congressional Progressive Caucus]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and I hear, now, of course, now, I assume you're a member of the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] too-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --Congressional Black Caucus? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. I just didn't see it-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --listed here. And the UK Caucus [House UK Caucus]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I didn't know the UK Caucus-- Speaker 2: United Kingdom. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's small, we didn't meet often-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and so on. But the Women's Caucus dealt a lot with abortion, contraceptives, and so on. And we wanted to be sure the old boys did not control women's bodies. All issues are women's issues, but we had to focus on a few because they wanted to deny the use of contraceptives, wanted to deny the use of abortions for women, and-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --you know, this whole rape thing. Speaker 1: Is there like bipartisan participation in a women's caucus? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just wondered what, you know, stance Republican women would take on these-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --issues. Speaker 2: Well, some of 'em would go along with us, women are women, the bearer of children. You don't want to bear a child as a rape. This is just an issue that came up on the floor, with Akin [Todd Akin], you don't want to bear the child that comes from a rape. And there were some saying that it's God's will and you should have that child. Well, you're going to impact that on a woman who was walking down the street and pulled and violently raped, and the semen from some stranger is going to be in that child, and why would you have to bear that child all the way, and have that child birthed through you? And so these were the kinds of fights that crossed party lines. And we would come out with a majority support for progressive legislation as it pertained to women's bodies. Speaker 1: Okay. Likewise in the Congressional Black Caucuses, now I've, from what I've read not all of, I mean, or very few of the black Republicans, if any, the small group-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --that there is participate in that. Speaker 2: There was one when I went into office. There were two elected in the first election for Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. And then these two were up for election a few days ago, and one has just conceded, but he came in, West, Allen West. Speaker 1: Allen West, right. Speaker 2: He came in to destroy the Black Caucus. He said the Black Caucus was racist and so on. He was put up to all that, you know. Remember Uncle Toms, the Uncle Tom syndrome? That's who that was. The other one [Tim Scott] wanted to join the caucus [sic.], but we made a decision not to allow the Republicans in our caucus because they would fight some of the stances we would take in order to improve the conditions for African Americans in this country. And, you know, the president had always to say, I'm the president of the United States of America, I'm not a black representative or a white, I am president. And so we wanted to support that kind, you know, of position and thinking. And Allen came in to destroy it. He never was taken in [sic.], neither was the other Republican. And I think they both were defeated. And I'm not sure about the other one out of Texas [sic.] but I think they were both defeated in November's election. Story_ID: 360699 Speaker 1: We were saying that J.C. Watts wasn't quite as, as hardcore as Allen West in terms of-- Speaker 2: No, he wasn't-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --at all. Speaker 1: And you got a story you were telling about-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. He's a, was a former football player, I believe. And they probably beguiled him and brought him in, you know, and he never stood up and fought for the conservative right view, he would just vote for it. But you never heard him make these statements, you know, that was so right, they almost fell off the cliff. And I remember hearing J.C. say, "I know who I am," and right after that he quit. He was coming on the floor with one of his colleagues and when they would take these hardcore positions, he wouldn't go along with them in his caucus but he would vote with them on the floor, but it got to the point that when he went back to his district, I think his family and other people were saying, "What is in your mind?" You know. The only way we have reached equality is you're a professional football player and you made some money that you could share with us but don't get it wrong, we're not quite there yet. And so he quit. And we didn't have any on the other side until four years ago when two came in, you know, at the same time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was Allen West, who was the other one? Speaker 2: He's a guy from Texas [sic.] and I don't remember his name [Tim Scott]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was very quiet and very sincere [sic.] about joining the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus]. Speaker 1: Talk about a sincere Republican who just seems he's too sincere, one from your own state, Ward Connerly, I don't know if we talked about him (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me tell you. He was the biggest, I would say, I don't wanna say on the air what I'd like to call him, but he worked in the back office of Governor Wilson [Pete Wilson], and he would fight every single thing that we did. And he would call us in our caucus racist, but he really was the racist one. And he was so far to the right. He was an awful person who fought me all of the time 'cause I was the only black, when Bill Greene left there were a couple of years in there that I was the only black representative on the floor of the Senate [California State Senate]. And I'll never forget Ward Connerly, and David Roberti who was our president pro tempore, came to me and he said, "You know, there's this guy Ward Connerly, what do you think about him?" And I said (shrugs shoulders). But he went around the country trying to do away with affirmative action, saying it was racist. And he was horrible in terms of his, he had made his money, I think, in development, and now he's going to go right. And we're saying that we needed to integrate all of the public services we provide, right down to the postal, get rid of the police, the fire department, the Red Cross [American Red Cross], you know, it was a private organization. But we believed that affirmative action needed to be the name of the game, until we came up to parity. And it was him that fought us every step of the way. Speaker 1: Yeah, he sponsored several propositions right-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were-- Speaker 2: Two o'three [203]-- Speaker 1: I can't think of the name-- Speaker 2: --I think 206 [sic. Proposition 209]. Speaker 1: --the numbers of them but they're-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: --his propositions made national news. Speaker 2: And, you know, and they would trot him out, and he would go across the country. But-- Speaker 1: Right, he's-- Speaker 2: --he really didn't have the kind of effect that he wanted. He made it more difficult for us to get to a majority vote, but he was not successful in other states. I don't know whether he's back in Sacramento [California] or not, but he came out of the governor's office and had made lots of money on development, and he would be against affirmative action. And we said, "No way you're gonna get away with this. You made your money so you're gonna close it out to everyone else that looks like you." He was definitely a poison to society. Story_ID: 360700 Speaker 1: I think [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama was elected to the [U.S.] Senate in, was it 2002 [sic.]? Speaker 2: It was early on, yeah, in the decade. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was 2002. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause he did-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --vote on the Iraq War [sic.]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: He voted against it at that time. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: 'Cause that's the only time he could have done it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he wasn't, yeah, so. What, well, when did you first meet him and what did you-- Speaker 2: Well, number one-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I said, "Who is in the Senate? Barack Obama?" I said, "Interesting, out of Chicago [Illinois], interesting." Well, we did a little delving. You know, he was an organizer, labor organizer and so on. I said, "Well, he comes from the right place in his beliefs and thinking." And then it was rumored that he would run for president. I said, "I don't think so. I don't think this country is ready for a person with the name of Barack Hussein Obama." And I said, "How does he think he can win that conservative white male vote?" Speaker 1: Now, this is in 20- I think that that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --talk began in 2004-- Speaker 2: He-- Speaker 1: --after he gave a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --speech at the Democratic National Convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Now, be-- Speaker 1: --in support of John Kerry, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Before then-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --his name was going around. Then he gave that speech and I said, "Now I understand." But we were supporting Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. And I remember we went backstage and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was there. And he asked me, "Why would the governor of New Mexico, Richardson [Bill Richardson], be supporting Barack Obama?" So I went out, Percy Pinkney who works for Dianne Feinstein, and I said Percy, "What's up?" He said that Barack Obama said to Richardson that there's a possibility he could be vice president. So that's why he did it. I went back and told Bill Clinton, and a tear came out of his eye. And I saw something happen that I had never seen before in my decades in the political arena. At the Democratic convention [2008 Democratic National Convention, Denver, Colorado], and when they start polling the states for the candidate, they got to New York, and it was Hillary Clinton who said New York passes, New York and its number of delegates, I mean, they had a large delegation, passes. And then this, it went by states and it went around again, and Hillary is as bright as her husband, and it got around to New York and she said, "New York and its three hundred delegates concede the race to Barack Obama," and it was over, it was over. And you need so many delegates and so many votes. I'm part of the Electoral College, and I'll go up there December 17th and we will cast our vote for the results of the November election. And when she said that, that was it. Story_ID: 360701 Speaker 1: Yeah, most people are still confused by that, that you can have a general election and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then have Electoral College. Speaker 1: --and then the Electoral College votes actually-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, why that happened, is because as this country was growing from a colony into other states added on, and you know, we just added on Alaska and Hawaii, Hawaii first [sic.] and then Alaska. So there would be a vote on the eastern seaboard and then horsemen would take the information across the country and give the information of what the vote, was because we didn't have the kind of telecommunications we have today. And they did it on horseback, and they would say, "This is the number of votes, we had to ratify and confirm," and that's how the Electoral College-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --from each district you appoint one and they go to the capital (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's a way of consolidating the vote to make it make sense? Speaker 2: Well, it's a way of informing, you see. It's about information. And, you know, back in the 17 [1700s], 1800s, and, you know, we had to use it that way, and that's how the Electoral College was formed and became part of the [U.S.] Constitution. And but it's really unneeded today but you'd have to change the Constitution. It takes thirty-two states to confirm, and then you have to have an election if you want to get rid of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it's archaic. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: It's not necessary. So we won't confirm his vote until December 17, 2012. Speaker 1: I think a lot of Democratic politicians were in favor of Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] in 2008 and a lot of black people, you know, stuck with her as long as they could-- Speaker 2: As long as they could at the convention [2008 Democratic National Convention, Denver, Colorado]. And Barack Obama got 98 percent of the black vote. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: We stuck with Hillary as long as we could. But as I said, "She's the one," and I told everyone, I said, "this is historical." She conceded on the second round of voting. You know, she saw what was happening, it's computing in her head. As Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] said in the last election, arithmetic, it's about arithmetic. And she computed and she said, there's no way. Now, she has said that she would not take another appointment, she'll finish out the term but she won't take another appointment, and she's not going to run again, she wants to go home and take care of her family. As, you know, President Clinton had a heart problem. Her child has, you know, she and her husband have broken up already [sic.], Chelsea [Chelsea Clinton]. And she trained Chelsea early on as to what the life is like of a political family. And as, you know, Chelsea did everything the right way, went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. So when her marriage broke up I think that Hillary was very concerned. And we've been up in their home in Upstate New York. And when we got there, Bill Clinton was on the phone talking to his nephew, his nephew had broken his leg, he was telling him what to do. His brother, Roger [Roger Clinton, Jr.], lives down here in San Diego [California], and it was his son. And I remember when Roger came to my mock swearing in when I become ambassador [to the Federated States of Micronesia], he sent, rather than coming himself, he sent Roger 'cause Roger was set to come up. But anyway, Hillary is very concerned about her husband's health and she wants to be able to go home and see to his care. So I said all that to say, from what I've heard along the way, she will not run. But the country might need her, and so we'll see. Story_ID: 360702 Speaker 1: Now you've been a member of [U.S.] Congress through this historical period when we elected the first black president, and that's gotta be a major story, you know, in your own congressional career. So you were in Congress during the first term of President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and basically almost through the entire first term. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: And it was something that was phenomenal, let me put it like that. And when we came back to session, you know, we're out in October and the elections take place the first Tuesday in November, and then we're out for the Christmas holidays and we come back after Christmas, it was unbelievable to know that we had an African American. I didn't think myself that it could happen because Akin [Todd Akin] and all those guys were still on the floor, and they're so right wing. And the more moderate Republicans and, you know, were there too. But when he won it was a celebration, I mean, we had parties and things every evening afterwards. And he would come once in a while to our caucus, the Democratic caucus, the president would. But the biggest victory and the biggest reaction was the one that happened Tuesday, (laughter) you know, a few weeks ago. And we went out to Paramount studios [Paramount Pictures, Los Angeles, California] and they must have had a thousand people in there. And I'm telling you, it was, to think that he could get a second term, when the leader of the Republicans in the [U.S.] Senate said their one goal was to make Barack Obama a one term president. And against all odds-- Speaker 1: Well, the, I-- Speaker 2: --but it was a brilliant campaign. Speaker 1: Um-hm. But on the heels of that in 2008, a lot of people think that the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm talking about this last one. Speaker 1: --the Congress was the most divided it's ever been in terms of partisanship. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: So how did you, did you feel that? I know the election of 2010 brought in a whole wave of Tea Party-- Speaker 2: We lost twenty-six seats. Speaker 1: --and right wing Republican Tea Party-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --candidates. How many seats were lost by the Democrats? Speaker 2: Twenty-six. Speaker 1: Twenty-six seats-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --were lost. So, and the speaker of the house turned, you know, Nancy Pelosi, lost her position as speaker of the house-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Boehner [John Boehner] became-- Speaker 1: John Boehner. Speaker 2: And let me tell you, Boehner was a very weak leader. And I know they had lots of problems. You know, he's from a family of twelve, and you go back behind the chambers and his office is there, and you could smell smoke and a few drinks and so on. And he, well, I don't wanna get in that personal stuff. But anyway, he was the last guy standing, so he became the speaker. And-- Speaker 1: And by the last guy standing-- Speaker 2: There were several others that wanted to be speaker, but Boehner was the best of the lot. Speaker 1: And I think if I remember correctly they, they kind of disqualified themselves in different ways-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --from being the speaker-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for certain-- Speaker 2: Yeah, for certain reasons and so on. And he was the last guy that, to be there. And very fragile though, very fragile. And not a whole lot of belief in his own self. Now, I'm going from a personal side watching it, viewing it, and being there. And he comes out very confident, but really not as confident as he should. Because, and they have the majority in the House [U.S. House of Representatives] now, but we have a president that's Democratic, we have a Senate that's Democratic, and so they have to tone down a bit 'cause if we go over that fiscal cliff, we're all in trouble. Story_ID: 360703 Speaker 1: I wanted to try to follow this chronologically, if you could help me (laughter) from your days in [U.S.] Congress, I mean, through to the, when you resigned. I mean, you know, what were the major issues that are going on, I know the health, Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The health initiative, yeah. Speaker 1: --President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] health initiative [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --was being formulated and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --fought for-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and then finally a version was passed. What was that process like, and did you, were you satisfied with the product that emerged? Speaker 2: I was elated that we could get some sort of health insurance guarantee to all the people of America. It was one hell of a process to go through. And it focused in a Barack Obama. And, you know, they said he was a Socialist he was, oh, I've never seen a president so insulted, and so demeaned as the other side put on him, start from there. And he was pushing the same kind of program Romney [Mitt Romney] had, and I'm talking about before this second term election. The first term he came in and we tried to get it through the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and we couldn't but we knew it was the right way to go for all the reasons I said earlier because health was one of the major concerns in this country with our population. And so they did everything to block him, he won. So we took on the health initiative, and we were finally to get it through, that was his biggest accomplishment. But in foreign policy there are accomplishments and in domestic policies too that don't get heard of, don't get publicized. It was the health reform that really got all the attention. Story_ID: 360704 Speaker 1: But that was a big fight [to pass the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010]. And we had several members that were gay in [U.S.] Congress, didn't want to admit it. But one of 'em, Republican, represented one of our neighboring communities. And there was one guy that harassed his own staff, and would go to the quarters that our pages live in. And so he left early in my tenure. And there were a couple of other that were masquerading on the Republican side. And we had outspoken lesbians and, you know, members of that community on the floor, and they supported a more liberal view. And so that was a big fight all the way through, that was an accomplishment for the rights of all people to marry who you love, you know, that's--don't ask, don't tell took it away from the [U.S.] military. But these are things that he worked on and emphasized and reached out to communities. And once that bill was passed, he came out here and Clooney [George Clooney], he came back from Clooney's party with $15 million. Speaker 2: George Clooney, yeah-- Speaker 1: George Clooney. Speaker 2: --the actor. Speaker 1: And so he went around the country. But the clever thing, if I can get back to the basis of his victory, he went to places that most people don't go, he went like to Montana, where there are two blacks there, Wisconsin where there's one, you know. Up in New England, you know, where-- Speaker 2: There's a little bit more in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], (laughter) in Madison [Wisconsin] now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: --being a little funny with this. Speaker 2: There's actually-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --less in Montana (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. But he went to places where you don't usually go and campaign. In this election, he set up 250 headquarters, and to turn out the vote, and it really shocked the Romney [Mitt Romney] group. You know, it took him a long time to concede that evening. How in the world did he do this? But the brilliance came out in the planning, okay, and having your people on the ground. And having, you saw how people were standing in Florida, and Wisconsin and other places, out in lines for five or six hours, raining, and all, but they were determined to cast their vote. So I saw this thing building in Congress while I was there, I've been out a year. And I saw the right trying to pull in more and they did win more seats in the last Congress. But I, I saw them trying to pull more people to the right. And it goes against everything America stands for because we are a nation of immigrants. And we fought the War of Independence [Revolutionary War], by the way 'Lincoln' is a great movie, go and see it, and emancipate, we emancipated the slaves, but we began with selling and buying human beings and all. So here comes a manifestation of what it's all about, a Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], mother, white, from New Zealand, Australia [sic.], Hawaii, father from Kenya. Now that's like this, coming together in him. So, of course, they set out to defeat him and everything he did. So when he won a major victory, it was really something to celebrate, and there are several things that, you know, they didn't publicize that he was able to do. Story_ID: 360705 Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the Democratic [U.S.] Congress before 2010 and after 2010? I mean, the Democratic members of Congress, I mean, I know people on the left often criticized the Democratic Congress prior to 2010 as having not done enough-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --when they had the votes. Speaker 2: --no. Let me say that because of the domination of the right wing Republicans, the Tea Party Republicans, Congress has done nothing. And they will declare a fight. They did not intend to move. They wouldn't even set bills for hearing in various committees, let alone on the floor because they didn't want to give credit to this president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] because, you know, nothing happens unless it's signed into law by the president. Now, the president has executive powers and he can do certain things but, you know, he should not have to use it unless they can get out of the House [U.S. House of Representatives], dominated by Republicans. And it goes over to the [U.S.] Senate, whatever bill it is, and then the Senate will delete certain areas of it and then he can sign it. But he'd rather have it run through the process, the democratic process, rather than using executive order. I've seen a tightening up on conservatism in the House and I saw it coming while I was there. But under the democratic president pro tempore we were able to do quite a lot. But the majority would block, not set, and would make it harder for bills to get through. Now the person who took my seat, Karen Bass, is working on a foster care bill and she's going to different states, this she gets a lot of support for, from the Republicans. I got a lot of support when I carried the gold medal [Congressional Gold Medal] for Dorothy Irene Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height], Dorothy Height. And, of course, I had all the Democratic caucus, but you need 290 [sic.] to pass anything out of the House, so I had to go over to the other side. And so I slid in next to a couple of Republicans and I said, "I'm carrying the gold medal," that's the highest medal we can give to a civilian in the state, in the country. And I said, "I'm carrying the gold medal for Dorothy Height." Well, who's Dorothy Height? You know, dramatic, Hollywood. You don't know who Dorothy Height is? And then I would say to them, "I'm going to tell you, but don't let anyone else know that you didn't know who Dorothy Height was." I said, "She took the mantle of leadership from Mary McLeod Bethune at age nineteen." And, you know, Mary McLeod Bethune was always in the White House [Washington, D.C.] talking to President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], and it was the beginning of civil rights. They all wanna say they support civil rights, you know. And so with that, where do we sign, where do we sign, you know, they wanna be supportive, and that's how we got the gold medal for her. And anything that is held under the dome has to be the highest level of awards or personage or whatever, and so we held the ceremony for Dorothy Height to receive the gold medal. And, of course, you know, she passed away several years ago. But she was alive at the time, and that was the best feeling I've ever had, to be able to present her with the gold medal, and to have as many Republicans as Democrats, because no one wants to say they were against civil rights. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were against busing and other ways to achieve it. 'Cause there are two processes, first, you have to desegregate to integrate. And so it was a fight but we got it and it goes all the way up to Congress, you know. And the southern states were against it. But there are two states now that wanna drop out of the Union. Have you heard about that? Speaker 1: I've heard about it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. But anyway, so it's a fight at every level. Story_ID: 360706 Speaker 1: There any other bipartisan issues that, I mean, issues that you were able to get some bipartisan support on? 'Cause I know this has been, it's been thin in this [U.S.] Congress, I mean, until you, now you retired last year [2011] around this time-- Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: --right, you were retired? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But is there any other issue that you were able to get any bipartisan support for in Congress? Speaker 2: Well, the health issues. Yes, you could get that support because--and issues that the benefits of government for seniors, there's not a district in this country that doesn't have a senior and a child. So the educational issues, issues such as social security, Medicare, Medicaid, in the State of California its Medi-Cal. And I chaired the health and human services [California Senate Committee on Health and Human Services] and brought that about when I was here. And fast-forwarding, twenty or thirty years, in the Congress it's the basic issues, like health and emergency services and educational services, that you could get bipartisan support. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything that happened, any policy or law, you know, that came through Congress that really, that you're the proudest of your participation in? Speaker 2: Well, there are several things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course, health, accessibility to healthcare is what I'm proud about. The segregation laws that we started here in California. I'm really proud of the part I played in those. I, representing California and by the way, there were four black members representing the State of California, [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters, Diane Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], Laura Richardson, and [HistoryMaker] Barbara Lee. Laura's district was drawn out. My district was drawn out too, but I went to San Francisco [California] and got it back, I guess it was Sacramento [California] I went to. But anyway, we fought for equal rights, and I'm proud of the fight that started when I was on the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], and all the way to Congress, you still have these fights that come up in many different ways. And I'm proud of the role I played and the debates that I could be part of. Speaker 1: So I just wanted to be, so I don't get mixed up here. The people you just named, Maxine Waters, Laura Richardson, Barbara Lee, and yourself-- Speaker 2: Were the four black women. Speaker 1: --in-- Speaker 2: Representing California. Speaker 1: In Congress? Speaker 2: In Congress. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When you were in Congress? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there are others now as you know, but from other states. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And we pretty much programmed together on issues. Speaker 1: Um-hm. I know Maxine Waters is from right here in-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] area-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Watts [Los Angeles, California]. And Laura Richardson represents-- Speaker 2: Long Beach [California]. Speaker 1: --Long Beach, okay. Speaker 2: She's no longer there. Speaker 1: Okay. And Barbara Lee? Speaker 2: Oakland [California]. Speaker 1: Oakland, okay. Speaker 2: Janice Hahn now is representing the area that was divided up, and now it's a different district. It centers from San Pedro [Los Angeles, California], and on into those areas down in that part of the state. And Laura is no longer in Congress. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. I wanted to, let's see. So you consider the healthcare initiative, the biggest thing? Speaker 2: The prime-- Speaker 1: The primary thing that-- Speaker 2: --uh-huh. Speaker 1: --you worked on. Okay. Story_ID: 360707 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done, you know, in public life, what are you the most proud of? Speaker 2: Well, I started a group of ten bills called GAP, Gang Abatement Program [sic. Gang Abatement Plan] because the gangs of young people were growing in the City of Los Angeles [California]. And I understand that gang activities has spread way over to Bermuda. And, you know, these guys are serious, they use guns. And so I presented several bills when I was in the Senate [California State Senate] here. And I was the first African American woman in the Senate, and the second was Teresa Hughes [Teresa Patterson Hughes]. And so we didn't get all of our bills passed into law, but we started to focus on gang activities and what spawned gang activities. And then I tied that into education. And too many of our homes lacked fathers, and the gangs were composed of young men, rather than young girls. And so we knew that the lack of a parent made a real difference, particularly with boys, the lack of male parents. We changed the welfare system and Medicare system. And as you know, under Pete Wilson we changed welfare. That was not my doings but the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] said, in 1996, he said, "I'm gonna sign the welfare reform, but you're gonna tell me how to fix it." So we wrote it up. And what it does, it allows you, if your income drops below a certain level, that you then are eligible for welfare. The first child you have you have to, that's the one that you based, if you had it out of wedlock, they will fund that first child but you have to name the father of that child, and you know we have cases where they couldn't tell us the name of the father. And if you had ten kids, only the first was covered. I did not like that but that is what was voted on in Washington, D.C., and the president asked me to try to conform it to Medi-Cal. And so Medicare is for seniors, Medi-Cal, children, Medicaid, all people whose income drops below a certain level. So what we did was we looked at how we could curtail the criminal activities among our males, how the home had a part to play, how the school had a part to play, and how the communities had, and as was my proudest contribution. We got some of the bills through, and I didn't get my whole package, of course, but we were able to get a lot done. Story_ID: 360708 Speaker 1: Who are some of the community people that, you know, sort of stand out in your mind over the years who have been, you know, significant to the growth and development of the black community in California? Speaker 2: Well, Tom Bradley, certainly. And by the way, my father [William Watson] was a police officer and served at the Newton Street division [Newton Community Police Station, Los Angeles, California]. And then when they built the division across from USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], he was taken, they wanted their best and brightest and he was over there and he was driving down Cimarron [Street], and saw this for rent sign and that's how we got on that block on Cimarron. Then years later Rochester [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson] built his home there. And we had Mantan Moreland and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eddie Anderson, yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah, Eddie Anderson, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Mantan Moreland, too? Speaker 2: Yeah, Mantan Moreland. And, in fact, I just saw his daughter at an event just recently. And we had an enriched community because of that. But I would say that I'm proud of the fact that, A, I could improve the standards for education on the school board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education] and for education of minorities, and I was the only face sitting there, but we were able to do practical things. And, of course, when I said, "We gotta bus our kids into the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California]," 'cause if there's a school that is providing excellent education for young people, every young person ought to be part of it. And so, you know, the busing route was going, I said, "Well let's call it training, no one's against training." But it was a real fight to try to integrate our schools and to move our children into the best schools in the district. And so that I'm proud of. And then I went from there, I had a, I worked for UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and had an allied health program, and that's when I was asked to run for the legislature, and then I ran for the Senate [California State Senate]. And I was able to bring the perception, change the perception but bring the issues from our community to the table. And we'd have to fight for a lot of things. And I helped David Roberti become president pro tempore so he gave me chair of health and human services [California Senate Committee on Health and Human Services] because the health and human services committee neglected Southern California where we were, and it was San Francisco [California] and it was the rural areas, the agricultural areas in northern. So I had them do a presentation on black health in the State of California once a year. And I was able to put it, manipulate the dates so I'd put it on a day when we had like thirty bills. And so my colleagues hated the fact that they had to sit there and listen to the status of black health in California. But when they were told, in particular, starting with, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the Watts [Los Angeles, California] area and so on, you know, we throw a few riots in this city once in a while to catch attention. Story_ID: 360709 Speaker 1: That generated a Tom Bradley. And you had a Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] who went, and went into [U.S.] Congress and was able to look back at his state, his city, and do some things. And, you know, you had a Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], who served for as I said, fourteen years as the speaker. And oh, there were many fights between the north and the south. And every step we took pushed us a little way forward, but these were not easy steps, and we had to have people who really would stand their ground. You know, on the East Coast you had a Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], you had a Shirley Chisholm. And these were people that spoke out, not just for our community but they spoke out for their districts. And so here, you know, you had to speak out, such a large state, and you have to convince the rural area that what you're presenting can benefit them as well. And the sophisticated central part of California, the San Francisco [California] area and so on, they were already progressive. And then Southern California, you know, was hiding behind the orange curtain. And so when you had a Willie Brown, and he went to some of those people and said, "You can't get in the middle of some of these fights," north and south, you know, Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh] and his team. And then you had Northern California and you had the speaker, Leo McCarthy [Leo T. McCarthy] up in that area. And then the Bermans played a big role. You had the gang of five, you know. And these are mostly Jewish guys and all, wielding a lot of power, which came from the Westside and some areas. And so to provide equal benefits, you had to form a coalition. And the coalition had to have on it people from all the different communities, from the Westside community, from the, from your Chinatown [Los Angeles, California] and Japanese area. And many of their, our Jewish supporters were on the Westside, people with money and so on, those were your coalitions that were able to remove many of the barriers from providing minority benefits equal to majority benefits. But it was the coalition approach that really worked. And we just lost a member who was really pushing forming coalitions, and we found out with Tom Bradley that you had to have a coalition, and that member was Mervyn Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally]. And Mervyn was lieutenant governor here, he was in Congress, and we kind of follow in his footsteps. And he had a particular knack and sense of the body politic. And he came from Trinidad and Tobago. Still had a very heavy accent. But he was, his skills were recognized, and he went to New York and organized there and then he met Hawkins, Gus Hawkins. In fact, he's written a book, and he called me and asked me if I would review it. And he brought the manuscript over, and because I'm a former teacher, you know, I was correcting the English, you know, and so on, moving paragraphs around because it was written just as he spoke, but it had, he was very knowledgeable, and was recognized for being an astute politician. Well, I tell you, I fell ill at the time with my knee, and I called him, I said, you know, "I'm editing this." He said, "Don't worry, don't worry, I will come and get it, I'll give it to the editor." And I think, well, I know, that he knew that his time was near and he wanted to get that book out. So I think it has gone through editing and will be out on the shelves very soon, if not already. But I notice that he was really pushing and pushing, pushing, he said, "Don't worry about finishing it," 'cause I only got to chapter two (laughter). And it was like, he was very, sort of like an emergency, get it done, get it done now. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Yeah, you mentioned Tom Bradley earlier, you had Gus Hawkins, Mervyn Dymally, and [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters. Speaker 1: Julian Dixon [Julian C. Dixon]. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, Julian Dixon. And the club, the New Frontier Democratic Club. And so-- Speaker 1: You'd have to pass through the New Frontier Democratic Club before you could run for any office in this area. Speaker 2: Now was Long Beach [California] affected by the new Democratic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --Frontier-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So did Laura Richardson come out of the New Frontier? Speaker 1: She didn't come out of New-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --Frontier but she did come to New Frontier. And she wasn't a member but if you ran for anything in this arena here, the Los Angeles [California], Los Angeles County [California], you'd have to go through New Frontier. Story_ID: 360710 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question too. If you could go back and change something in life, is there any particular thing that you'd go back and change, if you could? Speaker 2: I wish I could have found a partner that would be able to pace right with me. And a friend that I had gone with for ten years, he passed away, but he told me before he died, he said, "I knew you would go and leave me in the dust." But now I look back on life and say, there's a reason why I didn't marry and didn't have children because my sister's [Barbara Watson Coleman] gone, all of the generation above me is gone, and I'm the one who becomes the matriarch now. My mom [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] lived right there. She died there, my aunt died in, well, they all lived over there, my sister lived here too, they're all gone now. And I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So your mother just passed away last year? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I don't regret now marrying or having kids but I, it would have been great along the way to have someone at my side. But I don't regret it, now I see what my mission is and I accept it fully. Story_ID: 360711 Speaker 1: What factors, I guess, impinged upon your retirement? I mean, why did you-- Speaker 2: Well, let me go back. We're a family of educators. My great aunt was the first African American teacher in L.A. Unified [Los Angeles Unified School District], Pauline Slater. And we call ourselves African American because, I chaired the caucus when I was in Sacramento [California], the Black Caucus, and it was during, I think we were doing the 1980 census, and I looked, you know, it was Caucasoid, Mongoloid, and Caucasoid, Mongoloid, and we were Black. And so I kind of got worried when I looked at the census, and I said, "You know, how do we define ourselves in a nation that's so integrated?" You know, there's not one pure black person born here, people come here but there are no pure, they're all mixed. So I called the director of the census out from Washington, D.C., to my office. And I said, "You know, we have three racial groups, but if you're Chinese, everyone knows your gene pool is in China. If you're Japanese, they know your gene pool is in Japan. If we're Negro, colored, or black, we didn't use black at that time, Negro or colored, where's your gene pool?" And so she got it. I said, "Why can't we call ourselves African Americans, where we can distinguish then, where our gene pool is from," 'cause there are Asian Americans, there are Chinese Americans, you know. Speaker 1: Now what, what year is this? Speaker 2: This is back in the 1980 census. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, '80 [1980] census. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. So then we were able to call ourselves African Americans to identify where our gene pool is. And as an anthropologist and someone's going through that, every living human being on this globe came from Africa, Lucy in Africa. So it opens up a whole new thought, you see. And Negroids, Caucasoids, and Mongoloids, that's, that were the three categories. Speaker 1: Now, in 1980? Really, on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Prior. Speaker 1: Prior, prior-- Speaker 2: Prior to that, uh-huh. Speaker 1: I didn't know, black became-- Speaker 2: Prior to the African-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --American designation. Speaker 1: And the, okay. Speaker 2: And the [U.S.] Census Bureau agreed with me, and that's how we got African Americans on, you know, within that, in the census, collection of the census data. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 360712 Speaker 1: So do they still use Caucasoid and Mongoloid (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, that was the end of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Your gene pool, wherever it was located, became the title. Chinese Americans, Japanese Americans, African Americans, and on and on and on. Because when you get down to those islands where I was, people are really mixed, but they've got a lot of African blood in them. So then we determined where your gene pool is, and that's the first of your title. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So I did that. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So this is, this is the U.S. census that you influenced, the whole U.S census (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --in 1980-- Speaker 2: But see people came here from other places. And Columbus [Christopher Columbus] thought he had discovered India when he hit this bank, and there were Indians here. And in California we don't call any of them Indians, they are Native Americans because they were here before Leif Erikson in the Northeast and before Columbus on the eastern seaboard came here to this body of land. And they saw people looking around the trees. They were here long before anyone white came. So Columbus did not discover America, he just hit up against it. He thought it was India. So we called the people he saw, what, Indians. And they resent that. They're Native Americans. See, and they don't, in the State of California we say Native Americans, we don't say Indians. And we have the largest number of tribes here in this state. I don't know if you knew that. But we were instrumental in calling them Native Americans. We were, I was instrumental in changing the census designation to African Americans. Speaker 1: Okay. Now that's something I didn't know. Now this, this is prior to Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], I guess-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --campaign too? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Had nothing to do with Jesse Jackson. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. Speaker 2: It had to do with how we wanted to be designated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it had a lot to do with our gene pool. Our gene pool wasn't in Asia, it wasn't in Korea, it wasn't in South America, it was in Africa and I wanted that known. So, and you know, I carried legislation, in Exposition Park [Los Angeles, California] we have the African American Museum [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California], it's a state museum. And it was first called the Afro-American Museum [California Afro-American Museum]. Well, the African embassies here put up a big protest because on the whole continent there is not a word for Afro, the word is African. So I had to carry legislation to change the designation of that museum to African American not Afro. It's an insult, it's like calling you Neg. Speaker 1: Without the gro (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) So these are some of the good fights, you know, that I had, and very proud of that we can be recognized along because, I said, you know, we go back to Lucy, and this is B.C., I'm talking about. Story_ID: 360713 Speaker 1: You don't have children but what today, how today would you describe your family? Speaker 2: Well, when I was running for the board [Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Education], they said, "How can you be a board member, you don't have any children." I said, "I had thousands that I taught." I'm going to write a book on Selma Avenue Elementary School [Los Angeles, California]. Selma Avenue is the last school that I taught at and it's down the street from Hollywood High [Hollywood High School, Los Angeles, California]. And there's a story that walked on that campus every day. Let me just give you one. And I said I gotta put this in writing, no one would believe it. But I was the only sixth grade teacher and when I came back from Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] I went into the area office and they immediately assigned me, I didn't have to go downtown, they immediately assigned me to Selma. And I was the only sixth grade teacher, I had the bungalow on the end. The school burned down in the '30s [1930s] and they replaced it with bungalows, and they never built it back as one school like we have now, it was a series of bungalows. And so I was designated the person, if the principal was off-campus, to call if there was a problem in the office. So Sally Cole [ph.] was the office manager, just lovely, she was about this tall, Jewish and all, and we, just wonderful, we exchanged all kinds of stories together. And she had a knack for identifying the roaming gypsies, the white gypsies. And she would send a book of a certain color in, and I knew that the child that came in, when that book came to me, was part of the gypsy clan. But anyway I got, there was a certain buzz, and that meant get down to the office on the double. Well, we had connecting rooms and I would tell my partner on the other side watch my class, "I gotta go to the office." And so I went down and there was this woman at the counter, her back was to me. And Sally said, "Miss Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], would you come and take care of this parent?" So I went around and got on the other side, and she went down to the principal's office, and I saw her just folding up with laughter. When I looked at the woman she had a target drawn on her face. You know what a target looks like, with the black and then the red and-- Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: --green and yellow. Speaker 1: --and a bull's eye in the middle. Speaker 2: And she was, and she had two mops for hair. And she said, "Miss Watson, the children are throwing things at my son." And I wanted to say, I guess so you got the target (laughter) on your face. It was like that every single day. Story_ID: 360714 Speaker 1: There was another case of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] president, who was a ballerina from New York, married to a psychiatrist, and they lived under, over, above one of the Ls in Hollywood, up in those hills [Hollywood Hills, Los Angeles, California]. And so she was PTA president, would have to meet with the principal from time to time. And when they would go to the area office, they would take my car and leave both of their cars, our parking lot was in the front of the school, and they would go on to the area office or whatever. And so he came down off that hill with a shotgun looking for his wife and the principal, and they had a little thing going, you know. And I had a new Ford. And I said, "Lord, don't let them come back while I'm talking to this psychiatrist with a gun." He's looking to shoot his wife or shoot the principal, and they are away in my car. So anyway, I said they went to the area office on business and they won't be back for a while, and he left. But they took the principal out of the school and put him at Broadway [Broadway Elementary School, Venice, California]. I can't even use the names because these people are still living. And Broadway Elementary out in Santa Monica [California]. And the doctor went there looking for the principal. Well, the principal would drive a pickup truck and come in and park in the back of the school. At Selma [Selma Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] we were in the front, parking was in the front. (Laughter) So this guy is sitting there with his shotgun pointed at the school across the street, waiting for the principal to come through the doors. Well a box boy, boy from the market, and he was parked in the market parking lot, came and saw the barrel pointed out of the window, and went back in and called the police, and that's how they saved the principal's life. But it was something like this happening every day. And just one more story and I'm gonna end this. But there was a young girl in the fourth grade, her last name was Bardeaux [ph.]. And she acted out every day. And Mrs. Singh [ph.], who was just the sweetest, quietest, and she had real red hair with kind of a pancake thing on top. And she had red cheeks, and she was married to an East Indian, Mr. Singh. And she wanted to have the parents come, so she could talk about this child's behavior. And so our classrooms were like this, they made an L and they went out, and they were on the other side of the playing field. So anyway, I'm still getting my mail out of the box, Mrs. Singh, and I saw Mrs. Bardeaux, and she had another woman with her. And I looked around and I saw that the woman had on a gray coat, a blouse that had a V, and she had patent leather shoes, and a black skirt. And I didn't think much about it and I just went ahead and got my mail out. Ten minutes later, here comes Mrs. Singh panting and sweating, she never sweated or anything. She said, "I was sitting down to meet with Mrs. Bardeaux, and she introduced this woman as Miss Sweet Thing." And so she was talking to the two of them about this young girl, and she looked real closely at Miss Sweet Thing and she saw hair growing out of the chest and hair growing from the hands, and realized it was Mr. Bardeaux in drag. So (laughter) the principal calls me and then he says, "Go out to the yard," this is the beginning of school, "and get all the children off the yard with their teachers." So I went over and I said, "I'd like all of you to go directly to your class," and it wasn't quite nine o'clock yet. So they went and he said, "Have 'em pull all their blinds on the side of the rooms that face the playground." So I got all my students in and got 'em seated, and here I am over at the door and moving the blinds (laughter) you know, looking out. And I said, "Now boys and girls, get started with whatever." So I see the principal and the couple coming back to the office. And so I couldn't wait until the end of the day to have a faculty meeting to find out what in the world was going on. So he wrote at the top of the blackboard, the principal did, he says, when the negative force, female, gets together with the positive force, male, and comes together at one, then you will remove all negative forces. And we found out there were thirteen female dressing males as part of that belief that, you know, when you bring 'em together under one, you can change the negativity. Story_ID: 360715 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking you about your family, and-- Speaker 2: My inspiration, my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] who taught us responsibility, 'cause she worked at the post office at night. We'd come home from school and she's going to the post office. My father [William Watson] was, they were already separated. She taught us responsibility, and we had responsibilities to run the household early, I was seven years old. I could bake a turkey at that time. Really proud of what she taught us, because it's no problem to do whatever needs to be done in the home, 'cause my mother, and if we didn't wash the dishes, scrub the floor, wipe the--down the stove and all we were awakened at 1:30 in the morning to do it. We only did that one time. My father taught us discipline. He was a police officer and when he said your day ends after you say, we're Catholic, after you say your prayers, and he would say that to you, and he'd come in that door with a switch, with a hanger, with his belt, or whatever, we learned real quickly that after you said your prayers, you, that was the end of your day. And my grandmother [Edith Jacques (ph.)] was raised in a convent for thirteen years, his mother, so it was really strict and he was strict when he was in the home. My sixth grade teacher [Birdielee V. Bright] was really the inspiration, because she required the best of you and if she ever found, I was a pretty good speller and I had pretty good handwriting. And so she would give me the spelling list to take home. So she taught us responsibility, and hard work, and she had an A to F row. And my, I'll never forget, I'd be in the A row, Barbara Floyd would be in the B, Barbara would be in the A row, you know, when your work was perfect you got to the A row, when it wasn't quite perfect you were B. But we stayed in those rows. So she believed in being responsible and dependable, and when she wasn't in that room she wanted you in order. So I learned a lot from her, and when I started teaching I did the same things that she did. And then my great aunt, Pauline Slater, taught us the love of education. My [maternal] grandmother [Belle O'Neal] was born in Chicago [Illinois], so was my mother, but her family came from the Besaya County [sic.], Holly Springs, Mississippi, and moved up north. And our family believed in education, that was the only way you moved ahead was to be educated. So I went to school all the way through serving in the Senate [California State Senate], and I got my Ph.D. in 1987. And I believe in continuing education as my family did. My grandmother was a surgical nurse and operated on the first open heart surgery with Dr. Williams [Daniel Hale Williams]. She's written up in the textbooks and I think she was Belle Smith O'Neal, our family name is O'Neal. And she left Chicago, they spent seven years in Oklahoma and then came on west to California so her kids could get an education. So my inspiration has been because of what was ingrained in us as children. Speaker 1: Now, well, I think I'll ask you this question. What, do you have a public service philosophy, or political philosophy? Speaker 2: Well, my public service philosophy turned into a political philosophy 'cause I went in there as an educator. And so I was a board member, a senator, a congressperson, and a Ph.D., and I went back and I stayed in school, almost to the '90s [1990s], and that was the belief that we have as a family, that education was the way out. So my philosophy is based on the basic principles of who I am, who, and what part, and what role I played in the family and it was always to make you proud. And it was always to be obedient, you know. And we went in (laughter) the Catholic church at that time, St. Odilia [St. Odilia Catholic Church, Los Angeles, California], over on the Eastside. And as I said, my grandmother spent thirteen years, she's from New Orleans [Louisiana] and grew up in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana], and left the convent after thirteen years. Her sister stayed in, she was Sister Philomena [ph.], and taught a lot of my colleagues when I first got into the National Black Caucus of State Legislators. So we are a family that believes in education, and that's the philosophy that drove me in all the offices that I went into. Story_ID: 360716 Speaker 1: Now, is there any question I need to ask you before I ask my last question that you can think of, that we haven't covered? Speaker 2: Well, I told you who inspired me and why I was inspired, and that really was what I wanted to say, I had role models. And my father [William Watson] and my mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] divorced and all, but he took care of us in terms of child support. He married Miss Eblon from New Orleans [Louisiana] and owned three condo apartments, you know, next to the Watkins [Watkins Hotel, Los Angeles, California], I don't know if you know the Watkins Hotel, it was the only black hotel. Anyway, and she made sure that my father put, gave my mother the child support because she was married to him. She had one daughter who is still living. Her name was Bernice [ph.], and she has red hair and all, but she was a mulatto from New Orleans. And I have two sisters, half, and a brother because he married a third time. And one lives in New York, one lives in Atlanta [Georgia]. But my mother always spoke well about my father. My father said he had seven children, and he didn't say I have so many by this wife, no, he had seven children. And I remember us taking a picture, all seven of us, with their mother and my mother sitting at the ends of the couch. So we never heard them fight at all. We were sent up to Berkeley [California], when we came home my dad was gone. So my mother really protected us from, you know, what happens when you get a divorce. And she went to see my dad just before he died at General Hospital [Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, California], and cried when she saw him. She was always in love with him. But my father was 6'5", slim and really good looking, I'm gonna get a picture for you. And, of course, he was working in a theater [Eblon Theatre] in Kansas City [Missouri], owned by this Miss Eblon. And he was sixteen and she was thirty some odd. And they wore delivery uniform, double breasted with the little hats, you've seen those? And the boots up to here, livery. And he was the ticket collector. Well, he came on out to California with six of his friends, because he wanted to be the next Joe Louis, he wanted to be a fighter. And I remember him taking me when I was three years old to the Olympic Auditorium [Grand Olympic Auditorium, Los Angeles, California]. There was a library on Central [Avenue], and I was running and fell down, and I busted my jaw here and I had to be taken there for stitches, you know, first aid. And it was called Georgia Street, I don't even think it exists today. So anyway, you know, three days later, you have to go and have the stitches taken out. So he's taking me to Georgia Street to have my stitches taken out, and we went from there to the Olympic Auditorium. And I tell you, it was just these men and I'm sitting there and I'm saying, "Lord, get me out of this place," and there was a fight. And, you know, Joe Louis was on the scene, and I wasn't here, but he was on the scene and my father always wanted to be that person, and be just like him. So I had to go to my first fight at three years old. I do not go to fights now. And I think it's barbaric, but, you know, you get all up on these things and everybody gets excited, but my dad loved to box, and to fight, and he kept his self slim and became a police officer. And they chose him for the best runs and that's how we got over to the Westside of town, it was a big division between east and west. So I just want to say I had role models as I grew up, we all did. And they're all gone now. Story_ID: 360717 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who was dedicated to justice and community service. Story_ID: 360718 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And could you tell us about this photo that's on the easel there? Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother when she was turning about fifty or sixty. And we all worked together and built a twelve, a ten-unit apartment building. So that, we took that on that day. Now there she is-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just the ones up here, please-- Speaker 2: Okay. My good friend-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --'cause they're the ones we're recording. Speaker 2: --and my two sisters [Barbara Watson Coleman and Patricia Watson Bradfield]. Speaker 1: If you can name them for-- Speaker 2: And we're in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. If you can name 'em for me-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't see. Speaker 1: --like as you read from left to right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dr. Barbara Young. Speaker 1: --going this way, okay, very good. Speaker 2: And let me see the red, the one in the red. Oh, that's Frankie Walton [ph.] who taught in Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] with me. And Rolana Watson [ph.], my sisters, myself, Diane Watson, and Rolene Watson [ph.] in front of the [U.S.] Capitol, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And there again is, I'm in the center, Diane Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], my mother, Dorothy Watson [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] is seated. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And the other two? Just friends? Speaker 2: Just friends. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: One of them is deceased now. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: --that's myself with, I can't tell from here who that is. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): He's holding a loaf of bread I don't know if that's significant. Speaker 2: And that's my mother's, I think, seventieth birthday party. Oh, no that's me when I went into [U.S.] Congress. When I was elected into Congress this time. That's Mark Ridley-Thomas on my, on the right, and that's me in the center, and that was at one of my victory parties. Okay. And there we are when I won again my seat in the Senate [California State Senate]. And then that's Karen Bass in the center, and she's the one that is now the congresswoman for the 33rd congressional district. And I believe forward to the right, that's Mark Ridley-Thomas, the supervisor. Okay. And that's myself on the left and one of the bishops from Africa. Speaker 1: I don't think that's the bishop from Africa. That looks like a, you said that that was a Ghanaian, right? Speaker 2: From Africa, yeah, Ghana. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: One of the bishops, yeah. Okay. And that's me the day I was sworn in to Congress with one of the former congressmen who is no longer there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Dick Gephardt. Speaker 2: Gephardt, yeah. Speaker 1: There's Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel]. Speaker 2: Okay. Rangel and a group at my victory celebration. Speaker 1: Okay. Bishop Brookins [H.H. Brookins], my mother, and Juanita Millender-McDonald and other friends. Juanita was already in college when I got there. The person to the far left is my sister, Patricia Bradfield. And on the far left is myself and my friends, they came up to my swearing in. Speaker 2: Okay. And that's Nate Holden [Nathaniel N. Holden], whose seat I took in the senate, myself, and Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu]. Okay. And that myself, the one in the center is Holly Mitchell when she won her seat in the California Assembly [California State Assembly]. And the one to her left is Karen Bass who is now in my seat, the 33rd, in Congress. Okay. And that's myself, my sister, Barbara Coleman, and her former husband, Herbert Coleman, and a friend standing on the other side of me. That's Nate Holden and myself when he was in the senate. And that's David Roberti when I first got into the senate. And that's Alex Haley on the right, myself in the center, and Gwen Moore. Gwen and I ran together, and she ran for the community college board, and I ran for the school board. Dianne and Barbara, Dianne Feinstein, Barbara Boxer, and me. Speaker 1: Barbara Boxer on the left, I guess, right? Speaker 2: To the left of me, and Dianne to the right of me. Speaker 1: Yeah, Barbara Boxer is-- Speaker 2: Boxer is here, that's myself and Dianne Feinstein. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Dianne Feinstein on the left. Speaker 2: And they were the first, we were the first to have two senators, female to serve together. That's Xernona Clayton Brady [HistoryMaker Xernona Clayton], and from Atlanta [Georgia]. She was a press member. That's Roger Clinton [Roger Clinton, Jr.] when I had my second swearing in at Dorsey High [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], President Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] brother, so he sent him. And that's myself at the state department [U.S. Department of State], and my mother in the center and a cousin standing on the side. Okay. And that is myself and my sixth grade teacher [Birdielee V. Bright], who had tremendous influence and effect, and my cousin Eddie Turley [ph.] in the black suit. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Where are you in this picture? Speaker 2: I think that was in Africa. Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: When I ran for the board supervisor. Speaker 2: About what year was that? Speaker 1: That was in 1991, I believe. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: That's myself and my roommate from college. Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Right. And you know the little actor? Speaker 2: That's Webster [Emmanuel Lewis]. Speaker 1: He's a little, Webster. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And so who else is in here? Speaker 1: One is Stan Henderson [ph.], and the guy on the phone, I don't have his name. No, that's Stan Henderson, little Webster, and Aniva Aniva [ph.]. She's in Nigeria right now. Speaker 2: And that's [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Robert Guillaume and, and [HistoryMaker] Bill Overton and myself and some others, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And which one's Bill Overton? Speaker 1: The one standing right there. Story_ID: 360719 Speaker 1: Okay, that's myself in Washington, D.C. with Quinton Edness, who was premier. Speaker 2: Which one is he, oh, right-- Speaker 1: Right here. Speaker 2: --right to your left, okay. Speaker 1: In Bermuda. Speaker 2: Premier from--okay. Speaker 1: And Merv Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] and myself. Recently passed away. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This guy looks familiar. Speaker 1: Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and myself at the Hilton hotel. We were having a big fundraiser for Bishop Brookins [H.H. Brookins]. That's another one. I'm introducing him, he's thanking me. The president speaking in my ear. Okay. And that's myself and former staff, Alice Holmes [Alice Holmes-McKoy], on the far left. And at the podium. Okay, I'm in, the person in the picture with me is March Fong Eu, the secretary of state. (Background noise) I'm just going to let it ring. Speaker 2: She was secretary of state under? Speaker 1: Under governor, she was, I'll get it later. No, no, no. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who is this? Speaker 1: Under, I know it, March Fong Eu is the one that's on, in the picture with me and she was secretary of state. And it was--when our current governor was governor then. Yeah, she was his secretary of state (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jerry Brown, Jerry Brown. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jerry Brown. Yeah, I think you know who they are. The one on the far left is Nate Holden [Nathaniel N. Holden], I took his seat, and Abdul-Jabbar [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar]. And he was so much taller than me, that's why he's laughing like that. Speaker 2: He's taller than everybody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He dwarfed me. Speaker 2: --everybody else, I think (laughter). Speaker 1: That's Kenneth Hahn, the legendary supervisor for the 2nd district. And this one is Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.]. Speaker 2: I think if I put it this way on the pole that it won't curl up. Lou Gossett, and that's? Speaker 1: Tom Bradley. Speaker 2: Tom Bradley, okay. Is this Alan Cranston? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I'm getting, I'm good (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, you're getting really good. And that's a family photo. And the-- Speaker 2: That won't give me an award, won't it (laughter)? Speaker 1: You're getting an A plus. Speaker 2: Yeah, I get an A plus for that. Speaker 1: Oh, that's the place, is that Hastert [Dennis Hastert]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Dennis Hastert? Speaker 2: Dennis, yeah, Dennis, you're good. Speaker 1: I've getting there. I'm trying to get that A. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Bill Clinton, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr., Bill Clinton and-- Speaker 2: And then Bishop Brookins again. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm, I'm beginning to recognize them. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Here's 'Saturday Night' ['Saturday Night Fever']-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, what's his name? You know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: John Travolta. Travolta, I know who the second guy is and-- Speaker 2: And I don't know who, and myself, yeah. Speaker 1: This is Little James [ph.], this is Sarah, James O'Neal [ph.], Sarah O'Neal [ph.], Patricia Bradford [ph.], Christy [ph.], well, she's a Bradford. And this is Kim [ph.] who lives right next door...