 Story_ID: 15869 Speaker 1: I'm the interviewer. And my name is Julieanna Richardson. And Scott Stearns is the videographer, S-T-E-A-R-N-S. And Reverend Wright, I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name. Speaker 2: Um, that's a well-kept secret. My name is Jeremiah Alvesta Wright, Jr. J-E-R-E-M-I-A-H, A-L-V-E-S-T-A, W-R-I-G-H-T. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: September 22nd, 1941. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: January 11, 2002. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: Trinity United Church of Christ, 400 W. 95th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60628. Speaker 1: And your profession. Speaker 2: Ministry. Story_ID: 15870 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: I guess chicken or buffalo wings, Friday's, TGI Friday's buffalo wings specifically. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Your favorite (laughter) color? Speaker 2: I guess blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: White sand, palm trees, anything tropical zone, Cancer--Tropic of Cancer where in the dead of winter, it drops down to about seventy-five. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really, no. Story_ID: 15871 Speaker 1: Alvesta, I want to start with that. Where is that-- Speaker 2: That's, now wait a minute, don't play the dozens. I said, Junior. That means I'm named after my father. Speaker 1: But even with the middle name? Speaker 2: His--yeah, I'm a junior. Speaker 1: Okay, I know, but even the middle-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's his name. So, that's the name they gave me. Speaker 1: Do you know the origin? Speaker 2: Yes, his, his great aunt who raised him gave him that name. Where she got it from though, I don't know. I know when I was, when I was born the nurses asked my mother, "Where in the name of God did you get this from?" She said, "That's his father's name. Don't talk about it." But his great aunt named him, gave him that name and she was--pardon me, my great aunt. She was his aunt, his mother's sister. And she ended up, from the time he was young, ten, eleven on, raising him because his mother got killed in an electric storm, thunderstorm, with lightning. But Aunt Hattie--we all called her Aunt Hattie. She was my great aunt, but she gave my father that name. Story_ID: 15872 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father. I mean his name is Jeremiah Wright, Sr. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But can you tell us about him, sir, and, you know, where he was born? Speaker 2: He was born Caroline County, Virginia, son of a tobacco farmer. He has an autobiography out if you want to read it. He grew up in Caroline County, Virginia, walking to school, all the way through high school. And Creed, his brother, Creed, is the oldest, older brother. There was another brother Chastine, whom I did not meet and two, two sisters, Laura, Theophilus that I knew. Chastine had died before I was born. He was the only one in his family to go to college. And Grandpa Jim was, which is what we call his father, James Wright. Grandpa took him to college. Caroline County, Virginia sits about halfway between Fredericksburg, Virginia and Richmond, Virginia. So Grandpa took him down to [Virginia] Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], just as proud. And then the, you know, 1930-31, had twenty-five cents, gave him all he had, twenty-five cents, thinking that was gonna pay for college. So my father went to school a year--pardon me, a semester, not a full year, a semester, worked a semester. School a semester, worked a semester. And it took him seven years to get all of his degrees there at, at Virginia [Union] University. He got the bachelor of theology degree and he got the bachelor of arts degree. And then he went straight into seminary, and he got the master of divinity degree. That slow-down process is what enabled him to meet my mom [Mary Wright] because if he had not had to stay in school so long, he wouldn't have met her. He's seven years older than she. And she got there. They met, and they graduated at the same time. She graduated from undergraduate with her bachelor's and he was getting his master of divinity. They graduated in May of '38 [1938], and they got married June the 8th, '38 [1938]. And he started pasturing in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that same May, May of 1938. And he pastored for forty-two years in Philadelphia. Now, while in Philadelphia, he went to Lutheran School of Theology [Lutheran Theological Seminary, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and got another degree, a master of sacred theology from Lutheran. And after he retired, he just, he just enjoyed life. Right before he retired, about two years before he retired, he went back to school to get accredited as a chaplain in case he got bored, so he could go in hospital and work voluntarily as a chaplain. But he wanted the chaplain training and CPE training to make sure because when he went to college and seminary, there was no CPE training. So he wanted that kind of training so he went back and got certified as a chaplain from the American College of Chaplains. He also did something else very significant, having pastored for forty-two years. Four years before he was retiring, as he was getting ready to retire, he carried the church through a four-year training process to get them ready for a new pastor because when you stop and think, stop and think about it, forty-two years, they didn't know anything about a new pastor. I mean they have you. Ah, kids born there, grown, raised, married, children. And he wanted to get them acclimated to how you go about looking for a new pastor, and how you're going to have to take care of a new pastor. You can't do the new pastor in this day and age like you did me. When he came out of Virginia Union, for instance, with three degrees, they promised him, 1938, $9.00 a week. And they were only able to pay him $7.00. So with three degrees, so he, you know, he worked all kinds of jobs. He was a substitute teacher and doing everything else he could to make life and limb meet back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. He was still substituting in the '50s [1950s] when I was in high school. He was, for me, a rare breed. As a matter of fact, in many ways, he spoiled me to the point that I thought all ministers were like, like Dad. And those who were, were not good, he didn't talk about, he didn't gossip. So I didn't, I didn't know. I mean you talk about sheltered, I thought ministers--my father didn't smoke, he didn't drink, he didn't run women, he didn't--I mean he was just straight-laced, out of the country. Twelve o'clock curfew. Twelve o'clock curfew all the way, I mean, not only in high school, college. I was, I was trying to tell my, my oldest daughters when they were teenagers, I said, "Don't you remember when we would go to Philadelphia, some nights we had to stay over your Mom's house." That's because my father put that deadbolt on at midnight. You don't come in this house after midnight, especially on a Saturday because the lord's day starts at 12:01, so if you're grown enough to be in the streets, stay in the street. That's the tight ship he ran. And when we were growing up--and in many ways, when I look, I do thank God for it because when we were growing up we had--people laugh about it today, we had black and white TV. I guess it came out, early '50s, we got ours. Some of our neighbors who also had black and white TV's, put cellophane across their TV with different colors to get the sky blue and the people's faces up, pale and the grass green. But we had one TV, and Daddy would, Daddy, in the '50s, early '50s, said, "It's a boob tube. It's makes you ignorant." So he would give us thirty, thirty, two thirty-minute shows or one hour, period, a day. That's it. And I used watch 'Howdy Doody' and 'Hopalong Cassidy' or, or 'Amos and Andy'; two shows. That's it. You had to turn it off and then read, study. When the street lights came on, you had to be in the house, all right. That's the kind of, that's the kind of--I mean he was a old, he was old-fashioned. When I say old, he was old-fashioned, and that's, that's--he was--he wanted us to do something with our minds. Now, my sister [Mary LaVerne Wright] would read ahead, you know. The teacher would assign to page fifty, she, you know, what else you gonna do now? She'd go to 100, 120. I'd stop right at fifty. All right, but I'd have to read something. So I would go in his study and read which in many ways was a blessing and curse simultaneously. I was reading material in his study with no teacher. All right, and remember he had four degrees by this time, so I'm reading stuff way over my head with nobody explaining to me what it is you're really reading; a wide spectrum of things he had in his library. He was a student of Carter G. Woodson so he had African American history, which I was reading. And that was causing problems. I'd get to school, and they used to have Negro History Week, you know, and they would have looked at one or two people. And I'm reading all this stuff Carter G. Woodson has written, and people are looking at me, like what are you talking about? W. E. B. DuBois books. But he also had theological books, church history books, Biblical criticism. And I'm reading that, which is causing me to have a lot of questions about what I'm learning at the elementary level and at church school and Sunday school and BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union] and BTU [Baptist Training Union] and all that kind of stuff. So I'm--but it, it helped to get--it made a solid foundation in terms of--college was a breeze. I mean by the time I got to college, well first, in fact, when I was in high school, I got, I got skipped, what they called skipped. Out here they call it double promotion, and didn't know I was gonna get one. When I was in high school, pardon me, kindergarten through high school, they had 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, 3A and you had graduations in January and June. I thought I was going into 12A, but I had too many credits. So they put me in 12B and which meant I graduated ahead of my class. And I'm thankful for that kind of foundation that, that he laid in terms of learning, learning, learning, never stop learning. I always saw him reading and keep reading. You don't just read to, to graduate and that's it, but you read to learn. And he gave us a love for learning, as did my mother, but I'm just talking about him right now, which was awesome. And, and a man of faith, a man of faith, a man who practiced his faith. He just didn't walk one way and do something else--or talk one way and walk another way. He died the, he died in 2001. Story_ID: 15873 Speaker 1: And he [father Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer March 15th [2001] and they gave him three months to six months to live. And he lived until July 4th [2001]. But I was in and out of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] every other week. As I said, they moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in '38 [1938], and they stayed there. You know, he and my mom [Mary Wright] were married sixty-three years before he died. And the last month, I was with him every day. And when I say a man of faith, he prayed, I mean you hear him praying even in pain, but he said things like, I--he said, "You know I'm dying." I said, "Yeah, Dad, I'm gonna be here with you." He said, "I want you here with me. I want you here with me." The, the weekend before he died, the first weekend in July, I had one of my members, and she's my daughter's age, my, my youngest daughter's age, she had set her wedding date around my calendar. And I knew I'd be at home on the first Sunday, Communion Sunday, so we set it for the first Saturday in July. And she lived in Knoxville [Tennessee]. So she and her--so her husband now, and they, you know, up here, the family's up here. And so I asked the Hospice nurse, I said, "Do you think he can make it through the weekend 'cause I want to go home for this wedding and Communion. I'll be back Monday." So she said, "If he knows you're coming back Monday, he might wait for you." So after she left, I, I went back in his bedroom and I said, "Dad, can I home for a wedding and Communion?" He looked at me and sighed, he just sighed. I says, "I guess that's no." So I called back out to Chicago [Illinois] to explain I would not be here. And the bride was very understanding, as was her family. And that Sunday was his lucid day. As a matter of fact, when--as he was, was sounding rational, he did things like, he started--now, he's so weak. That last two or three weeks, we had to pick him up, literally pick him up to use the washroom. He had been wearing Depends [diapers]. And he couldn't get out of bed. But he got so strong, he started ripping his Depends off. He'd pull, pulled his clothes off. I said, "Daddy, what are you doing?" "Go get my brown suit. Get my brown suit." I said, "What brown suit?" "The one that's your color, the tan, light tan one." So I brought it back and held it, "Hold it up and let me look. Yeah, that's it, that's the one. Put it over there." I said, "Where, there's nowhere to hang it." "Put it on Mommy's chair." So I put it on her chair. He said, "Now, get me a dress shirt." I said, "I don't know where your dress shirts are." "Top drawer." So I get a dress shirt and bring it up. He said, "Open it up." I opened it up. He says, "Okay, put it on me." He's pulling his--I said, "Daddy, I can't put your dress shirt on you. What you mean you can't put it--." I said, "I can't it's, it's, you're pulling the Depends off. You've ripped them. You're naked. Why are you getting naked?" "I've got to change clothes. You can't wear pajamas to heaven." So I said, "Well, Daddy, suppose somebody walks in?" You know, I'm trying to pull--I'd pull the cover up, he'd pull it down. So I said, "I'm not gonna put this shirt on you Dad." And he looked at me and he was saying, "Why?" I said, "Well, you took--you're gonna mess on your shirt without Depends, okay. You don't let me wear me a dress shirt to bed." He says, "You're not going where I'm going". My friend, John Kenny, who is the Dean of the School of Theology at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], John said he didn't mean that week. He means ever (laughter). He was going to heaven. So when he, when he lost consciousness that evening, he never really engaged in any, any more sentences or, you know, maybe a grunt or shaking his head, but that Wednesday, my former executive minister, Reverend Barbara Allen, says that this is because he and my mother were not joined at the hip; they were joined at the heart. That Wednesday, July 4th, I was in the living room in the evening with my wife [Ramah E. Wright] watching a Blockbluster DVD on my little computer. My sister [Mary LaVerne Wright] and her husband were in kitchen. My mom [Mary Wright] went into, into the bedroom. Now, for the last six weeks or so we had baby monitors so we could keep one right by his bed. If he just whimpered, we could hear it. And it's, incidentally, one of the, one of the most painful things was at night, you know, you listen for any movement, if he needs you, was at night hearing my mom go over to his bed because they had to put him in a hospital bed and, and talk to him in the middle of the night. And you felt like you were eavesdropping, but you couldn't turn it off in case he needed something. And she'd just go over to him and say, "This is your best girlfriend. I love you." But anyway, I'm listening to the breathing; I'm listening to him in his room cause I had the monitor with me. My mom goes into the bedroom around 7:30 in the evening, quarter to eight, and she says, "Children, come here. I've got a feeling, come here." And we got up and went into the bedroom, me from the living room, my sister from the kitchen. And she said, "Let's have prayer." So I was standing at his head. My wife was standing here, I grabbed her hand. She grabbed my mom's hand, she grabbed my sister's and she grabbed her husband's hand. My sister prayer first. Then my mother prayed. And she and I thanked God for him being a good father, thanked him for being a good husband, a good pastor, a good minister. And then when she said Amen, then she said, "You can go now, baby; you can go." He breathed three times. And third one was that deep sigh. I touched his carotid, and I was holding my wife's hand and looking at my watch and watching his chest to see if there were any respirations. And three minutes had passed. I said, "Mom, he's gone. It's been three minutes." She said, "I know, I know." She had a feeling he was getting ready to die. So Reverend Allen said, "Yeah, that's because they were joined at the heart, not at the hip." And, they just lived a beautiful life, and he told he was ready to go. He said, "I've lived ninety-two years." As a matter of fact, matter of fact, to tell you the kind of--here was a guy--now, my mother jokes all the time. She raised my sister and me to be clowns, just have fun. My father had this straightlaced kind of humor. When he turned seventy-one, he said I'm living on my "if by" now. I said, "if by"? Yeah, the scripture says the days of our years are three score years and ten. That's seventy. And "if by reason of strength, they be eighty". I'm working on the "if by" (laughter). That, that kind of, that kind of humor. For his 60th wedding anniversary, to show you the kind, the kind of humor he had, that's June 8th. Back up in Holy Week, he told me he had prostate cancer and he was gonna start chemotherapy that week. Then he started fussing about my sister because neither one of us lives in Philadelphia any more, so--but my sister calls every day, every day. And she was worrying him. And he said, "She's bugging me. She treats me like I'm a kid. 'Did you take your medicine, did you take this?'" So I said, "Okay, well, don't bug him, just, just ask once a week." So once a week I'd say, "How you doing, Dad?" I said, "How's, how's your treatment going?" "Going fine." Said, "Okay." Next week. "How you doing?" And we'd talk about a few things. I said, "Well, no side effects?" "No." Third week--now, I know, first of all, I was in the medical profession in the military. Secondly, as a pastor, I've seen what chemo does to people, you know, and radiation. Third week, I said, "Daddy, you have no side effects from the treatments?" He said, man--here's his straight humor. At first he said, "They tell me I'm supposed to have diarrhea. I'm constipated. I told you I'm fine." (Laughter) So I said, "Okay." So I stopped asking. I said he'll tell me if something--he wants me to know something. So we started planning the 60th Wedding Anniversary. I said, what do you want to do, 'cause they had a real big 50th, renewal of the vows and all that. He said, "Mommy just wants to eat," said, "We, we want to eat. But she doesn't want--she doesn't like going to restaurants." I said, "What--why don't we have, why don't we go to the church he served and have some home-cooked food brought there?" "Nah, we don't want to set a precedent because other members would want to do that." I said, "Well, doesn't Corinthian have a hall they rent out?" He said, "Yes." I said, "Let's rent Corinthians Hall. I'll, I'll get the hall. Tell Mommy to make up her menu of who she wants to cook what, and we'll have the food there." And they had about twenty people, relatives and play sisters of mine, and I think one person who was left from the wedding party, the ring bearer or somebody like that, still alive. So when we were leaving for dinner, I said, "Daddy, this June 8th. You told me back--you haven't had any side effects from the chemotherapy?" "What chemotherapy?" Now, I got nervous, you know, because older people, you know, sometimes go in and out in terms of mind, memory. And I said, "Daddy, you told me Holy Week, you were starting chemotherapy." He said, "Oh yeah, I was supposed to, but I went to the doctor, she was your age. And she said, 'Sir, can I talk to you privately?' And I said, 'Yeah, you're my oncologist anyway.' She said, 'My father's your age. I wouldn't do this. I don't know who ordered this for you, but I wouldn't do this to somebody your age. You're eighty-eight years old, and, and to put you on this chemo, the side effects would be devastating.' She said, 'I can put you on hormones and you can maintain the same lifestyle you have right now for four years.'" And he said to me, "Heck, I'm eighty-eight. I don't need but four years" (laughter). So it's that kind of humor and he's looking something as serious as, as prostate cancer. "What, I'm eighty-eight. I don't need more than four years. Come, come on with it." So every time I'm saying "How about the treatments," he's talking about hormones. I said, "But you never told me." "I thought your big-mouth sister would tell you. She tells everything else." (Laughter) So it was, it was just a beautiful, a beautiful life and a beautiful death that he, that he lived. Story_ID: 15874 Speaker 1: Did he [father Jeremiah Wright] ever talk about growing up, his growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, all the time, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: What were some of the things he shared with you? Speaker 2: Yeah, he grew up, I mean he grew up in the deeply segregated era, the era of the [Ku Klux] Klan, the era of lynchings. He talked about walking to school and seeing white kids go by on bus, buses. He talked about their facilities as compared to the white facilities. He talked about church and church experiences in the rural South. In the church that he grew up in, I don't think they had--it might be able to seat eighty people then. They've grown since then. He talked about his father [James Wright] and what he remembered of his mother [Emma Carter]. He talked about Aunt Hattie a lot 'cause she was a surrogate mother. He talked about his brothers. He talked, talked about things that I had--because I grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I hadn't seen. And I did get to see them as they started taking us south. When I was older and conscious enough to realize what I was seeing, I, I'd never seen--but this normal to him 'cause it's stuff he did. I'm looking at, my God, you know, a wood stove, right. They're cooking on a wood stove. If you want chicken, that means you go out in the yard and kill a chicken. And then you put it in hot water and you pull the feathers off (laughter). And then you've got to cut it and clean it and cook it. I mean from the--everything, self contained on the--the garbage disposal are the pigs. They take the garbage out to the pigs. And all the vegetables are fresh. They're grown right there. Those kinds of, those kinds of things are--like how, and he talked about working, how you work in the field. I never worked in the field. I mean he showed me how to milk a cow. I'd never milked a cow. I think, in fact, one of those cows tried to hurt me. Nobody ever believed that cow didn't like me. That cow was trying to get me (laughter). But he, he talked about that kind of life as opposed to the life I saw in Philadelphia with trolley cars. They didn't have any trolley cars, street lights. They didn't have street lights in Caroline County, Virginia. The paved road was a secondary road out about a quarter of a mile from the house so that, that he talked about what life was like then. Story_ID: 15875 Speaker 1: And then, particularly, after I got older, when I got to college, I was in the sit-ins. And he talked a lot about that movement as opposed--as compared to when he--'cause I was in school in Virginia [at Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]. He had left Virginia in '38 [1938], going back, of course, on holidays and summers to see relatives, but he talked about how strange it was to see that day and how, you know, how he never thought he'd live to see the day of desegregation. He talked about '54 [1954, 'Brown v. Board of Education'] and the desegregation of--in 1954, I was thirteen, and he talked about that was dangerous. And I said, "Why is it dangerous?" He said, well, you know, one of the, one of the side effects of segregation is that the teachers, everybody knew you. And you--you didn't just see them in school. You saw them--because it was segregated, you saw them in the stores, you saw them in church. And if you messed up, and it wasn't anonymous like see any teachers that wouldn't know the family. They knew them, knew you. They would tell your mama, there were all kind--tell your daddy. There was a closely knit community that cared about you as an individual, and that that was gonna disappear with desegregation because there were people from different cultures that would be thrown together who knew nothing about you and cared nothing about you. Whether you got it or not was not the issue where those teachers were determined, oh, you're gonna get it. You're not leaving here until you do get it. He talked about that kind of ethos disappearing in 1954. Right on the heels of the '55 [1955] Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott, I'm fourteen, and he talked about desegregation then. I mean and he talked about--some of the stuff he tried to shield me from. For instance, one of my best friends, I thought, introduced me to, or exposed me to the problem that was in the African American community over color when I was 3rd grade, in 4th he told me. He used to beat me up in 3rd grade. He told me in the 4th grade when we became friends. And I said, "What, why did you used to fight me all the time?" He said, "My mama say you don't trust yellow niggers." And I went home and asked--remember, they hadn't told me that. And he didn't want to tell me that. He, he thought they had left that in the South, that old house slave, field slave kind of stuff. But he would, he talked about this, explained how it happened, how it came to be. His grandmother was raped by a white man. He writes about that in his autobiography. And his father said he only had one regret and that's that the man died before he could kill him 'cause he wanted to kill him. He talked about that kind of life that I never saw--you know, I saw the sit-ins, but I, I didn't see the raw hatred that, that he grew up under. Story_ID: 15876 Speaker 1: How did he end up going to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]? What was the motivation there? You said he was the only one in-- Speaker 2: Well--yeah, the, the teacher, the teachers at the school where he was thought he had the potential and thought that he should, he should, he should go further than just graduate and get a job. His brother moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and got a job in a bank, good, you know, good, good-paying job. But they were saying they didn't want him to follow Uncle Creed in that, down that path. They wanted him--and his teachers encouraged Dad, and Aunt Hattie, Aunt Hattie. Let me tell you something strange about Aunt Hattie. Aunt Hattie encouraged him. Story_ID: 15877 Speaker 1: I didn't know this about Aunt Hattie until her funeral because Aunt Hattie used to, Aunt Hattie--I used to be afraid of Aunt Hattie, okay. Aunt Hattie encouraged him [father Jeremiah Wright, Sr.]. I was afraid of Aunt Hattie for this reason. Aunt Hattie was one of those women who was born with a veil over her eyes, had the second sight. And she could read you. And I, stayed away from her cause I really, I'm scared. For instance, when I was, when I was a teenager and get in trouble--I stole some hubcaps off a car and put them on my car. And Aunt Hattie walked up to me and she says, "What is this about you and a car?" "Nothing, nothing." "No, no, no, no, I, I see a car. I see you and I see trouble." As we're speaking, the police were at my house. I didn't, you know, I wasn't home. I didn't know. She's that kind of person. When Janet Marie [Wright], my oldest was born, pardon me, when, long, nine months before she was born--six months before she was born, I was stationed at, here, Great Lakes [Naval Training Center]. And when the rabbit died, we excitedly and call back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. All right. And we called Philadelphia and my mother answered the phone. "Hey, Mom, how you doing?" She said, "You can calm down. Aunt Hattie told me. Janet's pregnant. It's gonna be a little girl born with red hair in June." Janet Marie was born June 23rd with red hair, the same red hair she has today that you've seen, okay. Sixteen months later, my grandfather [Hamilton Martin Henderson], my mother's father, my maternal grandfather and grandmother [Mamie Henderson] moved to live with us when I was in junior high. And Grandma died the night of my senior prom and Grandpa hung on until he was ninety-four. Well, when I was stationed at Bethesda [Maryland], I was driving up to Philly every other weekend to see how he was doing, you know, 'cause he was, he was low sick at that point. And he said to me, "I ain't going nowhere until I see my great-grandson," 'cause Janet was pregnant. She--"I'm a see my great grandson. And when he, he gets in, then I can leave." So I said, "Okay, Grandpa." "Don't be worrying about me, don't have to worry about me." So one night, in fact, it was Tuesday, which would be October, I guess the 19th, 21, 22,--19th, yep, Tuesday night, October 19th, 1965. Janet Marie woke up screaming. She was 16 months old. We went running into the bedroom in this apartment on the second floor. What's wrong? And she's standing up in the crib. Man, man, man (laughter). I said, Janet, there's no man in here. We had the windows locked. We took her--I said, she wants to sleep with us. That's all she wants. She wants to come out of this crib. I took to the front door, showed her the chain. See, the chain in on. No man can get in here. Man, and she insisted. So I said, okay, what did the man look like? She said, "Papa." I said, "My daddy or mommy's daddy?" She said, "No, no, no Papa." She meant my grandfather. I said, "Oh, you--grandfather, he's really far away from here. You know when we get in the car and we drive, we drive, we sleep and we wake up. That's, oh, that's 140, 150 miles from here, Janet. That's where Papa live." "Papa." I said, "If you see Papa, what's he doing?" She said, "Wave bye-bye, wave bye-bye." I said, "No, Papa is Philadelphia with grandma and grandpa. So you just go to sleep." And I tried to put her back in the crib, and she started screaming again. I said, "I'm telling you. This is all she wants. Put her in the bed between us." She fell asleep just like that. Six o'clock in the morning my mother [Mary Wright]'s on the phone. I said, "Hello." She said, "Aunt Hattie told me to call because the baby's upset. Papa died last night, and I started to call you. I didn't want to wake you up. Aunt Hattie said you didn't have to wake him up because Papa saw the soul of his incoming great-grandchild, saw it was another girl, saw he had nothing to wait for, and stopped by to say good-bye to Janet Marie, and she got scared.'" Story_ID: 15878 Speaker 1: She [Aunt Hattie], because of her college background, also encouraged Dad [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] to go. And he had such a thirst for it that it didn't matter that he didn't have the money. He worked until he got enough money to pay for next, the next semester. Then he'd go that semester and then had to drop out again. And he stayed, stayed there until he finished. Speaker 2: Now, you know, there--I had read a short little thing. It was printed out, that talked about, you know, how he got there and then they said, you can't eat. And he said, "What do you mean?" (laughs) And he prayed. But how did he opt to decide on the ministry? That's my--. Speaker 1: I think he--my, from what he said to me, he knew he was going into ministry when he, when he was in high school. But Aunt Hattie said, "You're gonna be a trained Minister. It's not gonna just be any," you know. And on the East Coast, where I grew up, it was understood that to be a minister--and Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], please remember, that the only school that had a graduate school, was the School of Theology, it was trained ministers. I think he really could have had, or would have had the option also to go up to Howard, Howard University School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.], but he was much closer to, to Virginia Union. So he went to Virginia to prepare himself for ministry. And remember, that first degree was a Bachelor of Theology. That's before he got his B.A. So then he, then he got the B.A. and then the M.Div. Story_ID: 15879 Speaker 1: Now your mother, give us her name and will you tell us about--. Speaker 2: Mary Henderson Wright. My mother was a twin. Her twin died somewhere near birth. So she did not live to be year old. She was born in Surry County, Virginia. Both my parents are from the country, and it--no city, no--Caroline County [Virginia] had one flashing light on Highway 301 when I was growing up down there--when they would take me down. Now, it has an excellent, Highway 95. My mother, my mother's--I think the closest city to her, Suffolk, Virginia where she was born. There were five of them who lived. Uncle James died, drowned and she never, never took to the water at all because of his death. All, my grandparents, her grand--her mother [Mamie Henderson] and father Hamilton [Henderson], my grandparents were in that group of Africans who went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] and graduated in the early, in the early 1900s, all right. My grandfather got a bachelor of arts and his M.Div. And my grandmother got a bachelor of arts. And they had a two-room school, girls on one side; boys on the other side that they were in down in the country. And, Granddaddy, Grandpa pastored a church down there also. But they raised all of their kids to go to, to go to school, with the understanding, yeah, you're going to school. You're going to college. You're going to graduate school. All five of the living, surviving ones had a minimum of two, two degrees. Some had three, some had four. My mother, I was looking at the misprints, and my wife [Ramah E. Wright] had to, had to warn her there were some misprints in a recent article, my mother graduated from college I think at sixteen, between sixteen and seventeen. She had her first master's by eighteen and her second master's by the time she was twenty. Her oldest brother, John, finished Virginia Union--all of them, except Aunt Pearl, went to Virginia Union. Uncle John finished at Virginia Union and then went to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] School of Theology for his master's in divinity. Uncle Tom went to Virginia Union. I don't know where he did his master's, but he did his Ph.D. at the University of Chicago [Illinois] in psychology. Uncle Shorty was a principal--Weldon is his real name, was, was a principal in Norfolk, Virginia. He went to Virginia Union and then did a master's in D.C. Aunt Pearl, her sister, my Mom's sister, went to Knoxville College [Tennessee] because Virginia Union didn't have a music major. And she wanted to major in music so she did her undergraduate work in, at Knoxville and then got a graduate degree somewhere else in, in music and voice. My Mom did a bachelor of science, then she did her master's in mathematics. And then she did a master's in education, and she ended up with a doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in education. As I said, my parents forced us to read. She was a stickler for education and using, using your mind and developing your mind. She was a, a minister's wife. She was a, she was a--in those days called a speaker, all right, because she grew up in an age where there wasn't women preacher, not in the Baptist church. So she preached, but they called it a women's day speaker, you know. And she worked, she worked from the time--I can't remember. In fact, Daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.]--I didn't tell you this about him. She worked. Daddy cooked for us. Daddy did all the cooking in the house. My mother worked in, in West Philadelphia and which meant she had to leave home early in the morning. So Dad would get up and fix her breakfast. And then she was gone by the time we got up for breakfast because it was long ride over to where she taught. And Daddy would cook breakfast. Then we'd walk home for lunch. Dad would have lunch ready, and he'd have dinner by the time we got home. So that Mom had the long ride back, commute back from Sulzberger Junior High which is in West Philly. Then she went to William Penn High School. She moved from junior high school certification to high school certification. Then she moved to Germantown High School. She became the first African American teacher in Germantown High School. Then she went to Philadelphia High School for Girls. And when she retired, she was the Vice--Vice Principal of the Philadelphia High School for Girls. She taught Sunday School. She played the piano. She played the organ at church. The Wrights Gospel Chorus--we were so poor in the early days, we couldn't turn the heat on, had one of those coal, coal furnaces; couldn't turn it on but once a week. So chorus rehearsal was at my house. And she, she rehearsed the chorus, at our house. And she taught me how to drive when I was thirteen down in the country (laughter). She's a lot of fun. She raised us to have a sense of humor. And we used--until she had her open-heart surgery, we used to trade our best jokes of week. Once a week we'd call to see, tell, tell each other the best one that we had heard that week. Deeply religious woman. For me, what was so, what was so weird was the combination--it's almost like an eclectic combination, dichotomous combination of this highly educated, highly trained woman with her country ways. I mean I was being taught in Philadelphia, you know, that the more erudite you became and the more intelligent you became, the more reserved and cool you behaved.. My mama would sit up in church and talk to the preacher, "Yes, well!" (Laughter), You know, it's like, you know, you, you've got too much sense for this, you've got too much education to be behaving (laughter) like this. "Say so, yes, sir, help yourself!" But she was just genuine. She was authentic. She didn't try to put on airs. Just a lot of fun. Story_ID: 15880 Speaker 1: To give Daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] a respite, he would go down in the country for vacation, down to Caroline County [Virginia]. Now, for my father, vacation was going down to Caroline County, where there's a wood stove, where--and I, and I--in '79 [1979], I spent a week with him down there. And I saw why they didn't used to let me go. I would have been bored to tears as a kid. These people get up, they get up--I mean the women are up. You can hear the women up by 4:00. They serve breakfast at 6:00 and a heady breakfast. Then the men go out in the field. Lunch is at--well, they call it dinner at noon, not lunch, dinner. You're talking fried chicken, corn on the cob, potato salad, greens. Supper is at 5:00 in the evening, all right. And supper is something like short ribs, squash, succotash, mashed potatoes. Everybody's in bed at 8:00 (laughter). No television, there's no radio. And it's pitch black out there in the woods. You can hear a train roar off in the distance. That's how Daddy relaxed, you know, he'd go fishing. Well, now, he couldn't take me as a kid 'cause I would have been stark raving mad. So, Daddy would go, Daddy would go down to Virginia. And Mom [Mary Wright] would take us on vacation. And she would take us different places. She did, you know, all the driving on vacation. And she would take one of our play sisters, our biggest play--oldest play sister with her as a companion. And we had some hilarious memories. Sometimes, I would go down to Cape May [New Jersey] with her. Cape May is on, is about thirty minutes south of Atlantic City [New Jersey]. It was where blacks were allowed to, to have beach resorts. Atlantic City, when I was growing up, you know, you might as well be in [Ku Klux] Klan headquarters. Wildwood [New Jersey] was too rich for our blood. So we're down in Cape May, all the way on the tip of, of the peninsula there. I'm smiling because I remember one trip she took us to see--and she would take us--she took us to see the Seven Great Wonders, the Seven Great Wonders of the World in Natural Bridge, Virginia. And we were riding through the Shenandoah Mountains. And the car started smoking. Well, what had happened, and we didn't know at the time, was my oldest play sister had pushed the lighter in to light a cigarette and it got stuck, 'cause they were talking. She wasn't paying attention. All this smoke starts pouring out from underneath the dashboard. Now, we're up in the Blue Ridge Mountains, Shenandoah Valley, where gas stations are thirty miles apart. She pulls over on the shoulder, opens up the, the hood, unscrews the--she said, "That man didn't put any water in here. I told him to put water in here, told him to check the water." She said, "Give me that Thermos, give me the Thermos." Took the Thermos, emptied the Thermos, still couldn't see any water. And she just said, "Well, let it cool. Maybe this water will cool it down and we can get to the gas station." So this nice guy pulls up behind us with his family. He has only a wife. They pulled up behind us. And it's me, Peggy, Mommy and LaVerne, my sister, LaVerne. And he said, "What's the problem?" She said, "That guy didn't put any water in this, in this radiator." He said, "Madam, that's, that's the engine you just poured water into" (laughter). So now--well, he was so kind and gracious. He drove her to the next exit and got five cans of oil and drove back to this exit, turn around and come back on this side to put the five--'cause he couldn't cross the highway, to empty the engine out completely of this water and oil mixture, and put the water--put the oil in. And that's when they found out what was causing the smoke was that the lighter had gotten stuck. It had nothing to do with the radiator or, or the engine overheating. We laugh about that to this day. But we had fun vacations. Story_ID: 15881 Speaker 1: As I said, my grandparents moved in with--her parents--when I was in junior high. So my mom [Mary Wright]--Daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] never taught us this kind of stuff. That's why I say he spoiled me. My mom taught us how to play pinochle, you know, cards. And--well, you couldn't play cards with Grandpa [Hamilton Henderson]. When my grandfather got to the house, then you're talking about my father being old school. No cards. That's, that's of the devil. So, I mean, Chinese checkers is all right. So we would say we were going to play Chinese checkers over to Peggy's house, meaning we're gonna play some cards, gonna play some pinochle (laughter). She taught us how to play pinochle and, you know, house games like that, real Chinese checkers, as well as checkers. Dad, Daddy--I never could beat my father at checkers. In fact, he taught me how to play giveaway. He said, "You do this so well, let me teach you how to play this game." And she was just, she was always a lot of fun. She could not cook. Now, she--in her older years, she's, she's gotten very good. But my sister [Mary LaVerne Wright] and I laughed one time. She, we hated to see Daddy go on vacation because we had to eat Mommy's cooking for a week or two, oh, God. She got out of the habit. I mean she really could cook when she was young, but when she got married, and Daddy was doing all the cooking, she got out of practice. And we were used to tasting when he cooked. She cooked one, one year, I'll never--Thanksgiving. She cooked a pie that the knife broke on. We took the pie, my sister and I, to the second floor and dropped it out the window to see if we could break it. And it cracked the sidewalk. I don't know what she did to that pie. Daddy couldn't tell what she, what she had done. But, but she--I mean, and she would take it, and take it all in stride with a joke and have--teach us to laugh at life rather. She used to say to us, you know, "God's got a sense of humor. You know that you're made in the image of God. You don't believe God has a sense of humor? Go look in the mirror (laughter). You'll see God has a sense of humor." Taught us not to take ourselves too seriously, but taught us to, to study and study hard. And she still, this, she just spent her last Christmas--her first Christmas without Dad and her last Christmas in her home. She moved into senior assisted living quarters on the third of this year [2002]. But-- Speaker 2: She's still pretty lucid? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Yeah. Every now and then, every now and then, she will do things that scare us, a sign of aging. She's eighty-six. She'll be eighty-seven in May. Like, when she was moving, packing things up, she called my wife [Ramah E. Wright], and she said, "You want this vase, you know, the vase, the one from Africa." I'm just using that as a for instance. And Ramah said, "Yes." She said, "Okay." She said, "Well the girls are coming, Janet and Jeri and they'll, they'll bring it back." Two days later, she'll call back. "Ramah, you want this vase from Africa?" She said, "Mom, you, you asked me that." "Oh, I did? Okay." Well, slips, slips like that make us, make us frightened, especially now that she's living alone in this senior assisted living place. But Dad didn't want her alone in that house. It's three stories. The washing machine was downstairs. She has two missing vertebrae and going up and down the steps is not, not good for her. She has cataracts. She cannot have surgery on the cataracts because she has a artificial valve and a pacemaker in her heart. A woman of deep, deep, deep faith, a woman that--the artificial valve reminded me of the morning that, that she was operated on for the valve replacement, I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. I went to have prayer with her, along with my dad. And we walked in the room, she said, "Here's my two favorite gentlemen." We talked for a few moments. And when the guy came with the gurney, we had prayer. And as she was rolling out, being rolled out of the room, she said two things. First, she stuck her head back over the gurney, she said, "You know if I don't make it, Janet has to stick with the family." Well, Janet was my first wife. And she's Janet--[daughters] Jeri and Janet's mom. And she's always been family. And my wife accepts her and loves her as family. But my mom wanted to make it clear. "Now, you understand, if I die, I don't want no stuff. Janet's gonna stick with the family." I said, "Yes, ma'am." She said, "All right. I'll see you gentlemen in the morning"--no, she said, "I'll see you gentlemen this afternoon. If not, I'll see you in the morning," meaning in heaven. But when I say great faith, in fact, she, she really brought me up short--recently. Well, not, not recently; I would say, twelve, fifteen years ago. I had a minister on my staff to die unexpected. It was suddenly. He had, he had, he had herniated disc surgery. No problem. I talked to him Sunday night--I saw him Sunday night. He was coming home Monday. I took my executive minister and her husband to the airport. And I had forgotten something, and I swung back by the house to pick it up. And my message light was flashing. Back in those days, it was before AT&T voice mail. You had the little machine. My message light was flashing. I played it. I said, "I just left here." I played it, and one of the secretaries here at the church was crying, and she said, "Reverend Ellis died, Reverend Ellis." I said, "What? What? No." I hung up, and I called the church. I said, "Don't play like that. That is nothing to be playing," and she kept crying. She said, "I'm not playing. His wife is waiting for you at the funeral home. She's not gonna let them move the body until you get there." So I went and did what I had to do. But he had nothing preplanned. And what he wanted he had told his wife, if I die, you know, if you're talking in general. But, but his brothers are all, are all ministers. And they did what they wanted to do, not what he wanted to do. And when I left the cemetery from his funeral, I called my mother and father. And I said, "Would you guys please write down now, today or as soon as you can, what you want at your funerals 'cause I don't want any stuff, you know, family mess. Please write it down." They wrote it down, had it notarized and sent it to me. But they not only had the preplanning, the living will and all that, they had the funeral program, scripture, songs, who they wanted to appear on the program, and had their pastor sign, giving his permission, and had me doing the eulogy for both of them. So I called home, I said, "Ma, I got your--." "Good. Put it in a safe place, put in a safe deposit box; take it to the bank somewhere." I said, "Mom, you've got me down doing, to do the eulogy." "Yeah." I said, "I can't do the eulogy." "What do you mean you can't do the eulogy?" I said, "I'm your son. You're my mama; that's Daddy. I can't, I can't preach your funeral." She said to me, "If you think death is the end of this thing, then, then what are you preaching on Sunday? Maybe you'd better be in some other profession. (Laughter) How are you a Christian minister, talking about death or the eesurrection of Jesus Christ, 'whosoever believe in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life' and you think death is the end of this thing. Then maybe you, maybe you ought to stop preaching" (laughter). I said, "I hadn't thought about it like that, Ma. Okay, you're right." So sure enough, I, I had fifteen years to get ready for doing Daddy's funeral in July [2001] 'cause I knew that that's what he'd asked for. And I was thinking today--I had a funeral today, and I was watching a family. It was their mother and I was thinking, will you have the same kind of faith and strength when it's your mother 'cause this is the last parent left. But she's, she's, she's a woman of faith. Story_ID: 15882 Speaker 1: I was in kindergarten and her mother taught me how to read in kindergarten. Everybody was so surprised when I got to kindergarten that I could read. But Grandma [Mamie Henderson] had taught me, and as I said, Grandma taught school and pushed all five of her kids to make sure they knew to have strong, solid foundation. And Mom [Mary Wright] was cut from that same cloth--is cut from that same cloth. And I'm sure she wouldn't mind your interviewing her. Speaker 2: And what about mathematics? How did--I mean you-- Speaker 1: You know, that's my worst subject too, don't you? Speaker 2: But it just seems, I mean why, why mathematics? Speaker 1: I don't have a clue. I don't have a clue. She's loves, she loved it. She loved it. She used to beat me over the head trying to get me to learn sine, cosine, tangent, cotangent and, and geometry, trigonometry and she, she knows that stuff cold. She knows it cold. Yeah, I think it's one of the great ironies of history that Ramah [E. Wright] my wife, is also a Math, Math teacher for 20 years at Westinghouse High School, with a major--with a master's in math also. I said, now, you've got these two mathematicians and you--any help my daughter needs in math, "Go see your Mama. I don't listen." I was telling my son [Nathan Wright], I said, you know, I said, when I--I messed up college twice. Twice. And I can tell you exactly where I messed up and how I messed up. So it's not a, I don't know what happened. I know exactly what happened. I got an F in zoology because the class was in 7:30 in the morning and I (laughter) didn't get up till 8:20, 8:30 to get me some breakfast and go to the my next class. That's how I got the F, all right. I said, in algebra trig, it was really trig, pre-calculus. I was sailing, had an A in the midterm. I was sailing, book had thirteen chapters. I was sailing through chapter ten. When I turned the page to chapter eleven, he had stopped English. It was now in Chinese. I didn't understand a thing to the end of the book, nothing. I went to him. I went to tutors. I couldn't understand any of it. And I flunked the final. Hadn't been for that A in mid-term, I wouldn't have gotten a C. That's how I messed up. I don't know how they have this fascination for math. It's, what, I guess about a generation ago they came up with something called the new math. I said, I, I haven't mastered the old math. So I'm not worried about trying to learn the new math. But no, I don't, I don't know why she got--maybe it's just that she had an aptitude for it. Story_ID: 15883 Speaker 1: Your parents [Jeremiah Wright, Sr. and Mary Wright], when they met, was it love at first sight? It seems--. Speaker 2: They, they said never it--put it that way. They, they knew each other for, well, the whole four years she was at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, for the whole four--. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause remember he was in school and-- Speaker 1: That's right. And then he--and once they graduated, they were married rather quickly, right afterwards, all right. Speaker 2: Right, right. They were courting, I know the last two years while he was in seminary and she was in undergrad, getting ready to graduate. Story_ID: 15884 Speaker 1: What was the decision about going to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? How did that come about? Speaker 2: He got called to a church there. In fact, as I said, he started in May. The marriage was in June [1938]. He [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] graduated in May and went to Grace Baptist Church of Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in May to work as the assistant pastor and become co-pastor so the old man was retiring, Reverend Hughes was retiring and turning the church over to him. So he went there with the intention of being the pastor, not knowing they were only gonna pay him six dollars a week--not sixty--six. So, he--but he went, he went to pastor, to be co-pastor and then pastor. Speaker 1: Do you think it took some getting used to Philadelphia? I mean one there, you know, from the (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Yeah, in some, in some way, but remember now, two things had happened. Aunt Hattie had moved up there. That's where she did hair. That's where she was a beautician and his brother, Creed. As I said, Creed had gone and gotten a good job in Philadelphia. So he had family there. So he had visited the city, but, but the City of Philadelphia--and again, it wasn't that, I would say it wasn't that, not that much difference. Remember in 1938, it's not the Philly of 2002. All the black community lives in a prescribed area so it's like a, still a small town. You're in a great big city, but you didn't have no commerce and traffic--other parts of the city, other ethnic groups did in 1938, '39 [1939], '40 [1940], '41 [1941]. Where you lived, there might be some whites who stayed in your neighborhood, but it was, again, like a small town. Where I grew up, where I grew up, my God, I mean, I, I grew up--105 West Sharpnack Street is when I started school. The church was 39 East Sharpnack Street. So that's one, two, three blocks from the church. There was a trolley that ran separating east from west. Now, I mean as a teenager, I can't, you know, I'm gonna try to sneak a cigarette in between the trolley, and half a block away from home. I've been seen by three neighbors who've already called the house. Everybody knew me. I mean they had permission, neighbors and church members. If they caught me wrong, not only to spank me, but I prayed while they're spanking they don't tell my mama [Mary Wright] 'cause I had another one coming. That kind of ethos where, you know, it's like a small town. Here, we're in Philly, but it's a small town. Everybody knows everybody in the African American community 'cause we're not that large a community and, and back in what? I was born in '41 [1941] so '45 [1945], '50 [1950], '55 [1955] they were no electric--electrical engineers, computer scientists, space majorists and, you're a preacher, teacher, undertaker, policeman. And high profile, Daddy, Daddy had--it's like, "Oh, you're Reverend Wright's son." Yes, yes, I am; can't even do wrong without getting caught. So there was a small kind of--so when he was there, when he first went there, I don't suspect it'd be that very different from Caroline County [Virignia]. I mean everybody knew everybody. And our church was small. When I grew up at Grace, our church was small. It didn't--it blew up as the kids say, while I was in the service. It got to the point that it had gotten big and had a--they built a new building, seats 900, with balcony--I mean educational building. But the Old Grace, we had one aisle, wasn't no side aisle. We had one aisle and maybe 200 people. It would seat 250 max, with chairs in that one aisle, one side of the aisle. But everybody knew everybody. So Grace Church wasn't no different than St. John Baptist Church in Caroline County where he grew up in terms of, and what, what it would be like. So I, I don't think that would have been that major of a culture shock for him. Story_ID: 15885 Speaker 1: The culture shock came later in life for him [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] in terms of--you know, my parents had never owned cable. In fact, I used to jokingly say I gave, I gave them a VCR 'cause we used to send them tapes of the service. I gave them a VCR several years ago. And it was one of the most expensive clocks I ever bought 'cause that's all it did was keep time. Sometimes you'd go there and it was just flashing, 'cause they didn't know how to stop and reset it. (Laughter) But I was the guest for the International Ministers Wives and Widows Association, one of my mother's [Mary Wright] groups. She's very active in several groups. That's one of her groups. And because I was a guest speaker, they put me in a suite in the same hotel where my parents were. And my dad came up to my room. And I had intended to go down to their room, go get some ice cream after the last session. Dad came up to my room. And I jumped up to answer the door without cutting the television off. And 'Def Comedy Jam' was on. My father has no cable. He had never seen 'Def Comedy Jam'. He stood there in shock, staring. He said, "The FCC [Federal Communications Commission] lets them say this on television?" And it was mild. I said, "That and worse, Dad, you know." "I don't understand"--'cause they had never seen that. That, that was a culture shock for, for them. My mom, my mom, when I was a teenager, there was a song called 'Cherry Pie'. You're too young to remember it. But here's how risqu it was, "Cherry, Cherry Pie, Cherry, Cherry Pie, Cherry, Cherry Pie, ooh, so good. Gimme, give me some, gimme, give me some." And on the third "gimme, gimme some," my mother was in my room, took the little thing and broke my record 'cause I couldn't have anything suggestive like that in her home. I got in trouble for singing, 'Work With Me Annie'. My sister [Mary LaVerne Wright] came home and told her. I was in a singing group, and we sang at her school. And she came home and told that I was over there singing, Work With Me Annie, "ooh, ooh, Annie, she so good to me". The sequel to that song was 'Annie Had a Baby, Can't Work No More'. That was an anathema to them, all right. They had never heard the songs my son--Hip Hop, Lil' Kim, M.C.--oh, God. No, no, no, no, no, no. They would have sure died. As a matter of fact, our baby, Jamila, our baby, Jamila busted Nathan out so badly several Christmases--I would say five or six Christmases ago, we all went home to Philadelphia on the 26th and were gonna stay through New Year's, cause we had New Year's Eve service and Christmas service. And I took, there were six of us--more than that, there were nine of us--Janet and Jasmine, her daughter, Jeri and Jay, yeah, and the five of us. That's nine. So they came to pick us up in two cars. And on the way--we were riding, I was in one car with one car with my mom and Jamila had her head over on grandmother's breast. And she said, "Daddy, can you rap"--there was a song on the radio. I turned. Now, my parents, when they drive, they've got the Christian station on. In fact, it's not even a Gospel Christian station, WNBI, the old hymns. So I turned to the, to doo wops, you know-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Tape change. Story_ID: 15886 Speaker 1: So some song was on the doo-wop station and it's one of those sort of mixed oldies but goodies like our V103 [Chicago, Illinois]. They don't play any hard hip-hop kind of thing. And so [daughter] Jamila says to me, "Daddy, can you rap?" I said, "Baby, rap is old. Daddy grew up rapping. In fact, we had a disc jockey here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Jocko, who came on the radio every night rapping. He'd come on and rap. And he'd say, 'Hey diddley yop, ho, this is the Jock, and I'm back on the scene with the record machine, saying ooh, papa dude and how do you do? Hey mama yo, hey, daddy.'" She said, "Daddy, that's not rapping. You're not cursing like my brother, Nathan." (Laughter) I said, "Oh, Jesus, oh, Jesus." So when we got out the car--he was in the other car. I said, "You've been busted, man." "What?" I said, "Jamila just told Grandma [Mary Wright] that you cuss when you rap." But they'd never heard that. They'd never heard that genre of music. Fortunately, Daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Jr.] died before he--he could hear the cars going by his house, boom doom boom, but he never heard the words. He never heard--and then, as I said, they don't have cable so they never saw BET [Black Entertainment Television]. They never saw MTV [Music Television], any of that, any of that. Just, just a, in a different, in a different, different world. Story_ID: 15887 Speaker 1: You have one sister, and she's one year older than you? Speaker 2: Sixteen months. Speaker 1: Okay, and her name? Speaker 2: Mary LaVerne. Speaker 1: Mary LaVerne. Now, can you tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up? Speaker 2: I guess the earliest memory was when I was sleeping in a crib. I remember I used to get out of my crib at night and get in bed with Mom [Mary Wright] and Dad [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.]. It was in the same room with them. And I got out of bed one night, and that image has been implanted in my memory forever. They were on their knees praying. And as a kid, you know, that hit me, we're not in church. We're not having meals; it's not a family devotion. You know, and prayer must be important for them to be doing this with nobody looking. And I can remember 'cause when I got in the bed, in their bed, I closed my eyes and tried to pretend like I was asleep 'cause, you know, they, they were gonna get back in bed and put me back in that crib and I'm trying, you know, (laughter) act like I'm asleep. But I never will forget that they were kneeling and praying. So however young that was, I was still sleeping in a crib. I think that's the early, my earliest memory. Story_ID: 15888 Speaker 1: You've talked a lot about your childhood, but what was it like in family life? You were, one, you're a minister's child, but what was family life sort of like and-- Speaker 2: We, as I said, Daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] cooked, and we ate together every day as a family. When you eat, dinner is not over, breakfast is not over, lunch is not over until the dishes are washed. You get up and do the dishes. You don't leave stuff in the sink. Outside of Dad's trip to Virginia and Mom's [Mary Wright] having to take us separately, we did everything else together. We went to church--Daddy took us, we--you go to school in the morning. You come home and do homework. You've got your thirty minutes of two shows. You can break it up, one before dinner and one after dinner or do a complete hour. Homework, reading, family, family games, checkers, Chinese checkers, dominos, cleaning, chores. As you got older, the chores got more labor intensive in terms of what was expected of you. I hated, I hated spring cleaning. I'd never seen curtains stretched. I didn't know what that meant. Why, and why you have to beat a rug and all that kind of--but my mother would have us doing that, helping with the cleaning. And then Sunday, well, Saturday night, we took the traditional Saturday night bath, getting ready for Sunday. And we'd get up Sunday. We'd go to Sunday school, go to church, come home and eat dinner. It was a family together. Then we'd have BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union] or BTU [Baptist Training Union] later, it was called, and night service. And you come back home for ice cream and dessert and you go to bed and get ready for school in the morning. And in the summer, we had vacation Bible school. My Dad taught vacation Bible school. He taught--and not just taught it, he taught wood shop. You had crafts, which is when I really became interested in photography cause I learned, I learned photography and how to develop and enlarge and all that in vacation Bible school. We had, we had--our church had sports. We played fast pitch. I can't get the people out here in Chicago [Illinois]--they don't even know what I'm talking about, fast pitch softball. Chicago has these great, big huge things they call a softball that you lob. We had fast pitch on the East Coast, and I was on the softball team, played Little League hardball and volleyball. Our church had a volleyball team. And you played other churches. There were competitions and socials and teas with other churches in the Germantown district [of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] all the time and a lot of fun activities for the kids. They had camp that we went to, which was a lot of fun. In addition to what you learned that made sense, you had a lot of fun like putting water in balloons and trying to hit the camp director without getting caught (laughter). And, as I said, and family, we'd--the family would go, we'd drive up to Boston [Massachusetts] to, to, to go on vacation together, up to where we vacationed together or to Cape May [New Jersey] together. Holidays, I used to hate Christmas, some Christmases when I was growing up because after--first of all, you couldn't open your presents until after service. We had sunrise service. Then we'd open our Christmas presents. Then we'd drive to see their mother and father, which is in Virginia. Now, my toys are in Philly. I mean I know what's in Virginia, some clothes. Good food, but clothes. Now, come on, you guys. And we'd be down there until time to, time to come home for watch meeting service. That's, just that, just a wholesome--I never saw my father hit my mother. He never raised his--never cursed her. They didn't have--I mean I was blessed to have that kind of family, family life. I was taught you do not hit women, just, just what I thought was a typical Christian family 'til I got away to school and I found out (laughter) about the rest of the world. Story_ID: 15889 Speaker 1: Reverend Wright, there was no, was there a rebellious part-- Speaker 2: Oh, for me? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, God, yes. Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Were you spoiled? Being the youngest son, was there any of that? Speaker 2: No, no, I wasn't, no I wasn't spoiled. As a matter of fact, I was, I stayed mad at my dad [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] for a long time, not knowing. He wouldn't let Uncle Shorty, I mentioned him, give me some six guns for Christmas. He wouldn't let me have guns, play with guns. That's--"All the other kids got guns." But no, I, he was not indulging me and giving me whatever I want, no. And we were, we were too poor for me to be spoiled. The rebellion started in my teen years, rebelliousness started in my teen years. As I said, part of it had to do with the reading and my not understanding a lot of stuff. And my thinking, as a teenager--like Paul says, when I was child, I thought as a child. I said, you're lying, you're just lying to me. You're, you know better than this. You, you've read the same--I'm reading the books that you read. I was sitting in church with that kind of attitude. But then as I was fifteen is when it really hit. And I was, I was--I started to tell you this a moment ago when I said the African American community [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was small. And Daddy was high profile. When I was fifteen, I got in trouble being rebellious. Two friends of mine and I were leaving church, walking home. And we passed this car with keys in it. And I said, "Somebody ought to teach this man a lesson." And they said, "Yeah, but who? Can't nobody drive." I said, "I can drive." "Oh, you can't drive." "Yes, I--watch! Come on." We got in the man's car and I drove off. And long story short, got arrested. They thought--we kept the car for a week. And (laughter) a lot of the kids in the neighborhood started saying, calling it my car. I said, "Oh, Jesus." So I'd park it like two blocks away, but everybody sees me and everybody knows. So I threw the car away, wiped all, wiped it clean of fingerprints and everything. And that's the end of car episode. The next night the doorbell rang while my sister [Mary LaVerne Wright] and I are doing dishes. And my mother [Mary Wright] comes back, and she says, "That was the police." My heart started racing. "Police, what do they want?" "Wanted to know if we owned some green, pink Pontiac around the corner." "Well, what'd you tell them?" "What do you mean what'd I tell him? Of course, we don't own a--the only car we got Daddy got it. And grandpa's car is out in front." Half hour later, the doorbell rings again. Buddy--that's the name--my name, my home, they, they call me Buddy at home. The nurses gave me the name Buddy. I was premature. And I stayed in the hospital, and the nurses gave me--"Buddy, come here." I went up there, and there're the cops in the living room. I said, "Oh, Jesus." They have in their hand the Bible belonging to Reginald McCoy, a member of Grace Baptist Church of Germantown, pastored by Reverend Jeremiah Wright. His name is on the front door. What's this Bible doing in the stolen car that they'd broken into? It had fallen down behind the seat. I didn't pull the seat out and look under the seat. I said, "You know, Reggie lost his bible a week ago. Maybe, maybe whoever was in that car found his bible" (laughter). So, the cops are writing down his address. And they take off. My mother was fussing. "Why you gonna tell me, are you telling the truth?" I jump on the phone. I'm calling Reggie. Calling and Reggie gets on the phone. I said, "Reggie, you remember you lost your Bible, when you lost your Bible last Sunday?" "I didn't lose my bible." "Yeah," I said, "Well whoever found your Bible last Sunday was in a stolen car because the cops found it in a stolen car, and they're on their way to your house." Now, I done set it up. All you've got to do is stick to the story. Fifteen minutes later, the cops are in my house with Reggie handcuffed (laughter), putting the handcuffs on me and taking us to jail. Okay. When they asked, Reggie told on everybody who was in the car. So they locked all of us up, the ones who were involved. And when we went to trial--they released us on the recognizance of our parents and we had good grades. The reason we got, didn't get any time is because of our grades in school. Honor roll, they put us on a year probation. But what scared me, and this again, when I was talking about the profile thing, the day we went to trial, when we got to the courtroom, all the prisoners or persons who were going on trial had to go with prisoners. And the parents went inside to wait for you. So I'm down there with these prisoners, some hardened, some innocent, some whatever. They line up alphabetically. I, my name is Wright, W, I'm the last thing in the line, right? McCoy is up there in the middle of the line. Billy Jones was up there with the J's. I'm back here in the W's. And there was one black sheriff at the end of the line. And as we started up the steps together, and he puts his arm around my shoulder, and he says, "Wright, Wright. What's your name?" I said, "Jeremiah Wright." "Aren't you Reverend Wright's son?" I said, "Yes, sir." And I didn't notice he was holding me back while the rest of the crowd was walking away from me. He's saying, "Your daddy is Reverend Wright, isn't he?" And I said, "Yeah." Now, they'd turned the corner and here I'm standing. He said, "Your daddy's on the Juvenile Detention Board." My father sat on the Juvenile--in fact, he was at the Juvenile Detention Board the night I was arrested. And I'm just happy he knows me father. He said, "Yeah." He grabbed my collar and threw me up against the wall and started punching me in the stomach and cussing. I cannot say what he said. But he said, "If I catch you down here again, I'm a beat the F, S-H-I out of you. Here, you're tearing the race down and your daddy's trying to do something good for our people," and he's beating me in the ribs and my--I was, oh, my God. I was scared to death. Then he started smiling, come on (laughter). He takes me in the courtroom, but I can't say this man--and every time I thought about doing something wrong, I said, "That fool is waiting on me down there." And he said, if he--if I came back, he was gonna kill me. He said, "I'm not, I'm not threatening you, I'm promising you." I said, oh, Jesus, Jesus. But, yeah, I mean why did you take car and then why you gonna keep it for a week? You know all the good your parents are trying to do. You know what your--in fact, my dad said that night something that really hurt in terms of waking me up. I got home, and I'm trying to be, you know, cute. I'm grown. I'm fifteen, you know. We're singing doo-wops in the lockup (laughter). So when I get home that night, my mother starts to, to beat me. Now, our spankings were with a razor strap, all right. She swung that razor strap at me and I grabbed it. You know, and she's like, she's gonna go berserk as she went running to get Daddy. And he said, "Leave him alone. He doesn't want to be a part of this family." And it's like, I, I don't not want to be a part of the family. That's not what I mean. You know, it's--I'm really confused now. I'd, I'm trying to cute. I want to show off to my friends I could drive. I said, "It's just going crazy now." I had, you know, that kind of rebelliousness. Story_ID: 15890 Speaker 1: The rebelliousness got worse, not as a teenager, but as a grown person and when I left the church. And I'll tell you what my mother [Mary Wright] said about that too. When I left the church, I, I was in the sit-ins. And like [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] wrote a book from the Birmingham [Alabama] jail addressing white Christian clergy who had told him to back off and slow down. These things take time. I saw Christians, white Christians who hated us. I saw what they were doing. I became very bitter. I saw black Christians who were hypocritical and I saw my roommate get put out of school--he was my roommate before he went into the graduate school, got put out of school, and he was just being honest. He was not doing anything. He had, the one, as I said, the one graduate school we had was in theology. And he had a girl who was gonna type, type his paper. So he had her in his room with his door wide open so everybody could see wasn't nothing going on, and showing what to do here and that's what this arrow means. And one of those holy ones saw her in there and reported him and they put him out of school. And, I said, you know, that's hypocritical. I--if this is what the black church is like, if this is what the Christian church is like, I'm supposed to be graduating, and going in, going into seminary next year. I can't do this. So I quit school and went in the service. I quit school my senior year and my parents--I was president of the, of the choir, (unclear) of the fraternity, president of the senior class. I quit school. My parents said, "Do you realize what you did? Do you know what you did?" "I, I'm going into the service." Went in the service, and while I was in the service, I was just, I got angrier and angrier. Vietnam [War], I was stationed with some guys, deep Southerners who were laughing at things on television as, as women were getting dragged across the street, with hoses and the dogs were biting and all that kind of stuff. And they were just, you know--I was really angry and left the church. I really did leave the church to, to the extent that, that 1966, yeah, 1966, summer of '66. I was twenty-five or about to be twenty-five I guess, that, that September. I was sitting on the church steps of a church in Rockville, Maryland, Mount Calvary Baptist Church with two of my partners who were stationed with me, one Saturday, warm Saturday, favorite time of the year, summer, drinking a fifth of Taylor port wine. And this old guy came up. He was sixty-three. I'm twenty-five, twenty-four. He's sixty-three years old, I found out later. And he got in the conversation with us. We were solving the problems of the world. You know, we're solving the race problem. We're solving Vietnam, we're solving it, you know. Taylor port wine will help you solve problems (laughter). So I offered the old guy some and he didn't want none. So I offered the guy here, and suddenly he, he said, "No, thanks. No thanks." More for me. I take another swig. And I offered Rudy some. He didn't want any. God, thirty minutes into the conversation, I find out this old guy is the pastor of this church whose steps we're sitting on. Now, they're from Rockville. They knew that. I didn't know he was the pastor. And I'm saying--but by this time, I'm halfway through the bottle, twenty-four going on twenty-five, hey. Let's get it on. Let's go. And I'm belligerent. I--they eased away within a few minutes, maybe forty minutes total they stayed. That man and I talked four hours that, four hours. And at the end of the time, he said to me, he says, "Wright, I hear you angry at white Christians. I hear you angry at white racism. I hear you angry with white supremacy. I hear you angry at black Uncle Tom Christians. I hear you angry with what things have been done to the church by people. I really don't hear you angry with the Lord or with the church. A matter of fact, I get the feeling from what the passion I'm hearing that you love the church very much and you're upset because of what has happened to it. So my question is, and I don't want you to answer me right away," he gave his card. He said, "It's not the wine. I know the wine's worn off, wine's been gone." He said, "I want you to think about this and answer me later on. If you love something as much as I think you love this church, where can you do the most good? On the outside of the church throwing stones at it or, in your case, shooting an 8 inch Howitzer at it, or on the inside, working to make it become what you think God meant for it to be. Think about that and answer me later. Just give me a call." So the next morning, I got up getting dressed for church. My wife says, "You're going where?" I said, "Church." "Yeah, right." "What's the B's name?" I'm like it' not, I'm, I'm--you ain't going to nobody's church 'cause I, I had stopped going to church. Now, of course, when you go home, you go to church (laughter). But I'm, I'm living in [Washington] D.C., I'm--so I went out, I went out, I went out to church critical, went out ready to tear the service up. I said, "I met this old guy yesterday. And he talks a pretty good rap. I want to see what his service is like." So I went out there prepared to tear it down. And I ended up, Julieanna, walking down the aisle crying. All day Saturday, every point I'd make, he would say, you're right, you're right. All day Sunday during his sermon, I found myself saying, you're right, you're right. And I had not intended to join church. I literally went there to tear it--I had pad and pen in hand and ended up joining church. And he asked me to stay for dinner, and then we became friends. And we came, we--I came back in the church. Now, my mother said, my mother said, I'll tell you, like I said, I'll tell you what she said about that five, six year hiatus in my life. I preached a series of sermons entitled, 'The Practice of Prayer'. And in the second part of that series, it was talking about how we pray for other people, intercessory prayer. And I pointed out that most of time, we do not pray properly when it comes to intercessory prayer. We, we say, here, God, take a memo. And we tell God, as if God doesn't know anything, all that's going in this person's life. We talk about, all about what's wrong, what they're doing wrong and what we want God to do now. And never pray, God, please take whatever this is they're living through as an entre to draw them closer to yourself and straighten out their lives, and have your world in your life. We don't play like that--pray like that. We, we just tell God, listen, straighten my child out. After--I preached it in front of my mother, I preached that series of sermons in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at a revival. And after service, my mother said to me, "Son, those were fine messages tonight, and I want to thank you. I'm thankful for several things. Number one, I'm thankful 'cause you've taught me the proper way to pray for somebody. I didn't know that. She said, but I'm also thankful I didn't know because when you were acting a fool, I just told God, keep your foot in his behind until he come back in the church. And I'm thankful that I did 'cause you're back (laughter) in the church." (Laughter) So, yeah, there was rebellion both as a teenager and as a young adult. Story_ID: 15891 Speaker 1: Reverend, I want to go back just a little bit more to the childhood. And I want to understand what type of child you were, what type of person, you know--. Speaker 2: Mischievous, mischievous. I had a lot of fun. I was, I was a good student, but I would finish my work early, and I would just try to make other people laugh. As a matter of fact, when, when my father [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] died [in 2001], over 200 members of our church went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for the funeral. And one of my, one of my, one of my young adults--now, I guess she's twenty-two, twenty-three, told something I did not remember. They made, they made several friendships at the funeral of persons I grew up with because, you know, they had 200--sixty of them flew and the rest were in buses and cars. And they spent time at the church eating. And they met one of the girls I was in elementary school with and have stayed in contact with her. And she said, "Margaret told me what you did when, when you all were in 6th grade." And I didn't remember that. So I said, what did I do? And it was this kind of mischievous thing. She said Margaret had braces put on her, and she was very self conscious. And to make her feel not so self conscious, you took a paper clip and put it up on your teeth and walked around her with the paper clip on. Now, I don't remember doing that. I really don't, but it was that kind of mischievous thing that I did. I remember, I remember one time my sister [Mary LaVerne Wright] helped me 'cause I told a lie at school. And the teacher was talking about Betsy Ross. And I had to be what, 5th grade, 4th grade. And she said Betsy Ross could fold material in such a way that with one snip of the scissors, she could make a five-point star. I said, "Aw, my sister can do that." She said, "She can?" I said, "Yeah." She wrote me a pass. She said, "Go get your sister." I said, "Oh, God." (Laughter) So I went upstairs. And I got LaVerne out of class. And I started crying. She said, "What's wrong?" I said "I just lied. I told them you could cut a, you could cut one, snip like Betsy Ross and make a five-point star. I'm sorry, I didn't mean it." LaVerne got downstairs. (Laughter) She cut up about twenty pieces of paper. She was like (laughter) "I used to be able to do it." (Laughter) But it was that kind of--and I had to open my mouth, aw, my sister can do that, that kind of, that kind of playfulness, which was not necessary. But it was, it was that kind of mischief. Story_ID: 15892 Speaker 1: What did you think of being when you were young? Did you--. Speaker 2: Well, I thought, I thought of being in the field of religion, but I wanted to teach seminary. I didn't want to pastor a church. I met, as you can well imagine, with my dad [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] having the kind of degrees and the books and things he had, I met Samuel DeWitt Proctor, President of Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]. And my uncle, my mother's brother, who got the Ph.D. in psychology was a dean of Virginia Union. And I saw myself teaching, teaching at the college, preferably the graduate school level, in seminary. That's what I wanted to do. As a matter of fact, my Aunt Pearl reminded me of that when Uncle Shorty died. We were in the family car coming back from the cemetery. And she said, "How's it going?" And I said something, half heartedly, like okay. She said, "That's an awful dry okay from a kid who told me that he wanted to teach seminary. You're teaching seminary and you're pastoring. You didn't sound excited at all." And I said, "I guess I'm not because I'd envisioned teaching at a black seminary." And living in Chicago [Illinois], there's no black seminary and most of our students are white. And by the time I educate them as to what the black experience is, the semester's over. I haven't even gotten to teach what I want to teach yet 'cause they don't know any of the language, any of the history, any of the culture. And I've got to bring them up to speed on that and now the semester is over. So I guess that--and that's frustrating, whereas, if I had a room full of black kids and I said, you know, somebody was shouting, they don't think somebody's yelling at the top of their voice. They know what shouting is. And I've got to explain, I've got to explain, well, why, why is the music this way? I've got to explain spirituals and common meter and gospel. And they're looking at me like what are you talking about, 'cause I'll say, like Philadelphia now, you know. You've got, you've got gospel music with (unclear) Stevens, but down south, you had, we had the, the old time Gospel coming out the holy--and what are talking--they know [Johannes] Brahms, [Ludwig van] Beethoven, [Pyotr Ilyich] Tchaikovsky, [Georg] Handel's 'Messiah'. They don't know what I'm--so by the time I explain all of that, before I can start talking about what I'm trying to talk about theologically, during that course, the course is over. And that was, that was, yeah, well, that is frustrating. It's, it's frustrating cause I'm not able to teach like I thought I'd be able to teach. I have a whole different world and culture to try to educate as to the African American experience. And, you know, that is frustrating. Story_ID: 15893 Speaker 1: The neighborhood you were born--I mean that you grew up in, Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], was it a transitional neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah, back then there were still whites. There were still whites, not-- Speaker 1: Was it mainly--was it called Germantown because it was mainly in a German neighborhood? Speaker 2: Oh, it was called Germantown 'cause the Germans, that's where the Germans lived when they settled, when they settled in, in Pennsylvania. Yeah, and by the time we moved to Sharpnack Street, it was in transition. There were still some white families there. We lived the second house from the corner. On that, other side of that street on that corner, the Robbendue (ph.) family, Larry was one of my classmates. I went to Central--or at my school. I was looking at elementary school picture in my mother's house. That's why you need to go interview her because you've got--she's got the pictures. That class was about 60 percent white. When I got to high school, it was overwhelmingly white. I went to Central High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. It was an all-boys school; and 2,200 of us, 2,000 Jews, 200 gentiles and of the gentiles, 60 black. So it was, yeah, there was exposure to, to whites and to, the Jewish population was overwhelming. As a matter of fact, the junior high I was going to which was Roosevelt, Theodore Roosevelt Junior High [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], was, the neighborhood was changing so much, getting so black, that they built a school for the Jewish kids so they wouldn't have to come there, further up in the Jewish community, which is now all black. But back in the, in the '50s [1950s], it was, it was heavily Jewish. But, yeah, it was, it was, it was mixed. Speaker 1: So did you have much exposure to the white community in that mixture? Speaker 2: Not so much elementary school. My dad's [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] closest friend in ministry was white, the pastor of Second Baptist Church in Germantown. We used to take our Christmas cards--pardon me, our Christmas letters to him because we knew Santa Claus was white, and we knew Reverend Hardwells (ph.) knew, as a White man, he knew Santa Claus. Didn't nobody black know Santa Claus 'cause we knew--yeah, so we'd take them to the White man, who would in turn give them to Daddy. And Daddy knew exactly what we wanted. But Reverend Hardwells and his family and the Robbendues are the families in the block. And the kids, my classmates in school, all the way up, as I said, we got in high school, it got overwhelming in that my senior prom was held on Shabbat and the food was Jewish, gefilte fish and matzoh balls and bagels. And my date got so angry with because I took her to a cheesesteak place to get me something to eat. I couldn't handle the food on my senior prom night. But, yeah, it was a lot of exposure to, to both the white community and the Jewish community, the Italian community also, Rhoda Ann Dichter (ph.) was a little Italian girl, her daddy owned the Hoagie Shop. She used to bring me hoagies once, once a day. Loved them. Story_ID: 15894 Speaker 1: Do you associate any sights, smells or sounds with growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Some that are hard to get here in the Midwest. There is a cuisine on the East Coast that is unheard of out here in the Midwest. I lived here three months before I could find out why I couldn't find my fish. And finally one guy in the grocery store said to me, "Oh, you mean saltwater fish." And I'm living on Lake Michigan, and I thinking that I grew up on butterfish, porgies and, and Norfolk's pots (ph.). And they never heard of that. It was--the smell of various cooking reminds me of home. Cheesesteaks, as I mentioned, my, my senior prom night, cheesesteaks and hoagies are not sold here, not the authentic ones. Those, those smells remind me, remind me of growing up. There's some old songs, old church songs that are not sung out here in the Midwest. When I heard them, I'm reminded both of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and of the country, being down in the country. But they didn't have a Hammond B3 organ and they didn't have the extra pianos and drums. And they just had the--you could feel the floor, floor vibrating as they sang those old songs. So when I hear songs like that, that reminds me of home. Reminds me of the gospel chorus rehearing in our house and what, what music to be like in the church where I grew up. So those sights--well, sounds really and smells. Not too many sights in the Midwest, in the Midwest. The Midwest is flat. I grew up with, with hills and mountains and places where you could ride your sled. And my daughters have never seen a sled. So, not so much sights out here, but the, the smells and those old sounds, those old church sounds. Story_ID: 15895 Speaker 1: Now, what song? Do you have any you could--? Speaker 2: Yeah, for instance, this type of, this type of common meter song (singing) "Guide me O, Thou great Jehovah. They don't sing that out here. And if I started that Sunday in church, people would look at me like, what? What is he doing? Now, they know the common meter, called the response, the minor mode, (singing) "I, I love the Lord, oh, Lord", but they, over east, some people know that, but they don't that, that, the first type I just did. Old Charles Tenley (ph.), Tenley song, the (singing) "We are often tossed and driven on the restless sea"--I could feel the floor vibrating now. And we, or, 'We Understand It Better By and By'. And sometimes when Jeffrey would just cut organ, and we're doing it a capella and the congregation (singing) 'By and by', the memory of that, that takes me right back home, right back home, yeah, yeah. Every now and then I'll go in a house, a member's home and they'll have the hot comb on the stove. And that smell takes me back to Aunt Hattie. It takes me back to Aunt Hattie. In fact, I was looking for a comb the other day at the house. And I went in Jamila [Wright]'s drawer 'cause she uses the fine tooth small--and I found a hot comb in there. And that reminded me of Aunt Hattie. She'd put it right up there on that, on that stove. So those, things like that remind me, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, your oratorical skills, where were they developed? Were they developed? Speaker 2: I guess in junior high. Well, again, both parents did public speaking. And most people tell me I, I preach like my mother [Mary Wright] more so than my father [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.]. But we used to have, we used to have speech contests, oratorical speech contests. And as a teenager, actually when I started getting involved in those where the judges would, would rate you and you were competing against other kids your age in those--remember I said we had district things, competition between churches. They weren't all athletics. Some of them were academic. And one of the, one of the competitions we had were the oratorical contests, they called them, where we're going up against kids from Mount Zion and kids from James Methodist Church, Bethel. But I guess that's where, that's where they started being developed in, in high school, junior high, high school. Speaker 1: And music? Speaker 2: Oh, music, God. From kindergarten (laughter). I started taking piano lessons in kindergarten and took--until 11th grade. Now, I never, unfortunately, I never studied like I should have or practiced like I should have. And my music teacher was very nice. She understood. You know, she could tell I wasn't practicing. So one day about 4th or 5th grade, she just said to me--I mean I, I excelled rapidly from kindergarten through 4th. Around 5th grade, she said, "Why aren't you practicing? Why you wasting your parents' money like this?: And I started crying. She said, "What's wrong?" I said, "My friends are all teasing me." Now, it was not until I got to college that I met my first male musician who was not gay. And I was raised in a rabidly homophobic culture. And all my friends were teasing me, "You got to play the piano". You know, they were calling me gay 'cause I was--so I, I've been playing football. I'd do anything to show that I'm not gay, all right. And I, I wasn't practicing. So she said to me, she said, "Well, I'll tell you what. You must learn your recital piece. You cannot embarrass your parents. So we'll make a pact. And every year you learn your recital piece, I won't tell you them that you're not"--'cause my left hand today, to this day is not as developed as it should be 'cause I just, I just, I stopped practicing. And, and my sister [Mary LaVerne Wright], God, she's a, she retired as a pipe organist for a church. My last recital piece was [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart's 'Polonaise in A'. Then I was playing football, didn't have time for the choir, I mean for, for the piano lessons any more. Choir, I've been choirs all my life, all--Philadelphia high school, choir at Philadelphia High School Orchestra. When I went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], I was a soloist in the college choir. And, and started playing trombone, I guess somewhere around 4th grade, and played trombone from 4th grade all the way through the [U.S.] Marine Corps. I was in the Second Marine Corps Division Band, both jazz band and marching band. I loved--I, I didn't hear, I never heard a Hammond organ. We had at our church--remember I told you, it was a little small church on the East Coast, and we had one of them pipe organs where you've got to pump the thing up until it gets enough wind in it, and then you can play (laughter). Well, I was a sophomore in college, I think I was sophomore when I heard my first Hammond B3 organ, no. I was a freshman, I was freshman because it was here in 1959--I went to college January '59. And that fall, I met Robert Wooten, a musician at Beth Eden Baptist Church here [Chicago, Illinois]. Our choir sang at his church. And he played the Hammond during the offering, during the intermission. I'd never heard that sound before. As it turns out, Robert and I got to be close friends across the years. And he is my oldest daughter's godfather. His wife is her godmother. Well, Robert--all I learned about the organ, I learned watching him. I can play the Hammond, but I learned to play watching him. He'd never give me a lesson, never. And I asked him, I would say, what, ten, fifteen years into my living here in Chicago. And I moved back here. "Why is it you will not teach me organ lessons, give me organ lessons?" He said, "Because I value the friendship too much." I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "I can see us fighting now 'cause I'm trying to get you to do something, and you're gonna tell me why you can do it your way. No. No, I'm not having that." So I would just sit and watch him. I would sit on the organ next to him and watch, watch the different registrations he would, watch what he did with his feet. And all I learned about the Hammond organ, I learned watching him play it, him play it. But I had drum lessons in elementary school. In fact, I was teasing my grandson the other day who plays the drums. I said, "You don't know what a paradiddle is?" And he didn't. I said, "Man, we learned pardiddles in elementary school." And I started doing paradiddles, single, double and triple paradiddles. And his mother knew 'cause she learned in tap dancing. But here he is in 10th grade, and he's never learned paradiddles. But I had drum lessons, trombone lessons, piano lessons. But I never had, never had organ lessons. When I got into the service, as I mentioned, I was in the Second Marine Division Band. My bunkmate, the guy I slept with two years at Camp Lejeune [North Carolina], is John B. Williams. Now, most people know him from the Arsenio Hall, the bald-headed bassist, who would always make the poetry. But he's Nancy Williams' bassist. He's was a professional jazz musician. And he taught me jazz. And he also taught me congas and bongos while I was, while I was stationed with him, and--at, at Camp Lejeune; never had formal lessons on those. I just learned those from, from J. B. teaching. But I grew up in a singing, musical family. Aunt Pearl, who I mentioned, my sister who went to Knoxville [College, Tennessee], when I went college--and I was in the college choir, of course, the church in walking distance from the college campus at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] was Moore Street Baptist Church. She was their church organist there for fifty years, for fifty years. The choir rehearsing at my house, so I was surrounded with music all my life. And then when I got out of the service and went back to--to school, I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. I transferred to Howard University because I'd been stationed four of the six years in D.C., and by this time, I'm married with two children, and I didn't have the money to move back to Richmond, Virginia to finish up my undergraduate work. So, and I figured they were gonna make me take something over anyway. It'd been six years. So I transferred to Howard and finished my undergraduate there. And immediately went into graduate school and started working on spirituals under Dr. John LaVelle. I was his graduate assistant and started working on the treatment of biblical passages in the scripture; what, what Africans did with biblical passages in the creation of the African American spirituals. And it was also there that, in that research, I got a whole new world opened up for me in terms of our music in learning more and more about what was, what was going on in the African world that created those songs, and not just those songs, but the wide, fold spectrum of African songs, song in the Americas, North America, Central America and South America. So that, that fascination with music really took off when I got back to, back into college. Story_ID: 15896 Speaker 1: Now, we were talking about Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], and I was, you know, we were saying, you know, I was saying, was it anticipated that you would go there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you said, well, not really. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: And you explained. But when you got there, you know, your, your uncle, you said your uncle was the-- Speaker 2: Was the dean. Speaker 1: What was it, I mean, what was that whole experience like for you? And you were, you had already--had you announced that you wanted to study-- Speaker 2: Ministry? Yeah. Speaker 1: Ministry. Speaker 2: That, my freshman year, I, I had had one opportunity speak at twelve in one of those youth things. And, and I did a Maundy Thursday meditation, but it was, it was that, that May that I, I announced that I was gonna--I preached my trial sermon that May, May of '59 [1959]. I went to Union in January and preached my trial sermon that May. And it was very strange. It was, it was good being around the ministers. Remember the only graduate school they had was, was for, for persons studying for ministry and in the college choir, there were graduate students that were ministers in the college choir. So we sang with, with ministers and were affiliated with them. You ate with them. Their dormitory, you know, was like a stone's throw from my dormitory. But it was also, it was also culture shock. As I said, my daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] didn't drink. I found out ministers drink. (Laughter) My daddy didn't smoke. I--he'd smoke a cigar. I found out these guys smoked cigars, pipes, cigarettes, reefer. My dad didn't cuss, you know, and these guys I was exposed to were very different. And so that, I was in that culture. You know, I didn't have anything to drink. I had one Tom Collins in, on my senior, in my senior year. I think it was, wasn't even the senior prom night--it might have been the senior prom night, somewhere in my senior year, told my big sister. She went straight and told my parents. But that's all I'd had. Shoot, I got away to college and it was like, you know, you say you're gonna be a minister. And here's what these ministers do. That's not what your daddy does, and it was a very, very strange time in terms of clashing beliefs and lifestyles. Grades were fine, I remember, except for that F in zoology cause I wouldn't get out of bed. I was on the dean's list, all A's and B's, until I got the C in, in trig, my junior year. Fraternity, pledging the fraternity was not crazy, wild like it had become across the years. It was fun. As I look back, it was scary in that we had, in '59, we had veterans from the Korean War going to school on the G. I. Bill. They were older guys, and they played a lot of psych games on us. They didn't do a whole lot of physical beating and all that kind of stuff, but they messed with our minds, and did stuff to us like make us stay up all night studying, while they took turns sleeping (laughter), and making sure that--the guy watching us, that we couldn't fall asleep. So that, there was the fraternity, and I wanted--the fraternity fooled some of my classmates. All my life, I wanted to be a Q [Omega Phi Psi fraternity member] because my daddy was a Q. I grew up looking at the Q shield in his study. And I was determined when I got to school, I was gonna be Q like my daddy. Now, my roommate was the pole mark of Kappa Alpha Phi, my guys in the choir, my friends were Alpha's [Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity]. And so when I said, I was going to Q, they were, you what? You know, but it wasn't because of the, of the men who were there that I was going Q. It was because my--I wanted to be one and as far as I can remember, I wanted to be, to be an Omega. So then there was a fraternity experience. There was the different kinds of, the liberal Christian, as opposed to my daddy's strict, country upbringing Christianity. There were things I was learning in class, humanities, religion, ethics, world civilizations. There were, there was a fun part, there was a girl part. There was a being in love part. But you, now, interestingly enough, Virginia Union was a church school. Now, back in those days, it was nothing like these schools today where you can just go in the girls' dorm and all that kind of stuff. The girls had to be, freshmen had to be in the dorm by 9:00. sophomores, juniors and seniors had to be in by 10:00 in the dormitory, all right. Wasn't no staying out all night and all that kind of stuff like there is today. So it was still a church school with church ethos. We had chapel. You had to go to chapel. You had to go to church. That too was strange for me because I knew church in Virginia based on my grandparents, both sides' churches. So I think when I'm going to church, I'm gonna hear some good, down church, country music, right. I walk into chapel at Virginia Union, and I hear what the white missionaries have taught, you know, in the college choir. (Singing) "Breathe on me breath of God" I say, no, no, no, I want to hear "Bye and Bye". When we gonna do that? Ain't none of that because gospel music was not allowed on the black college campus until the 1960s, '68 [1968] as a matter of fact. So we sang in the college choir. We sang anthems and spirituals. And you would get put out of the choir if a prof caught you singing gospel music. Like I said, when I heard that Hammond B3 here, I'd never heard one like that before. And then the second time I heard one, we were like kids at a candy store with our noses and hands pressed up against the glass. We went to Detroit, Michigan to C. L. Franklin's church. And they'd never heard any, you know, "Glorious, everlasting", you know, "How lovely are thy dwelling places". We did the first ever concert with just anthems. So we're in intermission, waiting for the second half which all gonna be spirituals, (singing) "Every time I feel the spirit, moving in my heart, I will pray, here." While we're ready to do our second half, C. L. lifts a offering. And he raised more money, incidentally, for us, for Virginia Union, than all them other churches combined. "I'm a start off with a hundred dollars. I need ten people to get in line with me." Twenty of them stood up. While he's lifting this offering, the girl starts playing the Hammond B3 and Aretha starts singing. And folks started shouting, and we didn't want to go back out there and sing. That old dead music we--tired music we got. They threw down. They carried one lady out stiff as a board. I said, God, I never, I had never experienced that. Most, most of my classmates had never experienced that. But that was, that was a strange experience. It was fun experience. It was learning--some of the professionals were absolutely brilliant, and I had, I had never been exposed to that kind of, to that kind of black excellence. I mean Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], most of my teachers were white. And, and to meet Ph.D's in different disciplines and to meet pastors with doctorates who were teaching in seminary and pastoring was like, you know, I've arrived. I'm in heaven. Of course, there's this jarring thing with, with the hypocrisy, the sit-ins. So it was, it was a combination, a potpourri of experiences that was, that was disorienting in some ways and in other ways very grounding; a lot of fun, lot of fun. Story_ID: 15897 Speaker 1: I keep thinking of you in your father's [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] study reading and I'm wondering if, what, the things that you read, you know, when you were in your teen, did that--how did that compare with the things that you were being taught, you know, there? Speaker 2: The--I asked that Daddy, later on about this, when I got, when I got out of service and got back in school and ended up at University of Chicago Divinity School [Chicago, Illinois], I was asking him, how do you handle the, the disjuncture. For instance, minor things. I grew up in the old--like you did, the old King James Bible. In the old King James Bible, it says, 'Paul's Letter to the Hebrews'. Biblical scholars have known for centuries, Paul didn't write that letter. When you look at modern translations, they've taken that out (laughter). And it just says, the 'Epistle to the Hebrews', all right. But I'm saying, y'all done taught me this is Paul's--because I'm reading super scripture in the bible. But the books I'm reading here said Paul didn't write it; one of his students or somebody influenced heavily by his teaching. All my life, let me ask you this question, what, what sea did Moses lead the children to, from slavery to freedom? What sea was it? Speaker 1: It was--I should know. Speaker 2: Everybody says the Red Sea. Speaker 1: Right, the Red Sea, right. Speaker 2: When you look at the King James, 17th Century translation, it has R-E, with a line over it, D. The line is 17th Century annotation for how you pronounce 'reed'. It's a long E. It's the Reed Sea. It is the Sea of Reeds he led them through. And I'm saying, nobody ever told me that. Why they keep saying Red Sea? You need to tell the people the truth. It's not the Red Sea. It's the Sea of Reeds. And when you look at the map, and I'm here--you got Geology, right? Said, get a map. And you go look at the map. Well, here's the Red Sea over here. The Red Sea is not between Egypt and Canaan. How in the world did it leading--I'm really confused. But nobody explained, you know, something because look at the, look--it's like Chaucer, in middle English, it's one language. Seventeenth Century English, nobody speaks any more. Thou dust not say to thy children, hast thou made thine bed? (Laughter) We don't talk like that. And we don't print certain things any way--that way any more either, like 'reed'. And when we want to Reed, put a long line over the "e" to show us the "e" sound and not a "eh" sound. But here I am reading, this is Red, this is not the Red Sea. And every sermon I'd hear somebody say, he led--he got down to the Red Sea. I'd say, you're lying. You're just lying to these people. (Laughter) You know, that was causing, that was causing, causing problems also. Speaker 1: Were you questioning? Speaker 2: I did, yeah, every--yeah, I did. I always felt, when it came to Dad, it was like, I'm bothering him. But I would ask him, as I say, I finally, when I got grown, I asked him point blank, how do you do that? And he helped me understand, understand the difference between biblical studies at that academic level and a book of faith in terms of people's faith story and faith journey, and how you handle the difference between the two as a clergy person. But, yeah, I, I would question and sometimes, I wouldn't understand the answer. I wouldn't understand the answer. Speaker 1: Did you enjoy Biblical studies? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Yep. Story_ID: 15898 Speaker 1: And then where did you drop out, were you--oh, senior year-- Speaker 2: It was my senior year. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. So that was 1961? Speaker 2: '61, '61. Speaker 1: Okay, you know, I thought it was interesting. That's the year that Trinity [United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] was formed too. And I thought it was such a coincidence. So you, so you, you know, you dropped out there, went into the service. I want to ask you what experience--you went to, did you actually go to Vietnam? That's what I wanted to ask? Speaker 2: No, no, it was not in Vietnam. Speaker 1: But it was during that time. Okay, you were stationed-- Speaker 2: I was in, I was in the Cuban [Missile] Crisis, yeah, that was '62 [1962], yeah. Yep, yeah, I went in--you were gonna ask a question though. Speaker 1: But I was asking what that experience was, you know, what things do you think you got out of that experience, you know, because you learned different--you were playing, you learned the drums. What did you say, you know, you-- Speaker 2: Congos and bongos. Speaker 1: Congos and things, okay, but I'm--. Speaker 2: I learned like, I learned, unfortunately, I learned what--I try to tell all of my young kids today who just are determined to go into the military. And I say, do you know you're black, 'cause that's what the service is gonna teach you. I was in at a very bad time and a very good time, I guess because the Civil Rights Movement was still going on. It was in full tilt and the Black Consciousness Movement was in and Vietnam. And the Vietnamese, you know, were saying things like this, and sending in flying to our, to our people. And by the time I got to Bethesda [Maryland], a lot of the guys who had been injured in 'Nam were at Bethesda Hospital. And here lies a black man, fighting for the white man, against the yellow man, when the white man stole country in which the black man lives from the red man. And, and the [Viet] Cong were asking black troops, why are you fighting? You can't live, you can't live next to the brother you're fighting next to when you get home, all right. And that, that jarring disjuncture. Here you are swearing to defend this flag and this country that has put your people where they are, was like, oh, what have I done? What have I done? And they were--the brash racism I ran into in the [U.S.] Marine Corps was like, was life changing, life changing. I ended up in the [U.S.] Navy as a result because of the racism. As a matter of fact, I had, I applied for a school called NESEP, Naval Expedition and Scientific Experimental Program, where the, the military would send you to school for, for four years in a science major, as, or any major in science. And then you give them, you give them four years, all right. So I figured, you know what? I've got three and a half years. While I'm in school for electives, I can pick up my degree that I've got working. I can get this four-year science, that's psychology. I can do the psychology major, psych major and they'll count the time that you've served. By this time, I've served two years. I'll only owe them two more years. Mellow. I applied for the thing--I'm at Camp Lejeune [North Carolina], I was stationed at Camp Lejeune. And remember, I went to Paris Island, South Carolina first, you know. I had heard so many niggers--I was called so many niggers that sixteen weeks, you know, it was like I was determined I was not gonna smile on my picture. And you'll see them, oh, I've shown you already, the picture where I graduated from boot camp. I've got this big broad grin on my face. And I'll tell you why when we're not on camera, but I was determined I was not gonna smile for that picture. I'm gonna be a hard Marine. And when we stood there in lines, the guards were about twenty-five yards away from us with the photographer. I tried to remember every time I'd been called nigger so I could get this hard look on my face. I was so mad. And the man tricked me and I smiled. But I left Paris Island and went to combat training at Montford Point [North Carolina]. Now, Montford Point has its own history. Montford Point used to be called 'Monkey Point'. That's where they made black Marines go before [President Harry S.] Truman desegregated the, the troops. Blacks were, black Marines could not go mainside, Camp Lejeune. They had to go to Montford Point. That's where they did combat training. After Montford Point, I was stationed at Camp Lejeune. And while at Camp Lejeune I applied for NESEP Program. It was a year-long process. I applied in January or February, and the first cut off was, was like spring. The second cut-off was the summer and by September, it was down to five of us. We had made it. And they told us, they said, well the next thing you have--all you have left is an interview which is, I mean you're home free, you're in. The interview, you've got to go squared away with your uniform and they see how you dot your I's and cross your T's and do you sound like a gentleman and a, a scholar, or you could sound stupid, yo. So if you pass the interview, just be on your best P's and Q's, you've got it. You're in. Mellow. That's September. Third, third Monday in October, I was coming off liberty and like a young, crazy serviceman, a car full of guys, we're trying to get back in time for roll call. And the line of traffic stops. It stops like three miles from the front gate, creeping. And I said, "We're in trouble, man, we're not gonna make it. Look what time it is. We're not gonna make roll call. We're not gonna make roll call." When we got within a hundred yards of the front gate, we saw the MP's [military police] were stopping every car, checking what I thought were ID's-- Story_ID: 15899 Speaker 1: We found out there was the Cuban Missile Crisis that had started that day. And they weren't checking ID's. They were checking non-military personnel, pulling them out of the car. Nobody except the military were allowed on--they were sending cattle cars out with the guys with loaded ammo to get on the ships to go down to Cuba that day. [President John F.] Kennedy went on the radio, television that night and explained what was going on. Well, I was--because I was headquarters, Company Headquarters Battalion, we only moved when the general moves. So when the general got back, we were on stand-by, all brown baggers, married persons had--had Cinderella leave, liberty. They had to be back on base at midnight. So I kept going down the company trying to find out about my NESEP [Naval Expedition and Scientific Experimental Program] thing. And they kept saying it hadn't come in yet. It hadn't come in yet. Don't you know we're on stand by? Don't you know the country's at--um-hum, um-hum. So I believed the man. The first Friday in January, first Friday in January, the newspaper comes out, the base paper--there're 10,000 people stationed at [Camp] Lejeune [North Carolina]. It's a city. Here are four white boys' pictures, had been accepted at NESEP. I never got notified about the interview. And I went back down to the company. He--did I say that? I don't remember saying that. I was so angry and hurt that I was--our liberty was Friday. I got liberty, and I was driving up to Richmond [Virginia] where the girls' mother was in school. And Chief Rogers was with me, a Navy chief. I was crying and speeding. I mean eighty, eighty-five miles an hour. This was long before the speed limit was seventy and in parts of the country, it was fifty-five. And he kept trying to get me to slow down. I just didn't care. And he said, "You know the Marine Corps is racist. You knew that. I mean this is not your first experience. Why, why don't you just pick a good Navy school and do something worthwhile with the time you've got left to do." I said, what Navy--I can't--"How can I get in a Navy School?" He said, "Well, the same thing I just said with you." He said, "Well, the Navy is a part of the Marine Corps. All you've got to do is apply and transfer, get a good school and do something constructive. Forget about this NESEP stuff, the racism stuff. Just do something positive with your life." And I started, "Well, what schools are there?" I didn't--he started explaining to me the different options. "We'll talk about it more when we get back Monday." Monday, we came back. I went over to his barracks, and he showed me the options for schools. And the one that interested me the most was the Cardiopulmonary Technician School, a fifty-two week school at Bethesda [Maryland]. So I applied for it. Now, that's January. February, March, April, he says to me. "You changed your mind, huh?" I said, "Changed my mind about what?" "The Navy school", 'cause he lived in Richmond, and I'm driving up every weekend to see my wife to be. And I said, "I didn't change my mind." He says, "Well, it doesn't take this long." It didn't hit me. The same guy that lied to me is the guy I had to hand this transfer application to school for. I've got some savvy about me now, okay. Okay, got back Monday. And I told Gil, who worked in his office, I said, "Gil, I need you to go to Sergeant Williams's file and CO's inbox and see if my transfer is there. He said, "Man, you can't do"--I said, "Wait till he goes to lunch." "You're gonna get me in trouble." I said, "Please, I'm just asking. Wait 'til he's out, when he goes to chow, look for me." And when he left, he came, he said, "It has never left the office." I said, "Would you please Xerox it." He said, "Man, I can't." I said, "Please, Xerox it for me." So he Xeroxed it. And at liberty that, that's when I went over to, back over to Chief Williams'--Chief Rogers' barracks. I said, you know, "Why I haven't heard anything?" It hadn't gone anywhere. He went to the division chief who went to the general, who called the man and me in. And he said, "I want this back in my office in the morning with all the endorsements." When the thing came back through end of, well, first of April, first, first of May. And that same man put me on mess duty from then until I got out of there. Now, you're supposed to a week, max, two weeks of chow--mess duty in the chow hall. He had me there until June 29th, June 27th, really, 'cause my sister [Mary LaVerne Wright] got married on June 29th. And I had made up my mind I was going AWOL [absent without leave] to her wedding 'cause he wouldn't give me leave to go to the wedding. But the transfer came through from the Secretary of State on the 27th. And I, I went to the wedding, my sister's wedding and then transferred, had to go to Great Lakes [Naval Training Center, Illinois] first, and go to basic hospital, basic hospital corps school training, and then to Bethesda for fifty-two weeks. And that's where I got my presidential commendations. I operated on [President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson, both surgeries that he had, as a cardiopulmonary technician. And that's how I ended up in [Washington] D.C. in the, and, and the learning experience. I mean the, I ran into it again, as I, as I said, throughout six years, with the constant message I kept hearing, you know, I don't care how smart you are. I don't care, you're still black. And now, remember what's going on in the world too. I mean 'Nam is going on, but [Eugene] 'Bull' Connor, hoses, German Shepherds. And the guys I'm stationed with, I had one guy who used to pick at me all the time. Now, we'd be watching the evening news, and when a hose would knock a woman down, he'd start laughing. And, you know, at that point, I had to weigh, do you mess up your career? Do you get court martialed? Do you go to jail over something stupid or just sit here and take it 'cause you are in this man's military. And I started counting days in terms of becoming the short time, how long it was gonna take me to get out. It was in that process, as I said, '66 [1966], I'm sitting on the steps, solving these problems of the race and, and the world, when I met Reverend [Tyrone] Brooks. Story_ID: 15900 Speaker 1: You decide, then that's when you also went to, you know, you start-- Speaker 2: Right, I got out, I got out of the service June 16th and started summer school June 19th and finished--they, they took something like thirty-five hours from me because you have to fulfill a residency requirement to get a degree from a school. You don't do three and a half years somewhere else, come in here and take fifteen hours and say, well, I finished Harvard. (Laughter) I don't think so. So they took all those hours away, and I went that summer and a full year, and I got the bachelor of arts and went straight into summer school and did a master's with John LaVelle in music and the treatment of Biblical passage in the African American spirituals, and went from there straight--well, I taught that summer at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. And from there, that--after summer school was over, to the University of Chicago Divinity School [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Well, what made you choose that? Was it because you wanted to get, you know-- Speaker 2: Divinity School? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes, like I said, I wanted to teach. Speaker 1: You wanted to teach. Speaker 2: And I had--I wanted to teach, and I wanted to continue the work I'd started under LaVelle. I read in my graduate school experience at Howard, I read a little interesting book entitled, 'The Gospel According to Peanuts'. Now, 'Peanuts' was one of my favorite cartoon characters back in those years. And what this guy had done was look at the theological implications in the cartoon 'Peanuts', like when Lucy would say, "Good grief". And he would talk about how, how is grief good. And he'd picked several, several cartoons and showed that there were theological themes in there. And he interviewed [Charles] Schultz, the artist who, who concurred with him that, that's what he was trying to say; that things don't always work out. Like he went, and the little boy's gonna kick the, kick the football and Lucy would alway moving it. And he always ends up on his back. The other little fellow Schroeder, who walked around with a cloud over his head, gloom and doom following. Somebody needed a blanket, that there are theological themes in these, in these different cartoon characters. And then the message is that Schultz--I said, now, listen, if they will let somebody--and it was this Ph.D. dissertation at the University of Chicago Divinity School, which he didn't have published. I said--and it was in the field of theology and literature, I said, if they'll let this man do this on 'Peanuts', I know they're gonna let me do this on the spirituals because I've only scratched the surface here with where I am at the master's level. And what I'm learning and all these other things, I'm, I've got to go back and read and want to read, they'll let--so I applied to the University of Chicago Divinity School to the theology and literature department to continue that work there to prepare myself to be a professor and to teach seminary. Story_ID: 15901 Speaker 1: And it was while I was in seminary--well, the first thing, I got a little part-time job. Let's go back to [Robert] Wooten, I mentioned Wooten who is my oldest daughter's godfather. He was the Minister of Music at, at that church [Beth Eden Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]. So he said, "I can get you a job at my church." So he talked to his pastor. The pastor hired me as assistant pastor there. And the pay was pitiful so I had to get three or four other jobs to put--keep groceries on the table while going to school. And while working as the youth minister at that church, I was convicted, that where I was really needed was in the church and not in the classroom. Now, remember I grew up on the East Coast. On the East Coast, it was understood, you're gonna be a minister. You're going to four years of college, four years of seminary, minimum, all right. On the East Coast, there's a strong--in fact, the only black seminaries accredited then, back then were Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia]--Howard University [Washington, D.C.], ITC, Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta [Georgia]. Now, Shaw [University, Durham, North Carolina] and Paine [College, Augusta, Georgia] had been accredited. But back then it was those three. And also there was this, just we had black history in my month--month at our church. We studied, I mean Carter G. Woodson. We knew, we knew Paul Laurence Dunbar. We, I used to go those cheers, hear the ladies, "Lies, lies, bless the Lord, don't you know the day's abroad? If you don't grow up little scamp, there's gonna be trouble", I grew up immersed in black literature. Sterling Brown and Arthur Davis taught my parents. So I knew the Harlem Renaissance. Zora Neale Hurstson, I, I come out here--first of all, the clergy are not trained. Secondly, the kids didn't know nothing. The kids thought black history began with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. And the kids in the church were leaning away from the church 'cause a lot of preachers were preaching against the naturals and all this black stuff, we're Negroes, you know, capital N. And I, I started working with the young kids trying to--they never heard of Henry McNeal Turner, right? They, they had never heard of Richard Allen, Absalom Jones. They, you're talking about African Methodist [Episcopal], they didn't know African Methodist Episcopal Zion. They didn't know of that history. So I'm starting to working with our kids, and I said, you know what, this is where you need to be because we're getting ready to lose a generation in the church. At the same time, Operation Breadbasket pulls away and becomes Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], and people started doing that for church. And I said, wait a minute, you know--and plus, you know, Jesse [Jackson] ain't got time on Saturday mornings to give these kids the foundation. So we had a generation that not only doesn't know the Bible, they don't know basic black history, nor the rich history of the church, the African American church, none of it. And you are over in the seminary, getting ready to teach some seminarians. And you need to be working with these kids. So more and more I started pouring myself into the youth ministry of that church. I left there in '71 [1971], November and was called here [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] in February and started in March of '72 [1972]. Story_ID: 15902 Speaker 1: What I read was that they decided, but see which I found sort of a curious story about this church [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois], you know, the membership. They had started losing membership and it was down to eighty-seven. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that they said they wanted--what was the requirement? Someone, what was the requirement? Speaker 2: They wanted, they wanted to go in a new direction. They wanted, the question became, are you gonna be a black church in the black community or are you going to continue to be--are we going to continue to be a white church in blackface? And they adopted their motto "Unashamedly black, Unapologetically Christian". And they-- Speaker 1: They adopted that as their motto. Okay.? Speaker 2: In fact, my predecessor, who was the interim here, Reuben Sheares, that was his--he, he coined that phrase. But they decided they needed to be a black church relevant to the black community because prior to '71 [1971], they had not been. They had, just like--and you have to understand, it's not all their fault. Most, if not all, prior to, prior to the '80s [1980s] or even the '90s [1990s], every predominantly white denomination in America, the Presbyterian church, Lutheran church, American Baptist, United Church of Christ, they started churches for African Americans of a certain ilk. These are for our kind of people, not all kinds of people. For instance, when I came here, there was no hymn of invitation for people to join church. There was a notice in the bulletin that said, if you're interested in becoming a member of this church, please fill out the card in the back of your pew and drop it in the offering plate. And the deacons come to your house and interview you because these churches were not for all kinds of people. If you notice, we sit right next to a project. That project has been here since World War II. This denomination did not try to start a church in the project 'cause they don't want people from the project. Ida B. Wells [Homes], Washington Gardens, Robert Taylor Homes been here. Nobody tried to start a church there cause we don't want--white denominations don't want them. We want college graduates who knew how to behave themselves properly and worship God right and not have these--as one African American clergy person in this city said, not have these niggerisms in their service, ejaculations and waving of hands and shouting out and Amen, the word is Amen. (Laughter) I mean that's where, that's why Trinity was started because blacks were moving into this neighborhood. Now, please remember, they've been here, over there. No, they're moving into where the homes are. They're moving here where these split-level homes are. So we want a church home-owning blacks who are our kind of people. And for ten years, that's how they had been. One hour service, one hour and five minutes on Communion Sunday. No gospel, no shouting, no emotionalism. We're in and out of here, all right. And they're deciding, no, no, no, we've got to change. We have to change. And the majority of the statement of the congregational vision of where they wanted to go, written by Valmon Jordan (ph.), Valmon said they made him take the word black out, you know. And they drafted a statement, and they showed it to all the candidates saying, can you lead us in this direction? And, yeah, they had, they had decided that they had to change. The, the active ones who were here. Now, some of the peripheral ones who were not active, they were not so happy about the change, you know. But then again, they, they were not that deeply invested in the congregation either. They came once a month, other ones every two months, that kind of, kind of parishoner. Story_ID: 15903 Speaker 1: So what attracted you [to Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois]? Was it that it was a church that you could pastor? Was it-- Speaker 2: Not only that, when I, I said Valmon Jordan--and you might want to interview him too, Valmon Jordan (ph.) is the man who crafted the language for that statement. He's the one that led them through the self study. He was also the chairman of the search committee. And he came to my home on New Year's Eve, and we talked. We talked a good two hours, three hours maybe. And when I heard what he was saying about where this church was and where it wanted to go, in many ways it was Dj vu for me in terms of something that happened at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], which I'll tell you about in a moment. But it also, there was also like an answer to prayer. I had been called to another church before I met Val. That church was at 66th Street. It meant moving my family to their parsonage. In fact, I'd been called to two churches. The other one was at 74th and Yates [Avenue]. Where I was living then, the girls would not have to change schools. They were one block from their, from their school. They would not have to move out of their home. And we could--their life would be disrupted by my now having a church to serve, 'cause I'm still in school. I didn't, I didn't leave the University of Chicago [Divinity School] until 1975. So it was like ideal. The family's not disrupted. The need is met in terms of here you'll get to do ministry in a church that wants to do something about being African American in 1972. And life can go on smoothly with some income. That makes a whole lot more sense than five or six little jobs you got now. So I came down to the, to the old church site and prayed. We had a little small sanctuary at the time. It sat 200. The rest of the block was empty. And I, I sat there and prayed and asked God to show me what God had envisioned in terms of that and got confirmation that this is it. We're, we're gonna fill up this block. We're gonna take care of the rest of this block, okay. Let's go. And Val set up an appointment with me, first to preach on that third Sunday in January. Then the fifth Sunday in January. And they voted the first Sunday in February, second Sunday in February, they voted. The dj vu thing for me was, was in '68 [1968], I was at Howard when Howard, Howard changed radically, when the kids shut the fine arts building down and formed a gospel choir. And it was like Trinity was saying we're going in a different direction. No, we're no longer going to say that to be educated and degrees we can't enjoy gospel music. We can't worship naturally and be who we are, naturally, that we've got to be something other than who we are, which is what predominantly white denominations and many silk-stocking Baptist churches have taught us; that you've got your own culture from 1:00 Sunday afternoon 'til 10:55 next Sunday morning. You ride around in your car listening to Luther [Vandross], Mariah Carey, your old school, Dionne Warwick, all right, new school, Jill Scott, at 5 minutes to 11:00, you'll be listening to [Ludwig van] Beethoven and you're gonna sing Risa-Korsky (ph.). And you're gonna be white for an hour to an hour and a half. One o'clock, you put your key in the ignition, you're back in your world, Four Tops, (singing) "Sugar pie honey bunch." How come you've got your own culture everywhere except--and black folks said, no, no, no. And I'd seen it happen at, at Howard. And that's where this congregation was, they said, no, no. We're gonna embrace our music. We're gonna embrace our culture. We're gonna be who we are. We're gonna push, we're gonna push kids to get education. Yes, go as high as, high as you can, but don't change who you are because you're now educated. So, I said, you know, this, this is perfect because this is what I just saw, this is what I just lived at the Howard, through the Howard experience. So that's why it just felt such a, like such a good fit. Story_ID: 15904 Speaker 1: There's a story also in here about a gentleman who, you know, his wife--he's sick--but he-- Speaker 2: Mr. Burns. Speaker 1: Yes, why did he cuss you, I mean-- Speaker 2: He cussed me out because I was trying to go along with the existing program at the time. And the existing program is I had--I started in March. The kids, there's a plaque on the wall will show you, the kids started gospel music on the fifth Sunday in October, the same year, all right. But I had two choirs. I had the gospel and, and when I say, gospel, they did not sing just gospel. They sang anthems and spirituals and gospel. And I tried to get the other choir, just add gospel. Oh, no, no, no, no, no. Well, the other choir, they wouldn't add gospel. We limped along, this is '77 [1977] with two choirs. But the other choir that wouldn't sing Gospel wanted to do a Christmas cantata the Sunday before Christmas. Fine. Let's do the cantata cause that's what we've been doing. Fine. I let them do the cantata. His wife had just talked me into talking him into having the surgery. And he came out to hear the gospel preached, maybe for the last time because I've got cancer surgery and it's a risk, high risk. And he said, you know, I needed to hear the word of God preached to me and you knew this shit was going on. If you could have told me, I could have gone somewhere to church. Now, I got to find me a church before I have to get back to the hospital for my surgery tomorrow. He didn't want to hear no cantata. He wanted to hear the gospel preached. That's why he cussed me out. He said, "You knew what I was facing, and you let them do this to me and you didn't tell me. You could have told me. I could have gone somewhere to church. This wasn't church." Well, he's from Memphis, Tennessee and that was not church for him, a Christmas cantata, European author, no. Not on the Sunday before Christmas and not on the Sunday before major surgery. Story_ID: 15905 Speaker 1: So the membership [of Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois], were they squarely behind this? I mean were they very-- Speaker 2: Of the eighty-seven? Speaker 1: The eighty-seven, were they squarely behind this being a black, a really black-oriented church or was that really-- Speaker 2: All but twenty-two. All but twenty-two. When those kids sang that fifth Sunday in October, with, between that Sunday in October and the November, twenty-two left, twenty-two left because it's one thing to say that theoretically, and on paper. Again, it's, it's one thing to say--and I said there were some peripheral members who didn't come every week. And when they had, saw the change and heard the change, you know, they were there in the, there in the mix of the twenty-two also. There were eighty-seven active members. But there were around, I would say 150 total, you know, who drop in. I call them, I call them CME Christians. Just like right now, my father [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] made me very conscious early on in my ministry about inflated numbers. I don't do inflated numbers. In fact, I, I teach a lot of students, you can tell the size of a church congregation by looking at its budget. These folk around here talking about I got 18,000 members and a $3 million budget. That means everybody's giving four cents a week (laughter). And your sanctuary only seats 1,500. You've got two services. That's 3,000. Where are the other 15,000, brother man? Anyway, Daddy used to say to me, he said, you can always tell the size--whenever a black preacher gives you the size of his congregation or the seating capacity, you can always divided by 2, sometimes by 3. So I became very sensitive about cutting out, rooting out fat. We don't, we don't do inflated numbers. We have active members, 7,500 and an annual budget of $12.5 million, $13 million for this year's, 2002. So being very, very sensitive to, to how many active members we had and what the actual membership was, I knew that we, that those other people--I call them CME members, like the giving members, in terms of people who've signed, walk the aisle there, they're up in the fifteen, 16,000, all right. But I call them CME Christians. You know what a CME Christian is? They're the ones you see on C, Christmas, and Mother's Day and E, Easter, all right. So, I don't count those. And, but in that 150, there were, eighty-seven were active. The rest were CME's. And they came occasionally. They left when they heard--because it's one thing to see it on paper and to affirm it intellectually, cognitively. But when you hear gospel, and see remember this church had not had any tambourines, any drums, and then a Hammond B3 was eased in. And no, no--in fact, my own predecessor said something, the interim minister, to me when I ran into my first fight here. He said, "Jerry, you've got to realize one of the problems you're gonna face from the peripheral group is that many people joined, many black people joined a predominantly white denomination to get away from black folk, and you're taking them right back where they don't want to go." So that I would say about eighty-seven solidly, the over, the overwhelming majority were, yes. They bought into the concept before they met me, all right. The peripheral ones, no. And some of the eighty-seven, when that, when the hard gospel hit, left. Now, some of the eighty-seven who can't handle gospel didn't leave and didn't fight, like one of my strongest members. She was just not raised that way. She was, she was AME [African Methodist Episcopal]. She was raised at Coppin Chapel [Indianapolis, Indiana]. And you don't, you don't sway to music and drums and tambourines. So she simply got out of the choir and sits in the pew, here every Sunday, gives liberally, active, strong member, working in the ministry, but she's not singing no music. I, no, she wasn't raised--my mother wasn't raised like that. My mother, Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], you don't have no drums. When my mother [Mary Wright] comes, she says, if hear drums like when the lightning hits, I'm not gonna be up in this place cause she wasn't raised like that. She's eighty-six. This other member is in her seventies. But that's how they were raised. Now, those are persons who couldn't handle the change, but who musically, said, okay, I'm just not gonna be in the music department anymore. I will work somewhere else in my church, all right. And they stayed. The ones who just thought it was anathema and, you know, dumbing down and, you know, taking us off the elitist level, where we're better than those people over there who shout or fall out, they left. Story_ID: 15906 Speaker 1: Now, and the question I have for you that I think is important, I mean you were raised in the Baptist church, and the United Church of Christ was, it's part of a Congregational--see, I didn't, I don't understand-- Speaker 2: No, the United Church of Christ is not, no, there's no such thing as a Congregational church anymore. There are some churches with Congregational in their names because it's in their charter. The United Church of Christ is made up of four denominations. The Evangelical and Reform churches were out of German and Dutch countries. And they merged in 1934. Congregational and Christian churches merged in 1931, and from '31 [1931] on, they became Congregational-Christian, then Evangelical and Reform. In '57, these--once had four, now two, merged to become the United Church of Christ. They didn't want to take a name that had somebody else's predecessor's name in it. They could not call themselves The United Evangelical Reform Congregational Christian Church. They'd be out of breath before you could finish. So they changed the name, that had nobody's previous name in it. So they became the United Church of Christ. Now, if Trinity [United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois], for instance, Trinity's already--in our Charter, it reads Trinity United Church of Christ. A footnote about that too. It's very important. When the church was started in '61 [1961], we didn't want the wrong element coming in here. We knew black folk didn't know what the United Church of Christ was. So they put a bulletin board out there that said Trinity United Church, parenthesis, Congregational, close parenthesis, 'cause don't come up here thinking this is Church of God in Christ or Church of Christ, all right. But I mean what I was saying was, right now, in the Ecumenical movement, there's something called Churches United where the AME's [African Methodist Episcopal], the CME's [Christian Methodist Episcopal], the United Church of Christ, the ELC [Ecumenical Lutheran Church] in parenthesis, all working together, suppose they decide to merge tomorrow. And they pick a name like God's Church of America. What does our charter read? Trinity United Church of Christ. So it's gonna say Trinity United Church of Christ, parenthesis, a part of the Church of God in America. So that you'll have Park Manor Congregational Church hasn't the word 'congregational' in its charter, but it's a part of the United Church of Christ. You have Zion Evangelical Church, that came out of that old Evangelical and Reform tradition, in the Charter, but it's a part of the United Church of Christ, all right. Now, what most people in the North don't know is, the United Church of Christ from the Congregational side, they know the modern Congregational church. Very important point. Why? Because in the 19th Century, the Congregational church was the church responsible for the great awakening, them down-home, throw-down, sawdust revivals. Most people, however, Jonathan Evans, hanging, soul hanging overhead like a spider on a spider web, that's the Congregational Church. They don't know that part. What do they know? They know the New England, Harvard University, quiet Congregational way of worship. The second part they don't know is, I said, they merged with the Christian church in '31 [1931]. There are 280 black churches in this denomination out of 6,400, 200 of them out of the Christian tradition. Now, when you go in the Christian--they're in North Carolina and Virginia. When you go there, you'd think you're in a Pentecostal revival 'cause that's how they worship, the Christian side. So that most people don't know that history, and this part of our history as a denomination. Now, go back to the original part of your question, see, let me clarify for you cause we talked about this on break, there are ten different Baptist denominations. American Baptist is very stuffy, high church. Now, Daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] would have the Wrights Gospel Chorus. I said the Gospel Chorus used to rehearse at our house. But they sang anthems. We had a pipe organ. Remember I said you had to pump it up. We rose for the glory of Patria. We had high church. There are all kinds of worship that I said a moment ago, playfully, and not so playfully, silk-stock high, high Baptist churches. They have worship that out-white white people. So when you say Baptist, you can't have a stereotype to think you're covering all kinds of Baptists cause Southern Baptists are nothing like American Baptists or nothing like Primitive Baptists or nothing like Full-Gospel Baptists Fellowship, National Baptists, National Baptists, Incorporated, National Baptists Unincorporated. They're all different, they're all different. And they are autonomous, you'll find that in, for instance, the American Baptist Church, very high church services and some get-down, throw-down, some in Spanish, the whole service is in Spanish, some in German. So it, it's, it's a mix, but I was raised in an American Baptist Church by a daddy who's from Virginia. So we had the Glory of Patria. We had the Doxology, but we also had the Wrights Gospel Chorus, all in the same service. Story_ID: 15907 Speaker 1: Why were you attracted to the United Church of Christ? See, I know, because--. Speaker 2: Well, like I said, I said during the break, the United Church of Christ and the American Baptist Church--now, I'm gonna give you two reasons, are the same, except for the mode of Baptism, same teaching, same doctrine. Each church is autonomous, priesthood of all believers, congregational policy, same thing as ABC, except for the fact that the ABC only recognizes one form of Baptism, and the UCC recognizes any form of Baptism. Speaker 1: So there was no discussion with your father [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, regular discussion. I, I-- Speaker 1: Okay, because I'm just saying people are just so-- Speaker 2: Let me come to that, cause I was, let me--I gave you the honest answer. Let me give you the humorous answer that I gave to the students at my home church where I grew up. The pastor there invited me back to do a revival, and he had lunch for seminarians with me. While we were at lunch, they said, "How did you end up in a UCC congregation? You grew up ABC." I said it was a theological issue, deep theological, you know. And they got their pens out. They said, "Yeah," writing it down. I said, "Yes, it's called hunger." Now, in terms of whether a denomination takes a stand on hunger. I said no, no, no, no. I was hungry. I had children to feed. There were two black ABC churches in the city. They both had pastors. I went downtown and took my applications down to Methodist, Disciples of Christ, United Church of Christ. And I says, whosoever will, let them call; have license, will preach. Now, when my daddy found out that I had done that, that November--I said, I left that November, and I put, did take my application, and I did fill out an application at United Methodist, Disciples of Christ and United Church of Christ. My father flew out here and spent all day Thanksgiving with me, talking to me about my decision. And at the end of the day, it was very happy, he said to me, "Well, we're gonna be in the same armed forces. We're just gonna be wearing different color uniforms. And we've got the same commander in chief." But he understood much better, and when he, 'cause he wanted to find out about the United Church of Christ too. He knew the Congregational Church. He, you know, he wasn't aware of the merger in '57 [1957], into which the Congregational Christian Church and the Evangelical Reform Church went. And I shared with him what its, its teachings were. At that point, I had not been called anywhere. But I had to explain to him United Methodist, why am I doing this. Why don't you just come on home? Because I'm in school, you know. And I feel if I'm called a minister, I can't find a denomination anywhere in the Bible, so I'll serve wherever I can. That's why I have applications in different places. And there are no ABC churches out here. There were two, as I said, two black. Speaker 1: But he wanted you to come and-- Speaker 2: He asked me to come. He asked me to come home. And I couldn't. I never will forget. I asked, I asked--he's gone, gone to be with the Lord now, I asked Clarence H. Cobb and Angela Baskin, how do you know you are where God wants you to be? As a matter of fact, we were sitting in my car at the cemetery, waiting for the pastor, where I had served as an assistant pastor, waiting for the processional to bring his remains to the cemetery. That, that procession was so long. I wasn't getting in that line. I drove straight out to the cemetery. And when I got there, I parked and Dr. Clarence Cobb pulled up. He parked. So he got in my car, and we were talking. And how's it going, "How's the world going, Wright?" I said, you know, "I'm glad you, you're in the car, Pastor Cobb, because I need to ask you a question. I, Robert Wooten, my close friend, my daughter's godfather, the man I've known since '59 who made me wish I had kept studying music, Wooten wants me to come back to his church, now that the pastor is gone. And he's my close friend. My father wants me to come to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], as his co-pastor so he can turn the work over to me. I don't want to do what my friend wants or my father wants. I want to do what God wants. How do you know that you are where God wants you to be?" And by the time I laid out the question for him, fully, in terms of my, what my dad had done, his work and so forth and how long Robert and I had been friends and our relationship, and what had happened between my coming to Trinity [United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] and that year. We were getting ready to build a new building, the procession pulled up. And he said, "I'll get back to you, Wright." And I ended up with Clay Evans answering the question for me. My father and I are like night and day. And I was gonna say, not just the old school, you know. The kind of music I love, Daddy, Daddy ain't into to that, and neither are the folk at Grace [Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] used to that, the church he served for forty-two years, all right. The way I do worship, the way I love worship, that's my best--and I don't want to go in after him and make it look like I'm destroying everything he stood for or have people just if your father was alive, he wouldn't have. I, you know, I'm, I can't--he's worked too hard to have that happen. So it's not that I don't love you, I just can't, I can't be me in this situation. Plus, I'll never be pastor. I will never, I go home now, Julieanna, with grandchildren and I'm still Buddy. Ah, boy, I remember you running up and down the aisle. They wouldn't let me be the pastor here. I jokingly, and not so jokingly, said this to my mother [Mary Wright]. She wouldn't let Jesus be the pastor of that church cause it ain't her husband. You know, she'd find, and for--the new pastor's been there twenty years, and she still man about that, I said, "Mama, stop, stop, you know." And, but I knew that would happen to me. And I went and told my dad that. I said, "Daddy, I can't. I got to, you know, I, I am amazed at what you've done here. I admire it and I love it, but I can't, I could never feel free here to be me." Story_ID: 15908 Speaker 1: Who was influencing your ministry, you know, in those early years. I, I'm even surprised actually that, maybe because I, I'm not as knowledgeable, I'm surprised that you mentioned Clarence Cobb and Pastor Evans-- Speaker 2: Clay Evans. Speaker 1: Because I, right, I think of you as a different-- Speaker 2: Well--the academically and, and methodologically and theologically, we're very different. But, now, you can go back to, there was something you asked earlier and I'm, and I'll unpack it for just, in just a moment a little more to show what I mean. You asked me were there any sights, sounds and smells that remind me of childhood. When I started pastoring here [Trinity United Church of Christ] , and our services were dead, and I would just feel empty and drained, I needed--in fact, I heard Clay Evans preach this sermon in 1977. He preached a sermon entitled, 'Every Pastor Needs a Pastor', all right. But before I formed a pastor relationship with him and with anyone else, there were times that I just needed to hear church. Nobody knew me. I was the little pastor out there on 95th Street, you know, under a hundred numbers. Nobody knew my face. I would slip out of here on Sunday and go slip in the back seat of Clay Evans church just to hear some throw-down Gospel and to (singing) hear Clay, 'cause it just felt good. What he said? I don't remember what he said. It just felt good (laughter). I feel good. So I can go, right? I'd leave Clay, and I'd run over to First Church [of Deliverance, Chicago, Illinois], just to watch 250 folk walking the choir at 11:00 at night and to hear them sing 'Jesus is the Light of the World' and the 'The Lord's Prayer', 'My Lot'. That just made, I mean it just--it fed my spirit, okay. And they, they kept me alive. Now, remember, remember, please, I'm at the University of Chicago Divinity School. I'm in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] in a cold, sterile intellectual environment. I needed something in my soul. Just like I had, I had one of, one of my Ph.D's from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] tell one of my seminarians--I had a seminarian in here who was doing his field placement here. And I could never get him to be himself, in that, he would talk to me just like I'm talking to you, and if a third party walked into the room, all of a sudden his voice would change. I used to call him Ted Baxter because he would effect this way. And I said, "Why do you do that?" "Well, this is church with educated persons and so many--." So finally, I caught him, and, and caught in a peer group session where there are members of the church who had, who interviewed with him as a field placement, and I said, "What was that you were telling me about this being an educated church?" "Yes, there's a certain clientele who go here. We had the Superintendent of Schools here, and we have Dr. this and Dr. that." And he's just, and this Ph.D from Northwestern said to him, "Excuse me, excuse me". She said, "When I want intellectual stimulation, I go to the Quadrangle Club. I don't come to church for that. I come here because I need something for my soul. So don't try to impress me with intellectual stuff, not at church. I need my soul fed." And I needed mine fed so I would go, and you're talking about the best choirs at--now, 11:00 to 1:00, I'm here. The meeting's in the afternoon. I got to go somewhere, so I would go down to Clay's, and I'd go to--after Clay's, I'd leave and go over to First Church. In fact, back in the '70s [1970s], what I would do, when I made friends, after some guys, after I'd been here several years, I would leave here and go to T. L. Barrett's 'cause T. L. Barrett was Mount Zion Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] back then. That was before he went to Life Center [Church of God in Christ, Chicago, Illinois] and then now back to Church of God. He was Mount Zion. I'd leave T. L.'s and go to Clay, then we'd go to, the boy, Natalie Cole's husband, Marvin, Marvin. And then close out with First Church. I'd just get it all. I, I was tapping for a week, all right. And Mama Gwen, Irma Gwen, one of Clay's soloists, or pardon me, one of Clarence Cobb's soloists, joined the church. Plus, the church where I was as assistant pastor, he was close friends with Cobb. So I met Dr. Cobb, Clarence Cobb, through Reverend Keller originally, and Logan Kearse, whose in Baltimore [Maryland] at the Metropolitan Spiritual Churches of Christ, every time he would come to town, he'd call me. And so Cobb knew of me, and when we dedicated that building, Clarence Cobb came down there and brought his choir. In fact, gave us some words that Fred Nelson has--by the way, don't forget, [Robert] Wooten, whose name I keep mentioning, his closest musician friend is Fred Nelson. Fred Nelson, Sr. was Cobb's musician for years. Now, little Freddie is the musician and plays for Johnnie Coleman. But it was those connections, that I knew Dr. Cobb--he said something the night he preached the installation, pardon me, the dedication of that building, that became a theme for us. And, and Fred wrote a song by the same title. He was in the middle of the sermon, and he stopped. And he turned around and said to me, "Wright, the Lord will give you as far as you can see. Now, if all you see is that corner, that's far as you gonna get. But if you see"--and he pointed down here to, to this building--"If you see down 95th Street, the Lord's gonna give that to you." Turned back and went into his sermon. And then when we started, that year we started our long range planning board. And I said to the long range planning board, "Remember what Reverend Cobb said, the Lord will give us as far as we can see. What do you see this church doing ten years from now, twenty years from now, twenty-five years from now? Let's, let's envision what God--what do you see?" But, yeah, that's how I got to know, know Reverend Cobb and Clay, I just used to slip in his church. And, and it was, it was at '77 [1977] when I heard him preach that sermon 'Every Pastor Needs a Pastor' that I got my secretary who was friends with his secretary to get an appointment. He didn't know me from Adam's house cat, and I couldn't get an appointment with him, but my secretary called his secretary. And they got me an appointment to go talk to him, and I got to ask him that question about how do you, how do you really know that you are where God wants you to be as a pastor? You're not, not doing what your daddy wants. You're not doing what your best friend wants. You're not doing what you want necessarily, but you're doing what God wants. How do, how do you know that? And he helped me tremendously in answering that question for me. Story_ID: 15909 Speaker 1: Who was guiding you in terms of just the whole thing, the business of really learning your trade? Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in that kind of church. Speaker 1: That's true. This is true. Speaker 2: I grew up, I mean I grew up--in fact, I--some of the places, I was assistant pastor twice, and I was associate, I mean interim. I, I couldn't believe they didn't have printed financial records. I couldn't believe the congregation, they didn't get reports on the income and expenditures. I couldn't believe some of the stuff I was seeing because I knew church administration. My mother [Mary Wright] was the financial secretary of the church, still is--I think she retired now. But she, I know when Daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] was sick, she was still, she was still on the Trustee Board. And I knew church administration from the home in which I grew up. Speaker 1: So you were prepared there. Now, back to, you know, Clarence Cobbs and Reverend [Clay] Evans and T. L. Barrett, but theologically, I mean they weren't--they didn't come out of a trained environment-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But that's what I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I didn't go, I didn't so much for the--for Speaker 1: You came for the-- Speaker 2: For the music. Speaker 1: For the music. Speaker 2: For the music and for the style of preaching, not the substance, not the substance. The style of, the style of preaching. I had, I enjoy, and still do, in fact, Daddy said, "I like to hear the boy pull the whistle." (Laughter) But I enjoy, I enjoy it. I had a member--. Speaker 1: But that wasn't what you grew up under. Speaker 2: Not in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but down in Virginia. Speaker 1: In Virginia, okay. Speaker 2: When they'd take me down, down in the country, you hear the homeboys out in the country, yeah, yeah. I tell you it's like, my Dad, I'll tell you a story my Dad told me, but I would say what happened here. When I was ordaining one of my, my seminary graduates, I was preaching her sermon entitled, 'Preach What You Know'. And the structure was the sermon was, I've heard all kinds of sermons, but the best ones I've heard are, when preachers preach what they know. And the text, of course, is Paul saying, I know who I have believed and am persuaded, that he says, preach Jesus. As long as you preach Jesus, you can't go wrong, all right. And illustrating, I was talking about the different kinds of sermons that I'd heard. And because of my dad, I'd heard Sandy Ray. I had Gardner Taylor, heard Bennie [Benjamin] Mays, heard Howard Thurman, heard C. L. Franklin, heard all of the wide spectrum, guys around the country I just mentioned. And when I was illustrating C. L. Franklin, I heard this, I think I was thirteen, thirteen years old, C. L. preached a sermon entitled, 'Growing Old in this Land'. And he spent like ninety seconds on growing old. "When, when you grow, old, what don't wear out, falls out, and what don't fall out, spreads out". Then he's ninety on 'In this Land'. This was 1953, so I was twelve. It was the year before the Supreme Court decision ['Brown v. Board of Education']. And then they--you're segregated from the (unclear), segregated in school, segregated in the hospital, segregated in the cemetery. And then he'd come back to growing old, then come back--about twenty minutes into the sermon, he shifted gears and went into the typical C. L. Franklin. He said, the (singing) "Butter rum (ph.) there is a land, oh, Lord, there is a land where we never, never--." And on the third never, Aretha stood up and started singing 'Never Grow Old', and pandemonium broke loose. While I was illustrating, two of my members started shouting in the servicing, shouting, all right; come back after service. I said, "Y'a'l like that C. L. Franklin illustration." "Ah, Reverend." I said, "I don't preach like that." They said, "Maybe you ought to" (laughter) 'cause there are people who really do like that. I mean--and I like it, okay. Now, that some say most times it's hard to get good--it's not impossible, there's, there's a new generation that you the (unclear)--in fact, Thomas Hoyt, whose now a Bishop in the CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church, Bishop Hoyt taught at Hart [Hartford] Seminary [Connecticut]. And Bishop Hoyt said in one, a lecture day on homiletics, he said, "There's nothing wrong with gravy. Please don't knock gravy. Don't get so intelligent and educated that you start knocking gravy. He said, but anybody who knows their way around the kitchen can tell you the best gravy comes out the meat. Give the folks some meat before you go into the gravy, all right." But, but I would go just, just because, first, the choirs. And then when they be bringing that thing home, oh, yeah. I just felt great. Story_ID: 15910 Speaker 1: That's how I got exposed to D. E. King, Dearing King, who is now deceased. I had never heard him or heard of him. And he didn't have a tune. He, he couldn't--I went to hear Clay [Evans] tune that night. I was depressed and I just wanted somebody to pick me up. Clay didn't know me. King didn't know me. Nobody knew me. I just slipped in the church. The music was wonderful. (Singing) "There's no secret what can God do." And I'm fine. Clay gave the little sick list he ran off, praying for you, praying for you. And he said, "I saw Dearing King walking. I'm a ask him to bring the message." I wanted to get up and walk out. Now, you can't walk out of Clay's broadcast. Them ushers will get you. I sat there stuck. I said, "Well, I be blessed. This is gonna be the perfect ending for the perfectly bad day." So D. E. King stood up. Now, D. E. King talks just like this. He didn't raise his voice and he had a little slight lisp. And he said, "My text tonight is from Revelation." Well, I grew up in a trained tradition, that said the only people that preach from Revelation are scholars and fools. I hope he's a scholar. He said, "My text is behold, what Jesus said, that behold I am He that was dead is alive for evermore and have the keys to hell and heaven." Opening sentence in his sermon. "You know before Jesus Christ came everybody who died went to hell." I said, "He's a fool, oh, God. I'm gonna have to sit through this. Jesus, help me." Next sentence on, he had me. He said, "Now, by hell, I don't mean what y'all think, lake of fire and all that, burning. Hell is a Hebrew term, 'hesheol' is the word." And 'sheol' is sort of a shadowy place." And he gave instances in the psalms where my soul looked in sheol, that's hell. "It's sort of a holding place, something like the Catholics' purgatory. And before Jesus came, that's where everybody who died went, waiting. In fact, three o'clock on Friday afternoon outside of Jerusalem when Jesus hung his head and died, he went to hell. But he went down there to conduct a revival and to get them folk that had been waiting for him. He had a key ring across his vest. And he pulled his keys out." He said, "With the first key, he opened up Abraham's grave and said, come on. I'm here. Abraham said, who are you? He said, I'm that city that you saw. With the second key, he opened up Isaac's grave. Isaac said, Daddy, who is this? He said, you remember that ram in the bushes upon Mount Moriah? With the third key, he opened up Jacob's grave. Jacob said, grandpa, who is this? He said, you remember the wrestling match down by the river"--that Negro walked through the whole Old Testament. By the time he got to that last key, leading all them saints up to heaven to open the key of heaven, you couldn't hear him. Folk were making so much noise, and they were shouting louder than he was preaching. He had the mic. And I sat there mesmerized. I was flying though. I came home; I called my father [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.], and I--Clay gets out at ten o'clock. I got home about 10:40, that's 11:40 Philadelphia time, woke him up. I said, "Daddy, you ever heard D. E. King". He said, "Everybody knows Dearing." I'd never heard of him. But it was just I would, I would go for what it did, what the ambience, the culture, the music and the style did for me. Not so much--and I would stumble across every now and then something substantive like, like what, what Dearing was doing with--he led those in captivity captive, and he, but he was showing--and with the Thessalonians where it says that. And he was saying all are those people who were in captivity, Jesus was taking them to heaven with him, that they couldn't get to heaven until He got there. Story_ID: 15911 Speaker 1: And listen, every now and then, you'd hear somebody like Tommy [Rev. Thomas Hoyte], Tommy would have some insights that were, were fascinating. I remember he was preaching one time, he said, you know, everybody tries to figure out how come Jesus said, verily, verily I say unto to you this day, you shall be with me in paradise. And then he hung around for forty days. Well, what happened to the poor thief. Tommy pointed out in that message, he said, in Greek, there's no punctuation. Now, a translator decided where to put the comma in the translation. But let's move the comma, and see what it says. Instead of Jesus said unto to him, verily, verily, I say unto to you colon, this day, thou shall be with me in paradise. Or comma, this day, thou shall be. Let's do it this way. Verily, verily, I say unto you this day, comma, quote, "thou shall be with me in paradise". I'm saying to you this day, that whenever I get there, you're gonna be there with me. Has a whole different meaning. It was like, I never thought of that, that there is no punctuation and a translator decided to put the comma before this day, thou shall be with me in paradise. And then it gets to be song in a cantata (singing) "Verily, thou shall be". Everybody's thinking that Jesus is saying, I'm taking you to paradise this day, all because a translator made a decision to put the comma there. Well, you know, there were occasional insights like that that I would get from, from--and as I say, like theologically, night and day, but down in the country, I would hear stuff and, and it's the same for me, and had become the same for me as my pushing my adults to stop putting down kids. For instance, we have five youth Sundays a year. I, I've stopped telling them when they are 'cause they won't come. And sometimes those kids got some insights that we need to hear as adults, so that you can learn, like you can learn fror anyone--from anyone. Who was that said if God can use an ass to speak to Balaam, you know, he can use people that don't theological degrees. How did they make all those years when people didn't go to school and couldn't go, go to school. In that same sermon about 'Preach What You Know', I was illustrating about one sermon I heard in Virginia down in the country, where this guy stood up on a Sunday afternoon, preaching 23rd Psalm. And he started off with "the". That's a definite article as opposed to an indefinite article; doesn't say, "a" Lord. He said, "the" Lord. "The Lord is", then he spent about five minutes on "the Lord is", the Lord is high, the Lord is holy, the Lord is awesome, the Lord is--the Lord is my--another five minutes on my rock, my (unclear). Go ahead. By the time we got down to surely, you couldn't hear him. And he didn't have no PA system. Folk were out, just falling out. But, and I, you can pick up things, you can pick--I heard, listen, I heard the (unclear). I heard a man preach a sermon on a rooster, no theological training whatsoever. You know the rooster that crowed. By the time he finished that sermon, I was sitting hypnotized. I said, "No, he didn't. No, he didn't." He said, he said, "God gave the rooster a job to do. We need more roosters in the church. God said, when you hear Peter deny my son, you crow." He said we need roosters. "And you notice the rooster didn't say, well, God, I can't sing like the nightingale, why don't you get the nightingale to sing? He didn't say I'm not, I'm not as pretty as the Peacock, why don't you have the Peacock do something, spread them thing--the rooster just did what God told him to do. And if you notice, it can be snowing, it can be raining, it can be cold, it can be hot. The rooster's on his job. But Christians, if it's too cold, we ain't come; if it's too hot, we'll stay home. We need roosters in God's church who'll just be on the job doing what"--he got down to end of that message, he said, If you listen carefully, ever since that Easter Sunday morning, the rooster's not saying cock-a-doodle-do. Listen carefully the next time you hear one." You'll hear him saying (singing) Jesus is alive" (laughter). Well, you know, it's, it's, it's the rich texture and wide variety of preaching styles that are in the black churches that I like it. I love it. Speaker 2: And it's the artistry you really described. Speaker 1: And I don't go there expecting these people to have the kind of theological training I have, and I go there to get fed, like Carol said, I go there for something for my soul, to feed me. Story_ID: 15912 Speaker 1: What was also forming you and how did the whole Afrocentric part of your ministry take shape? Was that something, 'cause--. Speaker 2: I think it starts, well, it starts partially with, with childhood in Virginia, that the church I saw in Gravel Hill [Virginia], a Baptist church down in my mother's [Mary Wright]--Surry County, Virginia, my mother's home and in Caroline County [Virginia], St. John, where Daddy [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] belonged. But that experience was being negated by or put down by folk up north, who were so-called educated. And I'm saying now these people are real people. These people--that's an authentic expression, you know, why is it this tension? But we think because we got a little, you know, two nickels above rent and two degrees that we're better than these folks, that understanding and claiming that part of our heritage was a part of it. Getting to college, part two, would be, how come we can't sing our songs? You know, this sounds like not the Wrights Gospel Chorus, some Thomas Dorsey songs. I, how come--because Europeans say you can't do that. Oh, we don't have a culture? We don't have a religious tradition? Remember, Carter G. Woodson, Daddy's study, African history, all that, learning that too. Then the military, yeah, I'm black, but that doesn't mean I'm less than. We're different, that doesn't mean deficient, all right. And then Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], the whole reclamation and reclaiming of our history and heritage and what I was studying, the Africans' culture and the cre-, the songs they created. Then that, that continued at the University of Chicago Divinity School, really got me immersed in not being ashamed of our culture, not being ashamed of our history because most people don't even know it. But teaching it and, and learning it and, and embracing it. Then in '75 [1975], same year I finished University of Chicago, Reverend Thanda Ngcobo was ordained here. She was the first minister of the English church. She's South African and she opened my eyes to the whole South African story, not from the media perspective, but Nelson Mandela being in prison, Steve Biko, Soweto, Sharpeville Massacre--she was from Natal [province]. And we started that same year doing the Umoja Karamu for our Thanksgiving service, which is a celebration of our history and heritage as Africans. We did not come in on the Mayflower. We came before the Mayflower, but that's not the issue. We're not pilgrims, we're not Indians. We're Africans. And we started, we started our story in Africa and come all the way up to the present. And I've been doing that since '75 [1975] as a congregation, meeting Manga Jalagoba (ph), who was at her ordination, who is a South African working on his doctorate here. Dennis Brutus was at, was at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and getting into that whole, that whole milieu and learning more and more about, about our, about our heritage and our history and our connectiveness; still doing the music research. Story_ID: 15913 Speaker 1: I was saying that, speaking of music, in terms of the connectiveness in the African, Afrocentric, addressing that question, Thanda, Reverend Thanda Ngcobo, was standing behind the Communion table with me one night in '76 [1976], '77 [1977]. And in our musicians' job descriptions, they have to teach all genres of music, anthems, spirituals, contemporary gospel, traditional gospel, Caribbean, African, Afro-Brazilian, Afro-Cuban, because we have persons from the Caribbean here, persons from South America. And it's a wide spectrum, we have a wide experience. And I want our children to know it, and common meter hymns we have to teach because that tradition will die in a denomination like ours. Whenever Jeffrey pulls his hands off the organ during Communion, it means we're getting ready to have a common meter. Jeffrey pulled his hands off the organ during Communion, and Mama Tripplet started 'I Love the Lord, He Heard My Cry'. And Thanda started singing standing next to me in Zulu. And she sang that song in Zulu. I finished Communion service, gave the benediction. After service she said to me, it was so nice of Elkan Setole (ph.) to come teach you that song. Now, Dr. Setole was an ethnomusicologist from South Africa, a friend of hers and a friend of this church. He would come teach our choirs African songs so we could do them in our concerts. And I said, "What song did Elkan teach?" "You know this," she started singing. I said, "No, no, no, no, baby, that's, that's a common meter. That's, that's"--she said, "No, no, we sing that, they sing that in my village today." Right in our face, right in our face is an artifact of our story that we don't even understand. What Africans did was to take the words of Isaac Watts' music and put it to African tunes. And nobody taught us that because music doesn't teach us that. When you go to music class, they don't teach you African music. And I said, "You're kidding me." She says, "No. I grew up singing that song." So they'll take Ira Sankey's words and Isaac Watts' words--that's why they call them Dr. Watts, they would take their words and put them to song--tunes that they sang in African. And here, right in our face is a song we've been singing since the 1800s, that's an African tune, and I didn't know it. And I'm the one collecting music. And most musicians didn't know it because they, most musicians in North America have never been to South Africa. And when you look at the curriculum, it does not include African music or Chinese or Japanese or any other kind of music. It includes European. If I say to you Classical, that means European. Most musicians cannot name four, four African musicians, composers. Just the nature of the curriculum. Asa Higgins says, that's by benign neglect; that's by malignant intent. But that is a part of what became a driving force in terms of, there's a connectiveness here that I not only have to affirm and celebrate, I've got to pass on cause our kids need to know this. Story_ID: 15914 Speaker 1: At any time during this part of your development, Reverend Wright, is there ever a time where you were challenged in terms of your Christian, the Christian belief system? Speaker 2: Not the Christian-- Speaker 1: Or the White, the--the role of the Christian church, let me see, the role of Christianity vis-a-vis the, you know, African and African American community--I mean, historically, I'm-- Speaker 2: I was, I was only challenged--was never, never--let me put it this way, never any serious challenge. Why? Because the people who try to challenge--the people who have tried--let me put, put the tense in this verb correctly--who have tried to challenge me on that point, fail to recognize several things. Number one, they want to say that African Americans were made Christians by slaveholders. They completely negate the fact that Africans were Christians before Europeans were. That's number one. Please remember, what did I just tell you about the Egyptian and the Italian? Christianity started in northeast Africa. There was no Suez Canal. When they went across the Sea of Reeds, they were on the same continent. That was African. Like, like Abuna Paulos told us in Ethiopian Orthodox Church last year when we went to Ethiopia, he says we have been Christians since the year 34 [A.D.], when the Ethiopian converted and went back to Ethiopia and took Christianity to Ethiopia, since 34. He said, Europeans converted in 325 when Constantine converted. So Africans were Christians first. And then to challenge us as African Americans is to negate 1,500, 1,600, 1,700 years of your history. And you keep starting, like Bobby Wright said, you keep starting the slavery, you'll forever have a slave mentality. Slavery is not what introduced Africans to Christianity. My research in music also showed that there were African spirituals on that side of the, of the ocean, Atlantic Ocean, all right. So that, that's a piece of it. And when people start trying to challenge you on that, then you--they find out you know a little bit more. They didn't even know that there were African Christians before there were European Christians. But then, number two, you want to talk about Christianity's role in the slave trade, all right. Let's talk about the Asiento where the Pope gave permission for the trading of human flesh, all right. Then let's talk about the Catholic Church's role in the slave trade. Fine. But please, let's back up 600 years and talk about Islam's role 'cause it started back in the 900s, 700 years before Christianity. Let's talk about Islam's role in the slave trade. We're always talking about the west African slave trade. Let's now talk about the east African slave trade because Muslims were taking Africans across the Indian Ocean into slavery long before, centuries before Christians. So it ain't no asa lama lakum as if this one's wrong and this one's right. Here's the black man's religion. No, the both world religions were involved in the slave trade, historically. So if you want to challenge, yes, historically, there were some white Christians involved and they were some Muslims involved. In fact, Muslims are still involved in the slave trade in the Sudan today, okay. And the guys who were in [Operation] Desert Storm got shocked to find out that some of the people there are holding slaves, black slaves, okay. Now, so that the challenger backs off when they find out, wait a minute, nobody told me all this. I just wanted to say, you know, well, the white man gave us Jesus. The white man did not give us Jesus, but then more important than that, when I am challenged, and I point out the iconic, iconography, that started with the Renaissance is not the original iconography. That's not what Jesus looked like. Again, you get, oh, nobody told me. I came, I--most people who have tried to challenge me, come at me with a doctrinaire set of questions that come somewhere out of Malcolm X's old page, notebook, Elijah Muhammad's, Noble Dru Ali, or something from the 20th Century, and has no historical merit to it whatsoever. When they find out I'm a historian of religions, they back down, all right. I thought you were gonna ask me if I ever get challenged. When you said, did I ever get challenged, I got, I got challenged in terms of Christian in that, that some people, well, race doesn't matter. Well, if it doesn't matter, then put him, paint him the color he was originally, if it doesn't matter, if it really doesn't matter, all right. Plus, the writers now, I mean the writings now, and, and again, I say when those people come at you, challenging you, the writings now are legion. When you look at Cain Hope Felder's writings. And you look at Charles Cofer's (ph.) writings and look at, at Cheikh Anta Diop's writings, people are overwhelmed with knowledge that, oh, nobody told me this 'cause--no, 'cause you're, you're coming in a doctrinaire, I'm gonna make you feel guilty 'cause the white man held slaves. And black people held slaves and Muslims held slaves, but that has not--it has, it has to do with--and here's, here's the ultimate piece, when you starting talking, not historically, but contemporaneously, the faith you preach is this. You remember the Matthew 16 passage, and this one will live with me forever because of what Reverend [Tyrone] Brooks did to me, to make me understand it clearly. In Matthew 16, it says they came into the coast of Caesarea Phillipi. Jesus said who do men say that I am? What are people saying about me? Now, the guys told him nice things. You know, they say, well, some say you're Elijah, John the Baptist, Isaiah, Jeremiah, one of the prophets, all right. Who do people say Jesus is today? Well, you know, Christianity is responsible for the slave trade and Christianity--people were raped and then there's a slave ship named Jesus. Some say, he was good prophet. He wasn't the son of God, though. Some say he was a good teacher. Some say after him came another prophet named Muhammad. Some, some nice things are said about Jesus. Then the next thing Jesus says is this. That's fine. Thank you for telling me what all those people are saying about me. Now, let me ask you this. Who do you say that I am? Because that's the question where the rubber meets the road. It ain't got nothing to do with Isaac Newton, [Dietrich] Bonhoeffer, ain't got nothing to do with who held slaves. I'm asking you who do you say I am? Peter's answers, you're the Christ, and the living God. That's a personal relationship. That's not a historical scholarship. This is a personal relationship. And most people can't challenge you on that because I ain't talking about what your mama believed, what your granddaddy believed. I'm asking you what do you--who do you say I am because the, the formational question at Baptism, whether Anglican or UCC [United Church of Christ], is do you accept the Lord Jesus Christ as your personal savior? Not did your grandmamma or did the slave owner? I'm asking you, do you accept him as your personal savior. That's the only thing that counts because it's relational. And it's about a relationship, not scholarship. Now, I got the scholarship to back up half the stuff you're asking me, for those who challenge, it's crazy. But let's put the scholarship aside. That's what other people say about me. Who do you say? Which is another reason why I was telling you that, that--talking about I just like the ambiance, I like the ambiance that, that--the lady whose funeral was today didn't finish college, all right. But that was her Jesus. You can't touch that. What did [MC] Hammer say? You can't touch that. And I need to be--I tell my seminarians all the time, I say, you know, you were, you go to school, you learn all you, if you can get a Ph.D, I hope you can; get all you can. But don't ever cut the roots off from the church. Don't ever cut--go to somebody's church, get--'cause you need to study the Bible longer than folk who split verbs, knock down adjectives and jump on the prepositions, 'cause they might not know the academic stuff you know, but they got a personal relationship with the Lord. And I just told the congregation, an old, old story my father [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] told me years ago about a young, young sophomore from Biloxi, Mississippi that went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And by the sophomore year, he didn't believe in nothing. He had found out Christianity was the white man's religion. He knew a little Malcolm X. He had read the autobiography from Malcolm X and he knew a little Rastafarian. He tried a little reefer, and he didn't believe in none of that stuff. Well, he went home for Christmas in his sophomore year the South, he had to go to church. He didn't want to go to church, but he knew he could not eat mama's greens if he didn't go to mama's church. So he went to church with mama and daddy, small church, the pastor recognized him being home for Christmas. He was so happy, proud, full scholarship, Brother Wilson stand up. You have something to say. And he didn't, he was petrified. He didn't want to say nothing. He didn't believe in none of this stuff. He thought it was stupid, ignorant, superstitious. He was a drama major, however, so he did the 23rd Psalm like James Earl Jones, redolent voice, perfect diction, 'The Lord is my Shepherd'. When he finished, the church was on its feet, standing ovation. Just before the benediction, the Reverend said, "I see Brother Washington's in church. Wash, this is his first time being back since his wife passed, his wife of sixty-five years. Wash, you have anything you, you'd like to say to the members?" Wash didn't come to the front of the church. He just stood up where he was and said, tears in his eyes, pure white hair, "The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green"--when he got down to surely, everybody was crying, including the college sophomore. On the way home, the pastor's daughter said, "Daddy, how come, how come John said the Lord's Prayer and everybody gave him a standing ovation. And when Mr. Washington said it, people were crying?" And her father said, "Because John knows the 23rd Psalm, baby. But Wash knows the shepherd." And it's being around--that's the question. Do you accept? And being around folk who know the Shepard, folk who have a personal relationship, that's very important in terms of faith formation, and not losing your faith, in light of all the stuff that you, you can learn and read scholarly and academically, and being disappointed by some of the people, the human beings who slip and, and who, as you were saying when we were off-camera, do things that give a bad reputation to either a church or denomination or the faith. Story_ID: 15915 Speaker 1: It's almost as if you're saying that to be spiritual, you have to remain in touch with the common person or that common--well, you're saying you have to remain grounded. What are you saying? Speaker 2: I am saying, I'm saying, for instance, my friend John Kenny always says God wants you whole-brained. See, and we approach religion too often and theology, with the left brain approach, cognitive, linear, scholarship, academic. Right brain is intuitive, feeling, I just got a feeling. I've got a feeling everything gonna be all right. I'm so glad trouble don't last always. God wants your whole brain. God wants you to use left brain and the right brain. Everything in life is not rational left brain. There are some things--love is nonrational. Love is just a much a part of life as logic is. So that, don't lose touch with these folk, who might not know the heavy stuff you know over here, but they've got a relationship because they've been--it's just I, I told, I was telling some of my students who were having problems with Jehovah's Witnesses and persons of other faith who would challenge them. I said, listen, why I push, your having a relationship is this. I can stand here right now and prove, intellectually, logically, left-brain cognitively that there's no such thing as love between a man and a woman, no such thing. It's either a function of the thyroid gland, pituitary gland or it's just wishful thinking. To love, you've got to be equals. And y'all ain't equal. One of you all is more intelligent than the other, one of you make more money than the other. Somebody's high, somebody's low. So if you're high, I adore you. That ain't love. If I'm lower than you, you look down on me, you sympathize with me. That's not love. And I can stand here and prove to you that a sexual orgasm is a function of different glands and different nerves in the body, airtight. Go for an hour and a half. When my mother and father, who'd been married sixty-three years looked at me, and said, the poor boy, gone to school and got tore up in the head. They know that there's love. They've experienced it. Now, I proved to you intellectually there's no such thing, but they've experienced it. And it's the same thing with God. You know you got all these great theories and different paths of spirituality. But once you've experienced the living Lord, the Christ, Son of the Living God, Peter says. Thomas says to him, my Lord, and my God. My Lord, that's experience. That's relational. And if you, if you lose, if you lose touch with that side of your existence, then how are you gonna do ministry? That's why I say, I, I teach my seminarians. How can you do ministry with the people? How can you do ministry with the people? Story_ID: 15916 Speaker 1: You had said, music, preaching and the holy spirit have to be present. Speaker 2: W. E. B. Dubois said that. I wish I had said it. I wish there was one-- Speaker 1: Oh, W. E. B., that's right, he did say that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I wish that-- Speaker 1: But that's been your belief system with, you know, with your ministry. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Now, you have a relationship also with Minister Louis Farrakhan, right? Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum. Speaker 1: Does that friendship really extend, really onto the--is it sort of Afrocentric based or is it--do you have any differences because he's, you know, from a-- Speaker 2: Different faith? Speaker 1: A different faith. Speaker 2: No, we, we don't have different--I know he's--I know upfront, he is a Muslim. And he knows upfront I am a Christian. And we respect those boundaries. I was sharing at the Fund for Theological Education recently. I had to speak to presidents and deans of, of all the schools that are accredited by the--by the American Association of Theological Schools. And I said to them, one of the most profound things I've heard recently, theologically, was from [President] Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton would have these faith breakfasts, eight years worth. I made two of them. And on his last one, he said, "I don't know if my successor is gonna continue this tradition, but I certainly hope he will. And I want you, if you're invited, to come, not because of who's inviting you, but because of what happens here." At those faith breakfasts he had, if you and I went together, he wouldn't let us sit together. And they were, before--when you walked in the room, he had me sitting next to a Sikh, sitting next to a Hindu, sitting next to an Orthodox Muslim, sitting next to an Orthodox Jew, sitting next to a Roman Catholic priest, sitting next to a Southern Baptist because most of us had never had a conversation with people like that. And he forced us to have conversations for two or three hours and see these people as humans and learn to talk to them. Here this guy's got a kosher breakfast. Well, what's kosher and explain, you know. And he said because in faith formation, Minister Farrakhan, Jeremiah Wright, who Julieanna is, who Jeremiah is faith-wise, have to do with everything that happens in your experience. And you've got to put up some boundaries, okay. Didn't have too good a preacher in the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church, didn't like young people, met some bad Baptist preachers, but here's who I am in terms of what my daddy, my mama, my grandmama and them taught me. Here, here's who I am. Here's where I draw the line in terms of my faith, the house I live in. And these walls are not malleable. You can't break the walls. He said, but you never build the walls so high that you can't see over them or talk to somebody on the other side who has a different set of beliefs. Otherwise, we're gonna end up with Serbia; otherwise, we're gonna end up with what's going on in the Middle East, Palestinian-Israeli. Otherwise, you're gonna end up killing folk who don't believe like we believe, whether it's jihad or crusade. I can't--I'm not trying to change his beliefs. He's not trying to change my beliefs because we understand we have different sets of beliefs. But we honor each other as human persons. So like, no, we don't--I mean I know where we disagreed. He knows where we--we don't sit around and argue about that. For what? Why should I try to proselytize, convert him, why should--that's, that's a waste of time. I'm attacking your walls. This is who you are. Mellow. But that doesn't mean I can't talk to you, doesn't mean we don't live on the same planet. We have some common problems and some issues to solve in this world together, you know. And that's how, that's how I look at our relationship, yeah. Story_ID: 15917 Speaker 1: Now, what about the role of the megachurch? I mean you are sort of one of the, you know, the--you're one of the mega churches that exist now. And those churches during your father's [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] day were, they were not even, things that existed. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean outside maybe of the Catholic Church, you know-- Speaker 2: And lots of them didn't exist because see in, in the Catholic Church, if you look around the city [Chicago, Illinois], there's something very interesting, Catholic and Protestant, the notion of parish, when you've got parish, you ain't got no parking lot, 'cause people walk to church. Megachurch is where folk drive. Folk come from miles to go to megachurches. So no--back in the '50s [1950s] and '40s [1940s], there were no megachurches 'cause people would, you didn't--you'd catch a trolley maybe, subway. But it was a church locally in your community and back in the, remember in the '40s and '50s it was segregated, so you wasn't catching no trolley too far to go anywhere 'cause black people live in this part of town. South Side, you went to, to [Wendell] Phillips [High School] or DuSable [High School]. So the phenomenon now is very different than, than it was in, in my father's, in my father's time and when I was growing up. And you wanted to know what specifically about it? You were asking--outside of the fact that they were different, did you ask something? Speaker 1: I was just saying that, what do you think the role of the church today--you know, because this is necessity that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it, yeah-- Speaker 1: --has existed. It's cash rich. Speaker 2: I think, I think it's--and unfortunately, unfortunately, most megachurches with which I am familiar and I will qualify that by saying they might be cash rich, but they're not mission oriented. It's all me. I think the role the church--I think the role of the authentic megachurch today is the same as the church I grew up. I told you we had, we had volleyball. We had softball, fast pitch. We had, we had hardball. We had oratorical contests. We had a, we had a potpourri of, of offerings to minister to the total person. And I think that's what megachurches do. I think that's, the role of the authentic one is to have a mission outside of itself, where you actually--our church is involved in, in a hospital in Saltpond and a computer school we put up in Saltpond which is Ghana, West Africa, in a little, small mission church of the Apostolic faith in Guguletu, a township of South Africa, to have mission outside of oneself and to be linked with other Christians doing missions throughout the world, a HIV-AIDS ministry. But ministries that, that speak to--for instance, we have twenty-two youth ministries 'cause all kids can't sing. A lot of churches you go to, you join the church, get in the choir (laughter). We have youth ministries, two youth choirs, three youth choirs, probably. I forgot the little ones; three different youth dance ministries, athletic ministry, martial arts ministry, rights of passage for girls, rights of passage for boys. There are megachurches have the opportunity of offering different kinds of these, of Bible study curriculum and it offers 22 different Bible classes, twenty-five some trimesters, each trimester, where people--as well Yoga, as well as self help, as well as Alcoholics Anonymous, as well as Narcotics Anonymous, as well as Three in One, which is Drug and Alcohol Recovery program based upon the Son set you free, you're not afraid to say Jesus. AA, you've got to say higher power. Three in One, you can say Jesus. But you have--and then serving the same need, but these people feel uncomfortable saying Jesus, so they won't go to Three in One. They go to AA, all right, that you meet the needs of the people, that you address the needs of the community and that you address the needs of the larger world. I think that's the role of the megachurch today, to, to offer not just congregation oriented, what's, what's in it for us, but what can we do because you, say we're, we're cash rich, we can do a whole lot more for, for persons outside of this community and this country, than a small, struggling can that's got to worry about how to pay the bills and how to keep the lights on. Story_ID: 15918 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for your ministry and your church [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Retirement, oh, excuse me (laughter). Speaker 1: You've grown it so much, I mean eighty-seven to almost 8,000, I mean 8,000. I mean that, that's a huge, huge growth. Your father [Jeremiah Wright, Sr.] grew, but, you know, a hundred to a thousand was a big deal even in his time, but I'm just saying that's a huge--it says you're doing something right, but I'm saying what is your vision? Speaker 2: Well, our vision--my vision, and our vision is, it's, it's two-fold, and I'll tell you why playfully said retirement also in a moment. You go back to what I said about Doctor--about Clarence Cobb giving us that, that saying, "the Lord will give you as far as you can see". I mentioned that we started a long-range planning board that year. And from '78 [1978] to now [2002], we've had a board for long-range planning, where we look long range in terms of what really should we be doing five years from now, ten years from now, twenty years from now, twenty-five years from now. Because the church grew as it did, some of the very important things that we had on the drawing board had got pushed back because we had to build again. And because we had to build again, we--that took all the resources, that took all the time. So some of the things that are on the back burner now are being brought forward. A--B, a part of that bringing forward is that we then sat down twenty years into the, into the long-range planning process and said, okay, let's take an assessment. What have we come? What have we done? What did we do right? What did we do wrong? And where should we be going now? And I pointed out to the, to the board as we sat there that day, I said, would you please realize, when you look back twenty years, look back twenty years, I think four of the persons who sat on the original board for long-range planning are now dead. All right, we've got a federally chartered credit union. We've got child care, Head Start, three Head Start programs, three day care programs, two senior citizen housing constructed, brand new worship center constructed, constructed, board for higher education, college placement, college placement tours, historically black college fair. We have wonderful things we can look back twenty years. Now, let's look ahead twenty years, and before you know, look around this table, cause only Georgette is gonna be alive and working in this church twenty years from now. So what we need to do is pull some young people her age to do the planning for the next twenty years, which is what we did. We then started a strategic plan process where we pull persons her age. We kept one or two old heads like myself and others on--that's why I say retirement, for continuity to show them where we've been and what we've done. And we pulled together about twenty-five persons her age and I've been involved with the strategic plan process now for fourteen months. So the strategic plan now, in terms of where the church is heading in the next twenty years is, is their dream, their plan, all right. And I would be retired. That's why I said, playfully retired, but--and lots of times as I sat there listening to their dreaming and listening to their envisioning where we ought to go, it was a strange feeling 'cause it's like, you're not gonna be here, talking to myself. I--well, I can't say that 'cause it, I'm not gonna be implementing that 'cause that's what they see happening. And that was a strange, strange, strange feeling. Immediately, in terms of short range, in that long-range strategic planning, the school that we have not been able to do because of the building, we want kindergarten through 12th grade African-centered Christian school, a seminary, a fully-accredited African American seminary. The closest African American seminary to us is Payne Theological Seminary in [Wilberforce] Ohio. Those are short-range things. They're looking at, they, meaning the strategic planning committee, is looking at a wide range of things that we need to bring up from the back burner now and some new things that we had not envisioned twenty-three years ago, twenty-four years ago now. So that my plans, my vision for the church, consistent with theirs, is to do things that keep us involved in ministry in the local community and in the larger community and in the world community. Education, education, African-centered education, connectiveness of our people to our historical past and to our present; making, making persons--you know, you know, do you know, do you know 50 percent, 52 percent of the persons living in Durban [South Africa], something like 54 percent in Cape Town are HIV positive. If this were happening in Israel, the Jewish community would be up in arms doing something. When--and I, want to make the African American community just as sensitive to the point that we're gonna jump and down and do something. Something happened in Durban, something happened--not, not the racism conference, I'm not gonna talk about that-- Story_ID: 15919 Speaker 1: Something happened in South Africa in Durban and in Brazil that we need to make happen in this country. Last March at Worldwide AIDS Day, I was asked to come to Cincinnati [Ohio] to address, keynote, the black church's response to AIDS. And as I wrestled with that topic, I said, do you mean what really what the Black church's response ought to be or do you mean what it actually is? And as I was putting that message together something hit me as, as a student in the '60s [1960s], as a person who was in the sit-in's. You know, we marched and we sang, and we prayed. But after all those public demonstrations, we jammed legislators to change the laws. We sat down at the table with them and negotiated and go the civil rights laws passed. The singing didn't do it. The praying didn't do it. That brought a public attention to it, the kneel-ins and the wade-ins, that brought public attention to it. Right now, the black church is having beautiful services on AIDS. We'll bring in Kirk Franklin, we'll bring in Aretha Franklin. We have folk crying and lighting candles, falling out. That's wonderful, but we're not touching AIDS until we get the laws changed to do what they did in Durban and in Brazil and get those anti-retroviral drugs generically given to the people at a price they can afford, and given to the poor free. Merck [and Company] had to back down in South Africa because it was gonna look like they were going against poor people and dying people. But we are so greed oriented in this country, they ain't about to touch them drug countries, and change the laws to get--Brazil, medications are free. One of the reasons you don't see these high numbers in other places, cause the med--the medications are available, the generic ones, not the ones made by Merck or [Eli] Lilly [and Company], whoever, but the generic ones, all right. And I'm saying that, in terms of the goal, until we get African Americans jumping up and down and saying, wait a minute--that's like they did in South Africa, we need the drug companies to back off this thing so we can get help to people. Everybody can't afford what Magic Johnson can afford. But the medicine is available at a much cheaper price. But because of the legislation in this country, which we're not touching, singing 'We Shall Overcome', nothing is being done. So it's that kind of--and my, my vision is to have the church, Trinity [United] Church [of Christ, Chicago, Illinois], working with other churches, not only in economic development, providing jobs, but doing something internationally, and making happen here, what happened in South Africa in terms of HIV-AIDS. Where they are, now, they haven't come up with a cure, but they're getting free drugs. They're getting free medication. Brazil, free, free, I mean free, F-R-E-E, free. Why don't we do that? It's doable. It's the same God in Brazil, the same God in South Africa that's in America. So that's why I'm saying the church. I see capital C, Church needing to be in the forefront of that kind of, of movement. Story_ID: 15920 Speaker 1: When you look at the black community, the church--I'm, this is an opinionated statement, but the largest sources of, of money really, exist really in the church and maybe in the, you know, in drugs. And I would ask you, what role--do you see a new role of the church playing, I mean, even in terms of--my question is, why can't churches own, well, the, you know, construction companies or franchises. I mean, you know, why, why are churches, you know, why can't they do--they have inbuilt, you know, workforce, they have, you know, they have, you know, a church like you has a tremendous amount of talent within the congregation, and-- Speaker 2: Well, go ahead. Speaker 1: And knowledge power. And I'm wondering if that is envisioned by, you know, you or-- Speaker 2: Hundreds of, hundreds of African American clergy, especially those persons who have the resources you mentioned, Floyd Flake. Our church has something like six or eight corporations, different corporations. And Flake has, God knows how many--West Angeles Church of God in Christ in, in Los Angeles [California], Friendship-West [Baptist Church] in Dallas, Texas, Kirby John Caldwell, Windsor Village United Methodist [Church] in, in Houston, Texas, that have, that have those things in motion and more envisioned. So it's not, it's not something that's just an idle dream. One of--that's a part of the--of the strategic plan that I know that these young people have come up with in terms of, you know, doing strip malls, doing businesses, providing jobs and setting up corporations cause some of those businesses you mentioned have to be for-profit. They can't be not-for-profit, but we have, we have for-profit and not-for-profit corporations set up now and more envisioned, yeah. But that, that is something that is happening all over the country in terms of churches using their resources to try to pour money back into the communities as well as into Africa and the Caribbean. Speaker 1: So you see the role of the black church in what way then, in the, you know, in this new millennium? Where do, what do you see? Speaker 2: I see it having an educational role. I see it having a vocational, vocational role. And very central to that, of course, is the spiritual role in terms of, in terms of the spiritual needs of African American people. That about sums it, educational, spiritual, vocational. And under vocational, I'm including economic development. Story_ID: 15921 Speaker 1: And Reverend Wright, do you--when you look back over your career and even, you know, the--your family background and things like that, do you think it would, you know, that all the groundwork was doing--I mean, do you think it's surprising what you were able to accomplish basically, given, you know, where you had come from? Speaker 2: I, I think, I think it's an old, an old Virginia, that old Virginia mother wit says it best. It's, it's not me. It's, it's--my mother [Mary Wright] used to say, "God plus one equals a majority", that, that things that God has been able to do, in spite of me, that yeah, some of it, some of it I look at and wow, I never, I never dreamed--I sat and as I said to you, down the street, say they're gonna fill up that block (laughter). And here comes [Clarence] Cobb saying "The Lord will give you as far as you can see", and now we've got a senior citizens home, 63rd [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue]. Now, we've got 39th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue]. Now, we've got 70, 70, 69th [Street] and Stony [Island Avenue], a child care place. This building. This was a A&P when I got here and a Rexall Drugs, you know, when I started down this street. No, I never expected that, but when I look back and see what God has done and, and again, seeing how God has worked--I, I didn't tell you this. When I say we started our board for long-range planning, I'll give you a short story. What was frighteningly awesome about that when those persons were called together for a retreat, I asked them to break up and go to different rooms, and don't talk--husbands can't talk to wives. Pray, meditate and listen for two hours in terms of what God will have this church doing and we'll come back after lunch. When we compiled a list up on the chalkboard and the printout sheet, out of twelve persons, the first twenty were the same. We had like thirty items in it. The first twenty were the same on everybody's sheet. That's God. That ain't Jeremiah Wright. I, I didn't go from room to room. I didn't say nothing to nobody. But they wanted a school. They wanted senior citizen housing. They--that, that's what they heard God say here that we need to do. So, I mean, just like, many of the ministers has come up with, other members. We've got some guys who go into the public schools, forty weeks a year, one day and spend a whole day in school. I didn't have nothing to do with that. They retired. They're saying, you know, you can't be--Judge [Eugene] Pincham always said, "you can't be what you can't see". If--what, what male figures does a kid see in elementary school? The janitor and the gym teacher. Most African American kids come in a single-parent, female head of the household. So the men go in to--they're not coming to church, they go into the school, and take the church into the school. That kind of Christianity on the hoof, when leather meets the road, actually doing something, are things the, the members themselves see as important and holding up role models for the kids to see. I mean y'all talking about being, Charles Barkley and Michael Jordan being role models, these guys see men in their school every week, helping, help with their homework, sitting beside them in social studies, teaching them how to tie a shoe. Most kids never have a shoe that they had to shine. They wear sneaks. What do we call them now, gym shoes? I forgot what they call them? But seeing the church actively involved in every aspect of life from the kindergarten age through our senior citizens, like we have volunteers who go down to the--who work for senior citizens. And we now have a Hospice ministry to teach people how to die well. Nobody has to, shouldn't be dying in pain, palliative medicine. The full spectrum--I see the black church's role as covering that full spectrum of life. I mean, otherwise, why are we following the one who says, I come that you might have life and have it more abundantly? He don't mean U.S. greed when he says abundantly. But then why can't you live life to the fullest? You should be able to get an education based on your ability to learn, not your ability to pay. You should be able to have health care cause you're a human person who needs health care. That those are the issues that, that we need to, we need to be addressing as, as a black church in the 22nd Century--what are we, 21st Century? 21st Century. Story_ID: 15922 Speaker 1: What are you most proud of with your ministry, and then O just have one more after that. Speaker 2: If he ever sees this tape, he probably would get angry with me 'cause he doesn't--he's very bashful. He doesn't like this. But there's one guy here who as an example of it, and, and who best illustrates it, when I see that I made difference in somebody's life. This one kid, he's grown now, he's not a kid. He was one of my bad teenagers. I saw myself, except that I couldn't do what he was doing at fifteen and sixteen. But he was such a good teenager, a regular teenager. He was in the choir. Now, one night I was sitting in my car listening to music, waiting for a song to go off. I had come to choir rehearsal or I had come to church on choir rehearsal night. And I saw him and his partner come up to the church, and they stuck a fifth of wine in the snow to keep it cold. I waited till the song went off. They went on inside. And I went out and took the wine and put it in my trunk and went on in rehearsal. And then after rehearsal was over, I came and I stood out on the front steps (laughter) and watched him and his friend almost clean the whole, you know, with their hands out there digging. I said, "What you guys looking for?" "Oh, nothing, man, nothing. It was on this side, it was on this side." I said, "What you looking for?" "No, no, nothing, Rev." He finished high school and went to college, dropped out of college, dropped out of college, started driving the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] bus. His little girlfriend's in the choir. He asked her to marry him. She said, "No, my daddy's not gonna let me marry you. You're a college dropout." The kid went back to school, finished college, got married. And they had one child. Then he went to law school. Now, he first was a chemist working out at that Argonne [National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois] Labs; went to law school, while working full time at Argonne and taking care of his family. Passed--came out, passed the bar the first time out and he's now a judge in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. And he's, he was--I would say he's forty-five, forty-six, will be forty-seven this year [2002]. His second baby, they've now had another son, but the second baby was a girl. She was born prematurely, I think twenty-six weeks, something like that. I've forgotten. She never came out of the hospital. She was, she had organs misformed and all that, and her mom stayed around the clock at the hospital. At that point, he had one son. So he would take his son to his mother's in the evening, go down to the hospital 'til visiting hours were over and go get his son. His mother would, help him with homework, and take him home, bathe, food; get up in the morning and take him to school, go to the hospital, go to work; come back, pick the boy up from school, take him to the mother. He kept that up for two months. I got a call that Mike's daughter had died. All the way over to the house, I was wondering, what can I say? What can I say? Everybody was hoping and praying. And so, we got over there, and all the kids who had been kids, with the wine in the, in the snow and all that, were there. All his partners and we laughed and talked and reminisced for a while. So I asked him to step out on the sidewalk with me 'cause I wanted to talk to him away from his friends. He came outside. And I said, "How you doing, man?" He said, "I'm fine, man." I said, "You can't be fine. Your daughter just died this morning." He says, "No, I'm fine." I said, "Mike, you--don't, don't go into denial, man. How are you really"--and he said, "Rev, Rev, let me tell you something. You preached a sermon," that same series of sermons I was telling you about my mother said, he said, "You preached a sermon about six years ago on us praying for other people and how we really don't pray for them. We tell God what to do in their lives. And, and I, I was, I was thinking about that sermon this morning. And it dawned on me, for two months, I've been telling God, 'Lord, don't you let my daughter die. Lord, you take care of my baby. Lord, fix it so grandma doesn't have any granddaughters and Lord, you know what we need'--never once did I ask the Lord what would be best for her." He said, "And on the way to, when I left the hospital this morning, I prayed, I said, 'Lord, do what's best in her life.' And it was like a burden came up off when I heard Him say, thanks, Mike, now I can take her home. So, I knew this morning she was gonna die because of what I prayed." I'm standing on the sidewalk, looking at this kid who hides wine in the snow, telling me of a sermon that I preached that has made a difference in his life. It's that kind of thing that it's like, you know, it really does count for something. Story_ID: 15923 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be, Reverend Wright? Speaker 2: Like I said, I made a difference in, a positive difference in somebody's life...