 Story_ID: 95750 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Kelly Davies. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Armstrong Williams, A-R-M-S-T-R-O-N-G, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 5, 1959, Mullins Hospital in Marion, South Carolina. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation sir? Speaker 2: I'm in communications, real estate. All right, I'm an entrepreneur. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Want me to elaborate? Speaker 1: No. That's good for now. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: We'll get into it later. We're slating this at the present time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, what is today's date? Speaker 2: July 29, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C. of the World's capital, at my residence. Story_ID: 95751 Speaker 1: All right. Okay, before we go into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish-type questions I am compelled to ask you, they just require a short answer. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Soul food. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: You know I like to wear black with a yellow sweater, but I like black and the blues, that's my color, I like black. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Every morning the Lord wakes me up, brother, it's a favorite time for me, 'cause every time you read the papers and hear about the obits, you know what as long as I'm alive and have another chance at life, every, every, every season is a great season for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Chateau Ez in Southern France. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you spell that please? Speaker 2: C-H-A-T-E-A-U, E-Z. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's between Monte Carlo [France] and Nice [France]. Actually, I vacation there often. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: The right side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It describes all our media endeavors. People know us--know us (unclear) refer to me as Mr. Right Side, so I like the right side. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And it's the right side of God not man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, I just want to be clear, all right. Story_ID: 95752 Speaker 1: Can you tell me something about your family history, I want to ask you about your mother and your father, but I want to ask you about your mother's side of the family first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Thelma Howard Williams, T-H-E-L-M-A, H-O-W-A-R-D, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born April 9, 1926, in Florence, South Carolina. Her parents were the Thomases, her maiden name was Thomas and well, no, no, no, her parents--well her maiden name was Thomas, yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you know about this side of the family, how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question. I've not even asked that question. I like that question actually you know what, my mother's family were very industrious. They loved not only their fancy hats and the dresses and the purses, but they loved dressing up, they liked very nice things, they liked sewing, they liked entrepreneurships like beauty salons and doing hair, they liked designing their own bags during their heyday, during the turn of the 19th century, the early 1900s, and well spoken, well educated, lots of pride and then much later in the 1900s they were farmers in the Pee Dee area of South Carolina and hard workers. They were God-fearing people, Pentecostal, church-going people, huge family, they had lots of kids and that was passed on. And, but very industrious, in fact I get excited talking about that because I actually believe my entrepreneurship side comes from my mother's side, because if you go back, and you know I've gone to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] where the family is located, I've gone to Philadelphia Pennsylvania, I've gone all over South Carolina and it is amazing to hear them talk about the Thomases. And also they were writers. They were very good with the written word and if you look in my mother's lineage, many of my cousins are wonderful writers, some write for the Washington Post, some write for USA Today, and it's amazing because not only am I a writer, and it's a gift. You know a gift is something that is good--comes from God, your parents realizes it early on so many of my gifts comes from my mother's side of the family. Story_ID: 95753 Speaker 1: Okay. Now do they have any stories from--any stories in your family on that side have passed down from the nineteenth century from, you know, Civil War period or before that. Back to, they may even go back to the Revolutionary War, I don't know, are there that you know of? Speaker 2: Well my mother's [Thelma Williams] side of the family, our great-great grandparents and relatives, many of them were in slavery. They talked about the treatment by the white man, the discrimination and just women were treated as chattel and all they could do is stay in the kitchen and many in the field, they were raped at will, many of them became pregnant by the white man, and you know in privacy he would take care of the child, but in public, you know, they were scorned. They talked about how they learned how to cook and passed it down, they would try these new recipes and how the white man loved that soul food, the collard greens, the chicken bogs. I don't know if you know what chicken bog is, it's when you cook rice, sausage. Well you boil the chicken and you get a pot of gravy with the chicken and you take--then you cook the rice--then you take the chicken and cut up this sausage, smoke sausage and put it in the rice and you just cook it for a couple of hours and then the seasoning on that dish is unbelievable. And my mother and those talked about how they learned these trades working in the man's kitchen and working in their gardens, they had to do the planning and how her grandparents, even through letters, how they longed for the day--they always wondered whether the black man would really be free, that was always a concern. Because if you thought that women had it bad, the men would work so hard in the fields, they were less than animals during that day and how they wished for their dignity. And the only thing they had on was to go to church on Sundays and their faith in God and religion, and they had such hope. They always felt that their generations would not realize the hand of God moving on the evil heart of the man at that time, but they were hoping that the generation like mine and those to come would never have to grow up under those circumstances. And it's quite fascinating because my mother, a very interesting contrast, I know I'm getting into another area that you're not inspired yet, but it was an interesting contrast in our home. My mother never really trusted many white Americans because she felt they were very abusive and very disrespectful because my mother grew up on a share cropper's home. She lived with her--with my grandfather, Armstrong Howard, who was her poppy, and she talked about how they were cheated, that you can never, ever, you always would be in debt to the man. They would always say, well you know, Mr. Armstrong, you owe me for that, you owe me for this and so therefore, you don't get anything monetarily at this pay period. They were always in debt and how resentful that was for her and it really made her bitter and very distrusting. And you know, my mother, even though the family was very industrious, my mother's family, they were very poor, they did not have much and she never--she just felt that it would be that way all of her life. And when she married my father [James Williams]--you see, my father was very--was a really--he may not have had the industrious background or the entrepreneur background, but my father's family were land owners. So my father married his first wife, Theola Livingston, in the late '40s [1940s]. Story_ID: 95754 Speaker 1: Now let's get your father's full name? Speaker 2: James, J-A-M-E-S, Stirk, S-T-I-R-K, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And when was he born? Speaker 2: My father was born July 2, 1919 in Marion, South Carolina. He was born at the home, not in a hospital, but my father's deceased, God bless his soul. We like to say he's sleeping, but my father passed of myeloma, that's bone cancer on December 16, 1985. But anyhow it was an interesting contrast because my father had come from a lineage of landowners, and I'm not just talking about four and five acres. My father's grandfather, Poppy Collar (ph) and Grandma Catherine (ph) in that family must have been 80 to 100 acres of land. And so they grew up with the sense of ownership. They owned their own home, they had their own land and for the most part, they worked for themselves. They did work from time-to-time in the field of the white man, because that's what he was referred to at the time, but still they had their own. So his attitude and resentment and bitterness towards white people did not exist. In other words he did not drink from that trough of experience and the kind of bigotry and racism and discrimination that my mother had experienced. Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how his family acquired the land? Speaker 2: Well, I'll do the best that I can. They always had the land. My family, they are third generation Republicans. My father used to tell a story as far as he could remember, they always had land, and they were always able to pass that land down, and it was quite unusual for us because so many farming--black farmers during that time, land had been confiscated, either by illegal measures, either by of their ballooning their mortgage payment on the loan early that forced them to sell and forcing them to build up debt, but for some reason, the family stayed--the farm stayed in the family. And what is miraculous is that the land that my great-great grand poppy passed on to my father and his siblings is still in the family today. Story_ID: 95755 Speaker 1: But in the early '50s [1950s], my pop--my father [James Williams] and his brothers and sisters had what we would consider a falling out. There was this argument, there was this brouhaha and as a result, my father walked away from the land and he said, you have it, I don't want to have anything else to do with it. But because my father knew about the ownership of land and acquiring land--let me get back to my mother [Thelma Williams], 'cause I want to talk about the contrast between my parents, which was really great as a child growing up. My father went out on his own and there was this guy by the name of Mr. Guy Davis, he was a Caucasian gentleman. My father went to Mr. Guy, who knew the reputation of my family and knew them as landowners and entrepreneurs and they had tremendous respect, and they were well dressers. In fact in 1926 my family, my poppy's family, my grand poppy [Poppy Collar ph.], my father's family had their own vehicle, can you imagine that? They had a vehicle, they had a car, and I have it somewhere in this room if I can find it. No actually, the picture's here, it's right here in the wall, I'm sure you could capture that, but they had a picture. They had a car, they had a vehicle, which is unbelievable for black people at that time, he had a vehicle. And so my father went to this guy, Mr. Guy Davis, and said you know listen, Guy, you know the difficulty it is for a black man to own land in these days and times and he talked about how he parted ways with his siblings and that he had recently married his first wife and how he did not want to grow up on the white man's farm because he saw what it did to his relatives and people that he knew, the bitterness, the disrespect and how it could lessen you as a man. And he did not want to see his children grow up watching their father and mother humiliated at the hands of the man. So he felt it was paramount, not for himself, but for his children's sake that they grow up with a sense of ownership and pride and respect. And he said I need you to front for me, to buy this land. There were 40 acres of land at the time that cost $800. My father asked him to front the money and promised Mr. Guy that within a year he would pay him back in full plus interest the amount. And Mr. Guy, because of the family history, went ahead to the auction, this was in the '40s (1940s), bought the land, deeded it to my father, and within one year's time, in fact, two months prior to the date my father paid him back $800. The community was--they were very upset. White people were upset because they felt my father was trying to be better than everybody else, the blacks in the community were upset because they felt my father did not know his place. But he had the land, he paid them back and he set out to build this farm, the farmers called The Stirk, after my father's middle name. And that land grew from 40 acres to 200 acres today, and it remains in the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Do they farm it now? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, tobacco, small grain, gardening and my mother, who's 77, she manages the farm, she actually runs the farm, but we rent the farm out. We're not actual farmers, we just rent it out. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, we're the--we are the--they're the share croppers now, and we're the landowners. Speaker 2: Interesting. So this took place in the '40s (1940s)? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 95756 Speaker 1: Yeah so let me get back to the-- Speaker 2: You were talking about your mother [Thelma Williams]? Speaker 1: My mother. Speaker 2: Tell us now, she grew up in a share cropping situation? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: They didn't have much money, but did she get a chance to go to school? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In fact, right, that's an interesting question. And it's--my mother is a genius, she's really brilliant, she has an incredible memory, a photographic memory and she's just very bright. It amazes me. My mother had to drop out of school in the sixth grade, my father had to drop out of school in the seventh grade. And Larry, I mean--I mean, let's just compare the time of when my mother was pursuing an education, which was in the '40s [1940s] to the time of where we are now. My mother had to walk five miles to go to school, whether it was the sweltering heat of the summer or the brutal cold of the winter, my mother had to walk. And then oftentimes, because the man wanted them to work, to harvest their crops, take care of the chickens, take care of the swine, take care of their cattle, she sometimes would miss two and three weeks at a time out of school to the point where she was so far behind that poppa, her father, my poppy [Armstrong Howard], decided that she should just drop out. So she dropped out of school in the sixth grade. Story_ID: 95757 Speaker 1: My father's [James Williams] story is the same. He dropped out in the seventh grade. And it's interesting because if you ask my parents, my mother who is alive and my father who's sleeping, if they had one regret, they would tell you that they were not able to graduate from high school. And one of the things that my father learned from that lesson was that he wanted all his children educated, and he wanted them to grow up in an environment with pride, not poverty, not like what my mother experienced. So, now it's interesting when my father married--what happened, my father's first wife died of child birth, the child lived, Earl [Armstrong], he was the last child of my father's first marriage. There were four kids, James Harold, Marilynn (ph), James Harold was born in 1944, Marilynn was born in June of 1948, John Harold was born--John Monroe was born on February the 16, 1956 and Earl was born on January 24, 1957. Now what happened was their mother died on January 24, 1957. My father had this very young baby and what we called in the south, this knee baby, that means when it's the youngest and the next to the youngest is called the knee baby, it's a southern term. My father who was trying to harvest the land and then plant and trying to take care of the farm needed a wife. After his first wife, Theola, T-H-E-O-L-A died, he went about the community to find a good woman. Story_ID: 95758 Speaker 1: And they mentioned the fact that Thelma [Williams], my mother, who was a little over 30 at the time was single. Now all her siblings had married. My mother never planned to marry, she always thought she would stay at home with poppy, her father. And so my father [James Williams] went by to see my poppy [Armstrong Howard], not my mother. Shows you how times have changed. He went by to see--I bear my grandfather's name, I'm his namesake, Armstrong Howard, and he said that he had this young baby, his wife had just died, which my poppy was aware of, and that he needed a wife, and that he knew that my mother was a good woman, had a very good reputation. And my poppy said well let me talk to Thelma, James, and I'll get back to you. It's a wild story, brother. And so he spoke with his daughter, and he said you know, Thelma, you know, I'm not gonna be with you always, and you're gonna want children of your own someday because you're gonna be old someday. And James is a good man, I know you never anticipated marrying somebody already with four kids, that is a hardship, said but I think James is a good man and he would be a good father for your children and you'd make a good living with him. And so in March, on March 17th, my father and my mother married. My poppy made the decision and they married. Speaker 2: That's unusual these days. Speaker 1: These days? Speaker 2: Yeah, even in those days. Speaker 1: Yes. That's what happened. He went to my poppy and it was an arranged marriage. And you talk about arranged marriage with the (unclear) and in other parts of the world, but it happened--it happens in this country. So, but she married and immediately in 19--that was 1957, in 1958 she gave birth to my brother Gerald, G-E-R-A-L-D, on January 31, 1958, she gave birth to me on February 5, 1959, she gave birth to my brother Kent on September 15, 1960, she had a baby that was stillborn in 1961, she gave birth to my brother Bruce on September 8, 1962, she had a baby that was--she gave birth to my brother Alvin on May 2, 1965, she gave birth to my sister Mary on December 18, 1966 and then she had a girl that was stillborn in 1968. So I mean she had all these kids, I mean, it was just--and when they started out, they had the land, but they had a home, it was like a little shack. My parents would tell the story how you could look through the floor and see the chickens and look up and the roof, I mean, and see the clouds and the rain. This is 19--this is 1959, but in 1960 when my brother Kent was born, my dad built the first brick house in the entire county and surrounding areas of Marion County. He was the first black man, one of the first, to own a brick house in the entire Pee Dee area of South Carolina, the first. And I mean to tell you something, my father built the house which stands today. It's like a 2000 square foot home, this fabulous brick home with four acres of lawn, my parents built this house from the money they were making from the farm. And so other than myself, Gerald and my siblings, my brothers from my father's first marriage, I was briefly in the shack but we had this brick home, and I mean you would not believe the kind of pride having this kind of home that still (unclear). And then my father built these wonderful stables for horses because we had horses. And I'll never forget this and I'm really--I enjoy this actually, I mean, this is sort of like telling a story about my family. I thought it would be about me, but I'm glad it's not, and that's who I am though, so it is about my family. Story_ID: 95759 Speaker 1: What happened was we grew up in a very affluent family. From the 1960s on my father [James Williams] became very affluent from the farm, let me just tell you. We, my siblings and I, did not grow up in poverty. In fact my father was doing so well that in 1964 he became the envy of some, just racist people in that area of South Carolina to the point that we were awakened early one Sunday morning and the horse stables were on fire. And our favorite red horse which we called Red was just--went up in flames and we all ran outside and we saw these three elderly white gentlemen walk away from the farm with gas canisters in their hand, and it was just--and I'll never forget my brother who was born in 1948, was much older, he said to my father, and this gives you insight into the difference between my mother and my father, he said to my father, he said you always telling us that there's good in everybody, that we should not get caught up in racism, but every time we try to do good the white man just puts his--places his feet on our neck, the white man is no good. And my father in this rage, Larry, losing his finest horses said, those are not three white men, those were three individuals filled with hatred, malice and jealousy. He said you do not judge people as groups as they judged us for hundreds of years in this country, we're individuals. You cannot blame any other white person in the world for their actions. And I will never forget it, that profound point. I mean, I was like five years old, but I will never forget that because it has impacted me for the rest of my life where I don't see people as groups, I judge people individually. I don't group people together. But anyhow-- Speaker 2: I have a question regarding that. I mean your brother saw these white men in a sense I guess as having privilege, was your father able to prosecute these men or put them in jail or convicted of a crime? Speaker 1: --Never pressed charges. Speaker 2: Why? I mean, had they been black men would he have-- Speaker 1: Never would have pressed charges. Speaker 2: --So he was the kind of person, you're telling me that-- Speaker 1: At this point, at this time. Speaker 2: --If anybody would have burned his barn up, he wouldn't have pressed charges Speaker 1: At that time, at that time. Speaker 2: Because I suspect, I mean, one would suspect this because that he knew it was fruitless to press charges against these guys because they were white men of the community. That being-- Speaker 1: Well, that's probably true but what he communicated to us is that he had work to do, he had to build his barn again, and that life itself will take care of them, he had work to do. And you're right in that point, it would have been very difficult, to prosecute, it would have cost money, it would have been a distraction, and it probably could have wreaked more havoc. But my father decided to use his wisdom to just move on beyond that, and that never happened again. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We never had that experience again. Speaker 2: Did you think at the time that-- Speaker 1: I was only five. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: So I was at a very tender age. Speaker 2: In retrospect when you look back at it, you see the point that the white men represent a power structure? Speaker 1: No, they were individuals. Speaker 2: So you-- Speaker 1: It doesn't matter, they were individuals. Even more I agree with my father today. Speaker 2: --Yeah, but do you agree that he should not have pressed charges against them. Speaker 1: Oh, I would have pressed charges. But during that time, I don't know what I would have done had I been my father. I'm not gonna check against my father's judgment. It's a different time. Speaker 2: For pressing charges. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That may have been why (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You're absolutely correct. There's no doubt about it and he decided to move on. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's what he did. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 99311 Speaker 1: And as a matter of fact, we always ask the question and this is one, we, we, I think we're already into it, but we ask you to reflect on some of the sights and sounds and smells growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, man, you know the redwood bushes, where they have the little purple when they're blooming, man, that was the most beautiful smell, oh, my goodness. And also we were sugarcane producers, we'd make our sugarcane, and man when we were turning that sugarcane into syrup, oh man, what a smell--what a smell that was. I'll tell you another great smell. I've never been asked this before, this is great. You know we were tobacco farmers, ran about 30 acres of tobacco, you know that green stuff. But when we were curing the tobacco in the tobacco barn, and it would take three or four days, and when you walk into the tobacco barn and you had these heating flames all over--these different heaters all over the barn to make sure that no area of tobacco was not cured. And when you walk in there and you're about 12 hours away from it being completely cured, there is this aroma of this tobacco, it's so, it's intoxicating, the smell, it's so great. I also enjoyed the smell when we used to make our own lye soap. You know a lot of people don't like the smell of lye soap, but I just--I kind of like that. When would slaughter a pig and we were great at--with the barbecue. We had these huge barbecue pits and we would barbecue the pig and just the aroma of the barbecue and the sauce. We would make our own sauces and all that kind of good stuff. And you know we had a lot of cattle and a lot of horses, I mean, even cleaning out the barn with all the manure, you know, it may be pretty disgusting, but it sort of made you feel like a man. You're out there just shoveling that manure, that horrible smell, you get it on you and then when you're taking care of the little piglets, when they're being born and you sort of get all that odor over you and you go to church on Sunday and clear out a pew. I mean, there may have been disgusting smells, but it was just--it's what a man does, you know. You know you're working and you're working by the sweat of your brow and it was just--I mean those smells been on the farm were just absolutely incredible, or just when you grow your own watermelons and you get one of these juicy ripe watermelons and you just take that butcher knife and you just slit it open and you just--when you open it, the aroma of that tangy smell just--just fills your nostrils, it was just good. Oh, I'll tell you the part, I think the best smell for me though, out of all those was when my mother [Thelma Williams] and her sisters would do what we called "Feeding the Preacher". You know when you grow up in the south, the minister would go and preach on Sunday, but he would always designate a place to eat after church. I mean, 'cause my family were such great cooks. The preacher literally lived in our kitchen. But it's nothing like it when my mama and her sisters, Aunt Mary Sue, Aunt Fran, Aunt Lupin(ph) and Ruth were in the kitchen cooking these potato pies, coconut pies, apple pies, banana pudding, and man the smell of that, you just want to sneak in that living room and just kind of slither, although you know you gonna get your butt whipped when you do it, but sometimes it was just worth a butt whipping, to cut that pie man. And then I tell you we got our butts whipped many times cutting those pies, but the smell, I mean it was just so addictive. And to this day when I go home, my mother canned apples and she cans peaches and she can these apples, and I bring the apples back and I go to a store and just buy the dough and just put the apples in the dough and I make my own apple pies. It's just wonderful food. Story_ID: 99312 Speaker 1: Now what did you like to do when you were a little person growing up on the farm, what were your favorite activities? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I tell you what we were always--we were never, ever in bed past the rooster crowing. We were up 5:00 a.m. in the morning, I don't care if we had nothing to do, except maybe on Sunday, we had to go to Sunday school, but we always had to get up early. Even now, I'm up at 4:30 a.m. and I'm in the gym at five. I just can't help it, it's just--it's ingrained. But what did I like to do, what if I said nothing on the farm. Man, I'll tell you something, that farm, listen what I'm doing now it's a blessing, it is a cake walk, it is absolutely a yellow brick road. What I had to do with my life on a farm, let me tell you, that was like hard labor, cropping suckling and topping tobacco, slopping hogs, cutting out the boars--the boars' testicle so they won't cross-breed, getting on the horses with the bull calves and riding on the horses and roping the calves' hooves and the neck, my brothers and I, and then jumping off the horse, falling on the hooves of the calf being cut and taking this black spray paint and you cut the testicles out and you black spray paint, so they would not get any diseases. Man, I had to do that, yes, you would not believe it. And it's how I grew up, I mean, we had to rope these bulls brother. And my father would say it's being a man, and you could get hurt, timing was everything. You know you guys watch this on television during the rodeos, it was real life for us. And not only that, guns were a big part of our household. Man, we must have had 20 guns in our house, never an incident with a gun. We must have had 15 dogs. My parents [James Williams and Thelma Williams] were hunters, and they felt that men needed to know how to hunt, how to handle a gun, how to respect a gun, 'cause you may never know when you may need that gun. So we were--we hunt raccoon, we would hunt venison, which is deer and quail and so, when you hunt raccoons, you would have to get up like one o'clock in the morning, I mean when it's jet black dark, and you have to put on this headlight, like they do when they go in these mines, you have to put on this headlight, 'cause the coon would always run up in the tree. And how you would see the coon is by his eyes, 'cause the light would just shine him out, and you'd have to shoot that--you'd have to know how to shoot that gun in the night, 'cause you could hit one of your siblings or somebody else hunting with you, so I mean, we were expert guns men, expert rifle men. We could shoot like you would not believe. And then we'd have to wear these galoshes because we would be out in the water among water moccasins and rattle snakes, so you could hear them nipping away at you, so you know you grow up fearless of snakes and bugs and these insects, and so, I mean, we were really men. I mean, we when we came along, Larry, in the--I was in the tobacco field when I was seven years old. We did not have tractors at the time. You know what we'd have to do to get rid of stumps out of the fields and move trees, we would have to use dynamite. We would take these huge sticks of dynamite and place it in the tree stump and just blow the tree up. And then we would get a mule and wrap a huge chain around the stump and we'd say, "whoa mule, g mule" until the mule would actually pull the stump up, this is how we grew up as farmers. But when there was the introduction of the tractor, my father had the money to buy his tractor, we bought tractors the (unclear) and all this kind of stuff. It became a little more technologically advanced, but we had to do these things by our hands and so--but you know I didn't--on hindsight, I didn't dislike it all, I mean, I remember with the chickens, you know, in order to kill a rooster, you had to take a tobacco stick, put it on the rooster's neck and just pull the rooster up and pop his neck off, and the rooster just (making motions), I mean going, and all the blood is just going all over the place all on you. And then you have to boil this pot of water to put the rooster in to take the feathers off and then you cut open his gut, and you see all the corn and all the grain and everything else, all the insects the rooster has eaten and you clean it out and prepare the rooster for a meal. So, we were, I mean we--now men could not cook when I was growing up. We--my father did not believe that a man's place was in the kitchen. That's what our sisters would do, they would learn how to cook, men were never in the kitchen, men never washed clothes, but we had to make up our beds. But we did the outside labor, like planting the gardens, planting the crops, harvesting the crops and all that, and, I mean, we were even big cucumber producers. So you know we worked, we worked all the time, six days a week and on the Sabbath, we absolutely rest. I mean there was always something to do on the farm. Now, we did take vacations. As a family we would go to the beach, that's what a vacation was for us. But in terms of going out of the state or going out of the country was just not even on our minds, it's not even on the radar screen. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you're very close to Myrtle Beach [South Carolina], right? Speaker 2: Yes, very close. Speaker 1: So you did go to the beach? Speaker 2: Yeah, Myrtle Beach is about 30 miles away from Marion [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: None of us could swim by the way. Swimming for us was a no, no. My mother was too fearful. She knew relatives who had drowned, so we never learned to swim. Speaker 1: And Marion is the home of the revolutionary (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Francis Marion. Speaker 1: --Yeah, Francis Marion, right. Speaker 2: Francis Marion, yes. Speaker 1: Walt Disney made a series about it called the Swamp Fox. Speaker 2: The Swamp Fox, that's right. Story_ID: 99313 Speaker 1: Any rate, now, tell me about school. Now what school did you attend and how far away was it? Speaker 2: Well, excuse me. I attended, well all of us, Terrell's Bay Elementary School. Terrell's Bay, T-E-R-R-E-L-L apostrophe S, B-A-Y. We were the Wildcats, grade school, junior high school, and I graduated from Rains Centenary High School. That's R-A-I-N-S, C-E-N-T-E-N-A-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you like school? Speaker 2: Loved it, because my parents drilled into us that they had to quit school, and you could see the pain. I'll tell you this is interesting. This is all interesting. You know I have to thank God for the father and mother that we all had growing up with. You know we would get whippings and disciplined in many ways. But there was never any doubt of how much our parents loved us, and the loved us all the same. You know we could be right as right could be, but my parents would never take sides against each other for the sake of the child, they were always together. My father had a lot of compassion. You know beatings then would be considered real abuse today, 'cause they would whip you with drop line cards--cords, plow lines used to plow the mules and the cows, tobacco sticks, switches, I mean man it was brutal. I mean you would bleed and you had to take off all your clothes. You know I was so--you know it used to pain me so badly to see my other oldest siblings get whippings. You know what I said, it will be rare when I get a whipping. I may have had four whippings in my life 'cause I was so afraid. You know I learned how to do whatever my daddy and momma, whatever they said, 'cause you know what, I realized I couldn't win, I just could not win, I could not take those whippings, I could not take it, they were brutal. Speaker 1: They were actually drawing blood? Speaker 2: Man, come on, yes, of course. That's no secret, of course you would be bleeding. And bleeding, you would have whelps, you would be swollen, you would have like knots. Okay, yes, you would have knots on your knees, oh yes. But, but, but, it was out of love and love. And sometimes we would just provoke them, you know, get in trouble. And my father said I'm gonna do this 'cause instead of the police beating you or you're ending up in jail the rest of your life, I'm gon beat the devil out of you, that's what he say he was doing, beating the devil out of you. And you know what, I was convinced he was beating the devil out of them too 'cause the way he was beating them. And so you know we grew up with that and then sometimes he would get so crazy, my mother would say, oh, no, no, enough is enough, stop, stop, James, stop. And he would stop 'cause he would really get carried away. And so you know a lot of families can relate to that because the brutality and whippings in families-- Speaker 1: Was that fairly common in that area? Speaker 2: Yes, it's fairly common all over this country, people may not talk about it. It's different now, but I would tell you before 1980, it was very common in families, that's how they were whipped, and that was really--it was brutal, it really was. But there was no doubt that our parents loved us, and there was no doubt they're whipping us out of love. And even sometimes my father would say, you know boy I'm so angry right now, if I were to whip you, I'd kill you, so I'm not goin touch you, but I'm a come to you later on. Oh, God, man that was the longest 12 or 16 hours in your life and eventually he would come. But my father did not like beating us when he was angry 'cause he felt it could be a frightening experience, so. I mean you give them credit, I don't think any parent should beat their child when they're angry, they should be disciplined but not at that--in that state. But my parents believed in hard work. But the wonderful thing about them, they believed in a strong education. My father often emphasized the fact that how he would give up everything that he had if he had a high school or college degree. And it's interesting, my older brothers and siblings, they were not really that interested in school, in high school. They did not focus on it. My father would give them acres of tobacco during the summer, they would make three and four thousand dollars a summer in tobacco, they would buy cars and motorcycles, so things became paramount to them. And my father learned a great lesson, you just cannot give your children things, sometimes you can cripple them for life. Children need to know why they have clothes on their backs, why they have food on the table and why they don't have to--why they always have food on the table and why they have it in abundance. So my father felt he crippled his older children by just giving them things, because he was trying to make up for the fact that they lost their mother when they were very young and my mother raised them, the fact that he did not have those things he was growing up, so he learned with us that he was not gon' give us things like tobacco. He would give it to us, but he would take that money and save it for us and put it towards an education. And so, I--for some reason you know, I did very well, not just I, I mean my brothers and sisters, we did very well in school, I mean I did very well in college. I graduated with honors in college and high school and all kinds of scholarships and-- Story_ID: 99314 Speaker 1: Before we get too far can you tell me about some of your teachers in grade school, were there any teachers there that you remember that inspired you or took a special interest in you? Speaker 2: Mr. Parker. Mr. Parker was my English teacher. He really, really had a lot of faith in me. He really felt I had a--he and Mrs. Pruden(ph) thought I had a gift for writing and had a tremendous impact on me. Mr. Stevenson, my history teacher, Marvin Stevenson inspired me to love history and to read. I was a vociferous reader, I still am now. I read two books a week, and he inspired me. But those teachers really had a--and Miss Crawford in science, my science teacher, Mrs. Annabelle Crawford, God bless her soul. She was my teacher and she had a tremendous impact and I just--I just knew that I could not go home, I could not go home with anything less than a B in my parents' [James Williams and Thelma Williams] home 'cause I would be on punishment, and so I did not want to be on punishment. Story_ID: 99315 Speaker 1: But it was not that difficult, I did well in school. But some other things I enjoyed, my father [James Williams] got us involved with oratory. You know they would have these oratorical contests throughout the state. I won it in 1976, it was the bicentennial year, I won the oratory contest for the state. My brother Alvin who's my baby brother won it a few years later. I was also involved in 4H where I would go on television and talk about swine, because I was a swine judger. I would judge cattle and swine and goat and sheep in these contests for 4H, so I was very active in that, sort of gave me an opportunity to travel around the state with Bill Jones who was my 4H leader at the time. And my father really encouraged that because I did well in school. I did well in English, I did well in science and math, I did well in history, I did well. I remember my junior year in high school, I told my dad I was gon' really apply myself and just see how good I was because he--that began the preparation for college, those grades really became important. And I'll never forget I got a perfect 100 in English. Every test I had in English, my first and second semester in my junior year in high school, I scored a perfect 100 on all the tests, on all the essay, and I still have the plaque on the family estate where they gave me a certificate my junior year. That had never happened before, I had a perfect score in English, so. So you know it's quite encouraging and--and you know when I was growing up as a kid all the elders in the church said that child's special, Thelma and James, I mean God has plans for him, that's good. He's gonna be a good one, he's gonna achieve good things in life. And my parents believed it so therefore I believed it. So therefore I was destined to do good. So I felt since all these elders in the community felt that I had something special, I could not disappoint my elders, I had to kind of live up to their expectations. Story_ID: 99316 Speaker 1: And then my parents [James Williams and Thelma Williams], they would always have newspapers in the home, always books for us to read, and they wanted us to read to them, because they did not really learn, because they had to drop out. So we would learn them--teach them also. We would take the lessons back home. Speaker 2: What newspapers were they? Speaker 1: The "Marion Star", the state newspaper, the "Florence Morning News" and you know at a very young age, we started reading the classics, the Iliad and the Odyssey, the Homer, [William] Shakespeare, I read all the classics, I read the Bible from cover to cover, I read em all. I mean some of my greatest lessons, well, the greatest books I've ever read are the classics. And so, you know I was inspired to do that, and you know it really helped me out on tests too. It would help me in communicating with people when I would have a conversation and you find out that you're well read, in other words, you're preparing yourself for life. And so my parents encouraged that. So high school, grade school, was a wonderful experience for us. And plus you know, when you do well in school, my parents kind of paid us. We got big allowances, 'cause we would get allowances as kids. I would get big allowances from my parents. I had the proper motivation of getting good grades. And so much so that I'm the first among my siblings to go to college and graduate. Story_ID: 99317 Speaker 1: Now, in high school what activities were you involved in -- and were you on the debating team? Speaker 2: Yes, and I was student body president. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yes, I was STA president. That's exactly right. I was a part of the student senate, I was manager of the basketball team, I was the manager of the ball team. I was so sports--in sports I was so challenged, athletically challenged. Speaker 1: At this time period, were the high schools integrated in South Carolina? Speaker 2: Ours were. I attended school at an integrated high--grade school and high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, well integrated too. So, yeah, I was student body president. My father [James Williams] wanted me to run. My father loved politics, let me tell you, and my father, really, I'll tell you, I mean I disappointed, but my father really wanted to groom us to run for the congress for the U.S. Senate some day in South Carolina. So my father really, really wanted us involved in extracurricular activities. So, I'll never forget my father saying, son, you should--normally it's the other way around, my father said, boy, you should think about, and he would say boy too, you should really think about running for student body president, getting involved with politics. I said, oh, I said run for office, and so you know he would finance everything. He would help us do the little flyers and help with the little themes and so. And I won, I actually won the student body president. I think the big thing was was when I went off to college. But I know we'll get to that. I guess you want to stick with school a little longer. Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you were student body president? Speaker 2: Manager of the basketball team. I wrote all the articles for the sports newspaper for the basketball team, I would write all the articles for the local newspaper, the Marion Star, I was on the debating team, I was a 4H guy in high school, and I was a spokesperson for the county on television. Whenever someone had to go on TV. That's where my television career started when I was in high school 'cause I would go on television like six o'clock in the morning, and it was Channel 13, WBTW in Florence, and they'd say this is your 4H minute, and I was the person that would speak for a minute. My father loved it. Man, let me tell you this. I never for--this is fast forward, we'll come back to this. Man, I'll never forget when I was in Jet Magazine, when they first had me in Jet Magazine. My father cut the page out of the magazine and taped it on his windshield and drove around town pointing it out to everybody. I was so embarrassed, just because that was my father. Speaker 1: Windshield? Speaker 2: Pasted it,, man on the windshield of his GMC green truck, and my brothers had called me to tell me, your father is riding all over town with that Jet article pasted to the windshield. I said that's my man. Story_ID: 99318 Speaker 1: Now you grew up in the '60s (1960s), '70s (1970s), I guess mid-'70s (1970s), you were born in '59 (1959), was there much discussion in your household about the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: No. That's interesting, isn't it? Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: In fact, my father said hard work will cure everything. He said we know enough about racism and bigotry, we grew up with it, we know about racism, he said, but we want you to learn about life, how to live and maneuver and get along with all people. So, no, racism, my mother would talk about her treatment--you know, I'll tell you what's interesting, I want to go back to this story about their burning down our horse stables. That's my only experience with racism in my life, it was my family. I've never experienced--there's never--you know I say this to people around the country, and they are so amazed, upset, shocked, because people assume, because if you're black that you must have experienced racism in this country. If you make that assumption then you would have to assume that white people never experience it because the hue of their skin, both are preposterous. I mean there are people in this country who--who may not have had that experience. It has never affected me. Speaker 1: It is hard to believe. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, yeah, I know. That's why I want to engage you, no. Speaker 1: The way the pervasive nature of racism in this country, you know, and even if black, it's hard to imagine somebody not being confronted by it, either from the outside from the white community or from the inside from the black community. The black community is oftentimes with racism in some way (unclear) you can't control your life. Speaker 2: Well, how do you define black racism? Speaker 1: Well, there's the notion that other black people are not worthy and there's the stratification based on color in some neighborhoods and communities and organizations. Speaker 2: Well, no, I haven't experienced that. Well, I tell you this-- Speaker 1: They call each other names based on their physical features or-- Speaker 2: --Well let me tell you this, that's interesting. Story_ID: 99319 Speaker 1: When I was in college at South Carolina State University [Orangeburg, South Carolina], before the '70s [1970s] to get into SC State you had to submit a photo. And if you're not what they consider high yellow, you were not admitted. When my father--after my grades were very good after my freshman year, when my father encouraged me to run for student body president at State--I had this advisor, I don't want to call his name, he was fair-skinned; and I said to him that I was gonna run for president of the student body. And his whole attitude towards me changed. And I could not figure it out. And finally my girlfriend at the time, Myra [ph.], I talked to her about it, and she said we should confront him. But I confronted him alone, and I asked him what the problem was. He said he did not feel I could run--I should run, and I asked him why, because he felt I was too dark. Now I'm going to tell you what was weird about that. My father and I had been having a discussion--no, actually it was not my father's idea that I run for student body president, it was mine. But my father felt my sophomore year was too soon, which means I would be a rising junior. He wanted me to wait until my junior year as a rising senior to run, and I said no, I said I think I can do it, it would be history too if I could do it two years in a row. But this, but I never could convince my father, if my father said I couldn't run, I couldn't run because I'm not gonna dishonor my father. But when this guy said to me I was too dark, it was the best news, 'cause I knew that I couldn't wait to take that two-hour drive home to tell my father that story. (Laughter) I knew exactly what he was gonna say, so it was a blessing. And you know I never saw that as racism until this interview. I just saw it as ignorant, but I saw it as a blessing for me 'cause I needed a reason to get my father behind me so I could run. And I never forget, I went home, we're sitting in the living room, I went home that weekend, I said, "Daddy, you're not gonna believe this." I had to pretend I was upset. I said, "I know you don't want me to run, but I gotta tell you this story." Oh, man he raised up, he said, "You got to be kidding me." He said, "Oh, no, no, no, you got to show that ignorance out. He said, "Oh, no; there's no place for that," he said, "you've got to run, you gotta show him that you can run and you'll win." And then he said he'll finance the campaign, 'cause you know in college, you really gotta have somebody financing you. And so my father did not want me really distracted from studying out trying to raise money to run, so he financed the campaign. But this guy was a blessing for me, but this guy was ignorant. I mean--but I, but this guy served a purpose for me in terms of what was going on in my life at the time, 'cause I would not have been able to run. But anyhow, but let me tell you something, running, that's the toughest race I've ever had in my life, running for student--yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 95769 Speaker 1: So I was in college. Speaker 2: Now where are you in school at that time? Speaker 1: South Carolina State University in Orangeburg [South Carolina]. Now my parents [James Williams and Thelma Williams], before I go back to the story about this ignorance that I experienced, which was a blessing in disguise, my parents paid the college tuition out of their pockets for all my siblings that wanted to go to school. We did not get one dime from any government, scholarship, even though we qualified, my parents felt they could afford it and there was some other kid out there who needed that money far more than we did. So my parents paid for my college tuition. And I tell you, you know I really didn't want my father to do it, I really didn't. And what they did--you know I also received the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] Scholarship, it was a lot of money, Recruiters [sic, Reserve] Officers Trainings Corp, and it was a lot of money that would have paid for my college for all four years. But I kind of wanted--I wanted to serve the country 'cause my father was big on war and serving the country, even though no one in our immediate family has served in the war. Speaker 2: He didn't serve in War World II? Speaker 1: He missed it. He was called but by the time, the Vietnam war had ended. But he really wanted to serve. And I always wanted to serve. I actually wanted to fight. I wanted to go off to war and I wanted to be a general. And I felt because of the discipline I had had on the farm, I had already gone to boot camp. Nothing else could shock my system from what I'd gone through, getting up early, running and so I decided to accept the ROTC Scholarship without my father knowing it. And going through the drill, it was nothing, let me tell you. Nothing, until the guy showed me a clause in the contract that when I graduated I would immediately have to go off to the military, no matter what my ambitions were. And I knew my father's ambitions were for me to graduate from State, go to Washington [D.C.] and work for an administration. Hopefully by that time he thought maybe a Republican would be in power that I could work for an administration, make some good contacts, open up some doors for my brothers and sisters, and then come back and run for office. And so I had to tell my father that this had become problematic because I had already signed. And I never forget I went to the lieutenant at the time over the ROTC program and asked him whether it was anyway I could get out of it. He told me I had already signed a contract and they had already advanced me about $1700 in cash, which I about spent, 'cause you know there's some things I wanted to do. And so you know I had my agenda too, you know I wanted to get that money 'cause I didn't want to ask my father. You know, my father reared us to be independent, not always on your parents. But anyhow when I realized--and the guy told me if I didn't have the $1700 back to them by the end of the week, there's no way I could get out of the contract. Story_ID: 95770 Speaker 1: One of the hardest things I ever had to do was call my parents [James Williams and Thelma Williams], and tell them. And so I had to call my father. I should have gone home to meet with him. Meetings were great, family meetings were great. We always had family meetings, always meetings around the dinner table. Everyone knew what was going on in each other's lives. And so there were no--it was not a family of secrets, I mean, everything was out in the open, which is pretty good, 'cause it really helps me in my life today. And so I called my father at five o'clock in the morning. I'll never forget this 'cause, you know, we always talked to our parents between four thirty and 7:00 a.m. in the morning. You know to this day, if I'm going to have a conversation with my mother or my brothers and sisters, it's between either four thirty or seven in the morning. Unless there's an emergency between the hours of like five to four thirty the next morning, we rarely talk, unless it's the weekend, we talk early in the morning. So I called my father and said I got a problem, he said what is it son. And I explained it to him, the situation. He said, boy, how much do you need, did not get upset, because he knew I was trying to be my own man and he really appreciated that. And he really appreciated the fact that I wanted to serve my country, he really did. But he really appreciated more that after being involved in the process of the ROTC that I still wanted, in some crazy way, to fulfill the dreams he had for me, which sort of were my dreams too, because I kind of liked my father's wisdom and advice. My father's really never given me bad advice or my mom, and they've always been so supportive so you know, I listen to my parents, even today, even though my father's deceased, his advice still rings in my ear and in my heart. I can never escape my father's advice. It is as--it as real today as it was 20 or 30 years ago. So my father said, well what do you need, I said, well daddy, and this is true, if I don't have $1700 by Friday, I cannot get out of this contract. And understand I had other brothers and sisters that they were taking care of, there were ten of us, eight boys and two girls. My father said, boy, the bank opens at nine, your mom and I'll be there by ten o'clock--by eleven or twelve o'clock, no chastising me, I mean, it was so moving, 'cause it goes back to the compassion and the unconditional love my father had for me. I never forget he drove down in this white Buick LeSabre and we went over to the ROTC, he had $2000, he paid the $1700 off, they released me from my contractual obligations, and my father gave me the $300 difference. I was so hurt. Let me tell you something, that was the worst punishment for me that my father--and even though he could afford it, but still, I had brothers and sisters back home. It was the worst thing for me because of my judgment. I had already spent $1700, my father had to pay it and mother, so. My father said all I want you to do is one thing for me, just do well in school, do well academically, get good grades, don't embarrass your parents. Speaker 2: Now this was about 1978 or so? Speaker 1: It was 1977. Speaker 2: Seventy-seven (1977), okay. Speaker 1: That's exactly when it was, it was 1977. And man let me tell you something, let me tell you this. You talking about somebody who was jamming academics at my college, I was doing well. And even today I still have that same feeling of that moment, it's as vivid as if it happened an hour ago, I will never forget the love. And so--and you know what it is, it's good to--you know a lot of people feel you need to be self-motivated, that it has to be for you, but no, it's not true. Story_ID: 95771 Speaker 1: When you have the kind of family I had and the kind of bigotry and the dangerous segregation and what happened to my father's [James Williams] horse stables and how my mother [Thelma Williams] grew up, you know, I want to go back. Now my father was an interesting man, he was not a perfect man, he was imperfect. Now there were issues that I had with my father. He did not believe that my mother should ever learn how to drive nor she should ever handle money, nor she should ever have nice clothing. My father never spent money on my mother. Let me just tell you this, okay. If there's one pet peeve that I had, but that was my father, and I never got into that. As much as it bothered me, my mother to this day cannot drive. My mother--so one of the things about my running for student body president as a rising junior had more to do with my mother 'cause I learned that it paid $2000 a year and I started thinking, I can use that money to give to my mother, help her buy little nice clothing for her to have things. 'cause my father always, boy, your mama doesn't need any clothes, where is she going. I said, oh, daddy, I stayed out of that, I stayed out of that. But anyhow that is why I decided to run for student body president 'cause I want to give my mother some of the things she never had. Yeah, we had, we were affluent, but in terms of it reflected back to my mother that did not happen. So I ran for student body president thanks to my parents. My parents financed it all. Now he would finance stuff like that, but he would take care of his boys. And so I won by 65 votes. That's was the toughest race 'cause I was Republican man. I never really understood the resentment that black people had of Republicans until I was at South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], but you know what-- Speaker 2: You ran as a Republican, and-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, and won. Speaker 2: --I mean, that seems unusual. Speaker 1: It was unheard of, it has never happened since. Speaker 2: A Republican and Democrat in a student council. Speaker 1: Yeah, they knew I was Republican. My brother ran and lost, following my tenure, 'cause they wanted to punish him for my winning. Now I won. But you know what, let me tell you this, the second time around when I ran, let me just tell you about delivering, and about integrity and character, and how people move away from labels and care about results. When I ran the second time, I ran against eleven people. The second person in tallying got 96 votes, I got about 2000 votes. I won by a whopping landslide 'cause you know what, we delivered, we were good at it and they loved us. I'm telling you, we delivered, and that's what people care about, as long as you take care of them and you deliver. I know that you can move beyond labels, I know Republicans can win. I did it at SC State. So-- Speaker 2: But you were in a student body that was largely white, right? Speaker 1: --South Carolina State was 98 percent black. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: It was a black historical black. My father wanted me to have the black experience at a university, plus he wanted me to be able to drive home two hours away. Yeah, I was at a black school. Listen if you can survive there, you can survive anywhere. Nothing has been has been as tough for me politically as when I was student body president. And running for that office at South Carolina State College, it's a university now. Let me tell you, if you can deal with that mentality, you can deal with anybody. But I won, okay. So-- Speaker 2: Let me ask about this while we're on the Republicans, you said that your parents had a long history of Republicans-- Speaker 1: --Never left my family, never left the party of Lincoln, never, like most black people. Speaker 2: So going back to Reconstruction? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: But from what I (uncleared) from a lot of people I've interviewed already, I guess around the time of FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], that's when you had a black people switch, and then-- Speaker 1: Not really. Speaker 2: --Those that hadn't at that point-- Speaker 1: It's Goldwater, it was Barry Goldwater. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: When he said he would not support the Civil Rights Legislation, it was Barry Goldwater, there was a mass exodus. Speaker 2: That's '64 [1964] Speaker 1: That's true, yes, that's right. Story_ID: 95772 Speaker 1: So anyhow I learned that this job paid about $2000 and then I never forget my first check was $625. I took all the money and gave it to my mom [Thelma Williams], and she went out and bought a new dress. You know what she said to me over the phone, she says, son, it's the first time I've ever handled money. That was a lot of money for her. You know what, I got to tell you this, she bought that dress, my daddy [James Williams] calls me, right. My daddy calls me, I tell you he's crazy too, but I love him. You know your parents can be crazy too. But anyhow he called me. Boy, you taking your money, and I'm spending all this money on you, paying your way through college, and you're taking your money and sending it back to your mama. Thelma doesn't need no dress on her and da, da, da. I said, but you know what, Daddy, that is my mother, I can do whatever I want with my money for my mother. You always told us to respect our mother. I never forget a number of slaps I got talking back to mama. So I think I'm spending my money in a good way, and I think actually you should stay out of it 'cause this is what I want to do for mama, and I think you should just leave it alone. You know what he said, well I'm a leave that alone. And he did, he left it alone. And it was when I went off to college, my mother first started handling money. She'll tell you she handles a whole lot more today--because it was always what I wanted to give her because we had, but it didn't trickle down, even when my father died, I completed sending my sister through college, bought her books and everything. Story_ID: 95773 Speaker 1: And it's interesting 'cause you know I know a lot of people who take on their father's [James Williams] ways in terms of how they view women, and women having a place. Now I'm a chauvinist, but not in the strictest sense, I don't believe there're certain jobs that a woman should do like on the farm. I believe a man should always get the door for a woman, whether it's a car door or a revolving door, I believe that. But in terms of pay, in terms of positions, in terms of running for office, I'm not a chauvinist in that regard. Because I got to see firsthand when women are treated differently than men, it was very personal for me, it was very painful. And it was also disturbing to me that you know when my father died, my mother could not drive, she's totally dependent on us. My brothers and sisters, those lives are centered around getting her to where she needs to go. And let me tell you something, he handicapped her. And so from that experience I grow 'cause in that regard, I don't want to be like my father. And I've grown, there's nothing in my personality in terms of that, that I've taken from my father, 'cause I just totally disagree with that. And even in later on in life, he said I was right, he said you've always taken care of your mother, and I always have. And--but the good news about my father is that he loved my mother, I was talking about his wife. And so, and he realized the bond between a mother and her son, there's a special bond between a mother and her son, and see I had a good mother. My mother, the things my mother did for us as children, now my father was wonderful, but my mother--it's nothing like a mother. I mean, she's your north star, I mean, in terms of my morality, in terms of my compassionate for others and respect or just in terms of the pains of what it's like to grow up, 'cause my mother's mother died when she was two years old. She never really had a mother. She doesn't remember her mother, she didn't grow up with a mother, and that has impacted her too. So all she ever had was her father. And her father was no different than my father. Poppy [Armstrong Howard] did not believe that women should handle money, that women had a place. So my mother grew up believing that this is the way it was. But see I did not want my sister growing up depending on no man. Men are different today, many of them do not fulfill their husbandly obligations or their manly obligations. I mean you have a lot of women taken care of men. And I never wanted my sister to come up in an environment if she were able to marry some deadbeat, which she did not, I thank God, she has a very good husband, a very good provider, but just in case, she did not, she could always take care of herself. And so I did not want my sister, like my mother, not being able to drive and totally dependent on some man. So, but you know that was wisdom on my part. And it's not anything my mother said to me. She was okay with the way things were, but I said this is not okay, it's just not. And now she can see and she agrees with me wholeheartedly. Speaker 2: Okay, that's--you were able to reform some of the family now? Speaker 1: Yes. We all need to do it. Story_ID: 95774 Speaker 1: My parents--let me tell you something, my parents grew up in a whole different era. Some of their ideas, now let me tell you something, 90 percent of what they taught us was excellent, but ten percent of it, just like my mother, look my parents were adamant against interracial dating. And let me tell you that has not changed today with my mother. This mixing of race, people think that white Americans don't like to mix in a race. Oh, please, there are so many families that don't like the mixing of the races. I never forget my brother Alvin was dating a white girl and he brought her home and my father beat him. It was just insane. Speaker 2: Not in front of the girl, did he? Speaker 1: Oh, please, yeah right. Okay, he beat him. These wounds go deep. I didn't agree with my parents. I said it's a contradiction. You say to us that we should judge people as individuals, not as groups. Love knows no color. The heart doesn't discriminate. How can you tell Alvin [Williams] if he likes this girl that he can't date her and something's wrong with it. So I believe that if someone wants to date interracially, it's not for me, let me be clear, it is not for me. Not, and listen, I don't have a racist or bigoted bone, but it's my choice. I prefer not to, and I mean I'm very open about it. And you know what it is, my parents have really influenced me. Even though I know it's wrong to say you shouldn't date someone because they may not be the same race that you are, they still influenced me, it still had an impact on me to the point where I never have and I never will. I just don't allow myself because of what happened to me as a child. But I would not want that for my kids. Speaker 2: What happened to you as a child that would make you-- Speaker 1: Because my you know it's just, my mother talked about how she was treated and the things they would say to her as a woman, I mean, it was cruel. I know they were individuals but still it just, it impacts me, that's my mother, you know I take on sometimes her pain, you know we take on the pain of people we love and for her she would be distraught if we married interracially, she would be distraught. And so it's not so much for me that as long as she's alive, I never will date nor I will think about marrying. Now when God takes her home, the situation may change. But as long as she's alive, I would never, ever, just can't. That's just out of respect and honor to my mother and my father who sleeps. But could it change, I doubt it. I've been this way 44 years, so I doubt it. Now I think for my brothers are a little more open but none have ever married interracially. I think many of them harbor these feelings just as deep as my parents did. They passed these along. So why do you get upset with certain white people when they pass along these same feelings to their kids, it's no different. And it's racism. So how you going to say their racism is badder than ours, okay, it's all racism. We got to get away from these warped ideas, because if you can tell your child that you cannot date somebody interracially and then you gon tell your child you should not associate with certain people because of the hue of their skin. And that is bad for America. That is the time we need to move beyond in this country. And I try to have foreign thinking in that area every day, 'cause that's not what's going to heal this country. So you know I take the beauty from my parents, but on things I don't agree with, I will tell them. Let me tell you. And I will tell you, mom, let's not even talk about it 'cause I do not agree with that, okay. And they leave it alone. Because we have fierce debates in the household, oh, fierce. We debate, we just don't take anything hook, line and sinker, oh, no, no, no, no, no. You gon have to tell me why, no, that's not good enough, I don't agree with that. I don't agree and that's the end of it. Speaker 2: Okay. Now these debates have started since you've been grown, right? Speaker 1: When I was about 14, 15, we had these debates. But the only thing is you can debate all you want when we were growing up, they had the last word. Story_ID: 95775 Speaker 1: But now that we're adults, we have saying--my mother [Thelma Williams], let me tell you, my mother never trusted white people until within the last 10 year--and I'll tell you the turning point, let me tell you the turning point, it was amazing. Strom Thurmond is my mentor, God bless his soul, he's deceased now. When my father [James Williams] died, we'd had this Farm Bureau Insurance since the late '50s (1950s) and when my father was ill, he sort of became disoriented and the insurance expired and you know how these slick insurers are, once you allow that expired, they want to renew you with a 100 percent increase in the premium because you've had these policies for ages. So we learned that our Farm Bureau Insurance had expired and my mother was visibly upset over it. And so, I said, well you know that's okay that they're really taking advantage of the fact daddy died and this is crazy, but I'm a call Senator Thurmond, he'll take care of it. Son, he's not gonna do anything, this is 1985. He's not gonsn do anything. Speaker 2: Did you know him at that point? Speaker 1: Yeah, I've known him since I was 16. My father introduced us. I said but I'm a call him, I said oh yes he will. Boy you just--I don't want you to call him, I said, but I am. My mother and I had--it was vehement--an argument over this, during the time before they even buried my father. I said, but I'm a call him. Because when I was just as strong as my parents and they know, when I make up my mind, she could get her feelings hurt, when I know I'm right and I know she has to grow to see the truth. I say oh you get upset but in a few weeks you'll say I'm right, but you're gonna get upset for a while, but this is what I'm gonna do. And I called Senator Thurmond. I never forget how they put him on the phone, he was so irate, 'cause he knew I loved my father, he knew I was grieving, he was so irate of what they did, he had the president of Farm Bureau call within an hour and it was reinstated. And I put mama on the phone and she broke down and cried. She said, son, things must have changed, I never would have believed that. She said Strom really did that, yes ma'am. And when the premium came in, apologizing that the old premium was renewed, I've never have to have those debates with her before. Speaker 2: Okay. Now you say Strom Thurmond was your mentor, in what sense. Because many people see Strom Thurmond just in the last year as a (unclear) and his controversy around his attitude about race, his--? Speaker 1: No, no. I think most people realize that he made a remarkable change. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If you just read the press reports, the broadcast, he made a remarkable change. Listen. Story_ID: 95776 Speaker 1: When I was 16 years old, my father [James Williams] had read in the paper that Senator [Strom] Thurmond was going to be at the Drive By Sea Food Hut, that a little seafood restaurant in Mullins [South Carolina]. My father said--you know I had said my father had these political aspirations for us, but we had to have a vehicle for these aspirations. And my dad said you need to meet Strom Thurmond. Everybody said Strom was a racist, that's all I ever heard. My dad said don't worry about that, meet him for yourself, you need to meet him. He said get dressed 'cause we're running late anyhow. So we get in this truck and we go to the Drive By Sea Food Hut and just as we're arriving, (unclear) and he was old then, he was 70, okay. So just as he was leaving I walked up to him to shake his hand, I said, hi, I'm Armstrong Williams and I hear you're a racist. Let me tell you this, it took everything for my old man not to hit me. Let me tell you something, he was visibly upset with me and he asked me to apologize. Strom said, no, don't worry about it, he seems like a bright young man. How old are you, when you graduate from high school and get to college, send me your resume and come work for me, you decide whether I'm a racist or not. And so--and so (paus) Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Do you need some water? Speaker 1: No, I'm okay. And so, and so, Strom gave me his address and I gave him mine. I got in the truck, he said, boy, let me tell you something, it's okay to ask a question, but there's a time and place for everything. Now you disrespected that man, he said, but I know you meant no harm and the man did tell you to follow up for a job, he said but you don't disrespect your elders. And he went through this whole thing with me, I said yeah, Dad, I hear he's just a racist. He said he probably is, he said but they change too. He said you follow up with Strom, 'cause Strom's gonna be important in your life one day. I said what, Strom? Man, let me tell you this, I was 16 years old, I wrote him, 'cause my dad made me to, he wrote back. I called him, he called back. That went on for a few months. Story_ID: 95777 Speaker 1: I didn't really think about Strom anymore until I got in college, and I'll tell you what happened. It was 1979 and I had just won student body president as a rising sophomore and I felt pretty important. And I kind of started believing I didn't need to be in no tobacco field during the summer. And I was trying to figure out a way not to go work on my old man's farm. So I was talking to daddy [James Williams], he said well boy I'll tell you if you get that summer job with Strom Thurmond, you won't have to come here this summer. Hello, brother, a light went off in my--he said I know you stayed in touch with him 'cause I asked you to, I know you know how to reach him. Man I reached Strom, I called Strom, I will never forget this, Strom called me back in an hour. I was sitting in my dorm room, I think it was--was it Bathey Hall, I think it was Bathey Hall, and that phone rang and he was on that phone, man I said, you remember me, and he recalled everything I said. He said I thought you forgot about me. I said man I want to come and intern the entire summer. I want that experience, I want to come to Washington [D.C.]. He said I'm a have my staff call you and set it up so you can come. And sure enough just about every summer until I graduated from college, I was in Washington interning. And that's where my relationship with Strom began. That's the beginning of it all. Speaker 2: Now Strom Thurmond stated off as a Democrat and became a Republican-- Speaker 1: And a Dixiecrat in the middle. Speaker 2: --Right, right, right. Speaker 1: Segregationist. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. And became a-- Speaker 1: Filibuster of Civil Rights Legislature, longest filibuster every 24 hours, that's the same Strom. Speaker 2: --That's right. And he became a Republican during the era when a lot of Dixiecrats became Republicans because they were afraid the Democratic Party was too liberal. Speaker 1: States rights is what he would say, if he were alive today. Speaker 2: Right. So early '70s (1970s) they changed, the body of it changed. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 95778 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we were just talking about interning with Strom Thurmond. Now, that's, I guess, that's the most profound experience you had in your college days, or would you say that's true? Speaker 2: Well, you know after Senator Thurmond and I--he was impressed that I won student body president, he was very impressed, it was in the papers, and as a Republican, he was just stunned. And boy when I won it two years in a row by a landslide, they saw something. And so during '79 (1979), '80 (1980), before President [Ronald] Reagan was campaigning for the White House, so Strom had (unclear) Atwater talked to me about campaigning for Reagan and that Reagan was coming to this state and I that I should introduce him 'cause they felt if Reagan won, I could get the job as someone who's so young in an administration. And my father [James Williams] loved it. And so we campaigned for Reagan and got a fairly good percentage of votes for Reagan on the campus, 'cause I was a very popular president at SC State [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], I mean, very popular. And not only was I student body president, I was chief justice for the student legislature for the entire state for two years in a row. You know how some people have that political, those gifts, I had those gifts, I could write, I could speak, I was very good academically, but I was a country boy. I was a country boy who did not come from poverty. There was a sophistication, a certain class that my family had, there was a certain elegance that they had. Like I said they believed in dressing. That's why I wanted to tell you the story early on about my mother because that played into it. My parents always wanted us to look just perfect. They invested in clothes, the way we looked and they wanted us to be able to speak the English language well. And so, sure enough, I introduced Reagan in Columbia, South Carolina, when he was there. Reagan went on to beat former President Jimmy Carter. Story_ID: 95779 Speaker 1: And I tell you a funny thing happened, Senator [Strom] Thurmond wanted me to work in the [President Ronald] Reagan administration. But that January he wanted me to be a winter intern in Congressman Carroll Campbell's office which did happen. He took so much interest in me and then he would visit the campus with he and his wife, Nancy Moore, at the time. We would have lunch, he would talk to me about politics, and I would tell him about all the things that people were saying, he's a racist, it's really hurting me on campus, my association with him, he said, yeah, and I understand. He said I was a segregationist and he said there are a lot of things I don't understand about this black and white thing, he said I do a lot of things that are very political, he said, but I'm open to new ideas. I said well you know I'm a young kid, I can't influence you, I wouldn't even know where to start. He said but you should be in Washington [D.C.]. So I'll never forget in April, I think it was 1981, well no, April of 1980, '81 (1981), 'cause Reagan had taken over in 1981. I received a call from the White House that I would get a presidential appointment at the Department of Agriculture. I graduated from South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] on May 10, 1981, and I started working in Washington on May 11, 1981. My parents drove me from Orangeburg to South Carolina, I caught a flight either that night or early the next morning to go to Washington to start working. My parents [James Williams and Thelma Williams], almost two weeks later--because my father had already found me a place in Washington, he wanted me in a very good neighborhood, and in fact, the premises that we're on now, the reason why I'm here is that my father had a friend who lived in Washington, and I ended up living in this complex and my parents drove up and furnished the place for me. They brought my furniture and everything, and my father gave me $500 and told me I was on my own. You know it's a wonderful thing from a family. I mean, to give you that kind of start in life, and it was really wonderful. You know, as I think about, I had very supportive parents. And you know what's wrong with the world today, kids don't need the world, they need their parents, both their mother and the father. The support of both are so important. I never lacked confidence, I never suffered from self-esteem, I never felt that I was less, that I was just as good as anybody else, I never doubted that I could achieve, I never doubted that I could conquer Washington, I never had a doubt. I never had a doubt that I could be a superstar in this city with something, that a country boy from Washington 'cause I had all the ammo that was necessary. All I had to do is what my father had drilled into me for so long was to network, 'cause people--my father knew people would like me, 'cause my father knew there was goodness that I was harmless, I had character, and I was honorable. All those things were instilled in me, but he put me out here to fly and make all these things work. That's the beauty of life when you have to grow it yourself. So Senator Thurmond placed me at the Department of Agriculture in the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service and they didn't know what to do with me. I was a very good writer, but I was ambitious. And I'll tell you what the turning point was, I studied Washington and I knew I had to do something with a bang. The Secretary of Agriculture at the time was John Block and the Deputy Secretary was [Richard] Dick Lyng and they wanted me to do the Black History Month program, this was 1982. You know how it is they put you in these agencies, they want you to do all this black stuff. I know my dad did not want me doing no black stuff, that's why I ended up in the (unclear) 'cause my father did not want them putting me in no box. But I said to him, I said, you know what, I may have to do this in order to build credibility. I got to just find a way to make this thing work. And my father always said, go with your instincts, don't always listen and go to people to ask them what you should do, go with your instincts, feel it. And Senator Thurmond helped me to develop my instinct and my gifts, he really help me develop it, and I would sit around his office, when I was in Washington, we used to sit around and talk. He talked to me about racism, he would show me all the letters that whites were sending to him and the kinds of racist things they were saying about blacks and all this kind of stuff was going on. And I'll never forget in 1982, they were voting the renewal of the Voting Rights Act and a lot of people knew that I had a relationship--well let me tell you how people knew how I had a relationship with Senator Thurmond. Senator Thurmond said in order to have clout in Washington, people got to perceive that you're close to a senator or high-ranking people in Washington, in the White House or a high ranking official in the Administration. He said you're gonna let people know that I'm your mentor and you're like a son to me. And he said you gotta figure out how to do that. And I--man I was trying to figure it out, and it finally came to me. I would go to all these receptions and they would have all these big parties and this senator would show up for this person and everybody would just--they were just in awe and ever since then that person would be a player 'cause they knew they had a senator backing them. But I had this efficiency, it was this one-room apartment with one bathroom and kitchen and this open space. And so I said I should have a party, and wouldn't it be something if Strom Thurmond came to my apartment and stayed an hour and gave a speech. I'd try to invite who's who, 'cause if I had his name on an invitation that he's coming, everybody would come, it would give me credibility. And sure enough, I came up with a plan and I asked Dennis Shedd who was his AA at the time, chief of staff, administrative assistant, could I come by and see the senator, and I told him what my plans were, but I needed him to come by my apartment. I want to make him my guest of honor. And I said you gotta say that you're coming 'cause you know these people are gonna call and find out whether or not we have this relationship if you're coming, so everything's about my credibility. He said oh don't worry about that. And so I'll tell you another joke, we had this efficiency apartment, I had 175 people packed in my little efficiency, and I told em Strom was coming. And at exactly 7:15 Strom shows up and you know what, I had to brief him on what to say. And at that time Barry White's song "It's Time For Change" was a hit in America, and I helped him learn the words. And he got up--when he walked in people were shocked, there's Strom. When he walked in the room, "there's Strom". And Strom grabbed my hand and he said this is like my son, this is my protege' and he said the thing that I've learned from him, he said I don't know if you listen to Barry White, but I do. He said, Barry White has this hit song now, "It's Time For Change", nothing remains the same, he said even I have changed as by what you can see today. People were crying man, right, black people were crying, they could not believe this was Strom, they were crying. And I was the man. Story_ID: 95780 Speaker 1: And when Strom [Thurmond] left I mean the Secretary of Agri--that's when the Secretary of Agriculture really tried to give me something to do. People were calling me, are you interested in working here, the Washington Post would put my name in the paper and so I said I gotta capitalize on this. Strom said you gotta capitalize on it. He said well take advantage of them trying to put you to do this minority stuff and see what you come up with. And I just happen to be reading in the newspapers at the time that Richard Pryor almost killed himself freebasing on cocaine, this was in the '80s (1980s) early '80s (1980s). And I said to myself, wouldn't it be something if I could get Richard Pryor to come to Washington [D.C.] and give a serious speech. Can you imagine if Richard Pryor could give a serious speech, and what if I were able to get Richard Pryor, Strom could get President [Ronald] Reagan to host a reception for him in honor of black history month at the White House. So I told Strom my idea. Oh, Strom said you would be the man if you could pull that off. He said do you know Richard Pryor, I said no. He said well go for it. I went through the yellow pages looking for numbers. I must have called a hundred numbers, and this guy by the name of Terry Giles called me back, he was Richard Pryor's lawyer. And I had to act old, Strom told me I had to act old. I said look, I am handling the Department of Agriculture's Black History Month's program. This is also the White House's program and the person we will invite would have a reception in the White House with the president. And none of it--none of it--all of it was not true, but it's politics. I was stretching the truth, some would call it lying. But it wasn't a lie later on, it may have not been true then, but it did come true. So anyhow--so this guy said--and I said let me just tell you something, Richard Pryor needs an image overhaul, he needs to come to Washington, and this guy said, man, Richard Pryor has never given a straight speech in his life. The only thing Richard Pryor has ever done was watching the "Poor People's March". He said Richard Pryor--I said ask him, I said the president. He said man Richard Pryor is a Democrat. I said please try, sir, please try. And I was on the road in Dallas [Texas] with my boss, Isadora Rodriguez, and I got a call from this guy Terry Giles, he said Richard's gon do it. He said I gotta tell you something about Richard Pryor, he's known to be a no-show, he says so you can put yourself out there, but he may not show. So I told Strom, I didn't tell him that part. I said we got Richard Pryor. So he got in touch with the White House and said this will be a great thing 'cause Richard--cause Reagan had his own problems with black America then, with the budget cuts and everything else, slashing programs. Richard Pryor was still a superstar, he was huge then. He was bigger than what Chris Rock is now, Richard Pryor was huge during the early '80s. And so the White House loved it, but he said this is a kid. Nobody's gonna believe that--Strom said I believe it. I'm putting my credibility on the line. And so Strom told me in his office, he said now son, if this doesn't work out, you could be fired. He said I can't save you on this, he said are you willing to risk it all, he said because this is what it's about, you gotta be willing to risk it all. I said yeah, I was young I didn't know any better. I said let's go for it. And man I was nervous. It wasn't until I was at Dallas Airport at 4:59 when that airplane landed and Richard Pryor, Terry Giles got off the airplane and he was there. And I will tell you this, you can go back through the archives, there were thousands of people there. There must have been 12,000 people at the Department of Agriculture, Entertainment Tonight, every media outlet in the world was there. And the headline in the Washington Post was "The Jester Weeps." And as a result of Richard Pryor speaking, the Washington Post wrote that a lowly agricultural employee, a protege' of Strom Thurmond invited him and he said yes when he asked Richard Pryor. Strom was so proud, he called his secretary and said you doubted my protege', but his word is his bond. And so I mean I was like Mr. Up and Coming. Story_ID: 95781 Speaker 1: The very next--this happened on a Thursday, on a Friday a guy by the name of Clarence Thomas called me. He said man, what are you doing over at [Department of] Agriculture? I said man I'm just putting together this program working (unclear). He said man they don't know what to do with you, you need somebody to develop you. You got a lot of potential. Why don't you come and work for me? And he said have Diane set up for you to come out and see me on Monday, let me interview you. So Diane Hoke called me on behalf of this guy, Clarence Thomas, who was chairman of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. I went over to the EEOC, it was an eleven o'clock interview. He hired me on the spot, increased my salary by about $10,000. And I worked for him for four years as his confidential assistant and helped him writing his speeches. That was how my story began in Washington [D.C.]. Story_ID: 95782 Speaker 1: And you know when you can bring Hollywood and mix it with Washington, D.C. and it's a success, I mean, people still talk about that today. But Strom, had it not been for Strom Thurmond, I had to have somebody believe in me. Can you imagine, I was 21, I was 21, but Strom believed in me, and sure enough when Richard Pryor spoke that Saturday, I think it was five o'clock in the afternoon, President [Ronald] Reagan had this huge reception at the White House for Richard Pryor and he was calling it the Black History Month Reception. And Richard Pryor was moved to tears that he was there with the president and the president asked me--and I have pictures of Reagan and he said how did you pull it off? He said Senator Thurmond really believes in you. He said you're changing old Strom. He said he really believes in you. And since then Strom Thurmond has voted for the Civil Rights Legislation the Voting Rights Act, I've set up people to meet with him. And I never will forget Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King called me when the King commission decided to defund her. They decided they were no longer gonna fund the King Commission. And she said I read about your relationship with Strom and I know he's chairman of the Senate Judiciary, could you call him on my behalf? And I called Senator Thurmond, told him what was happening, he said get on the phone, we had a conference call with Mrs. King, this is Coretta Scott King. And Senator Thurmond said I'll call you back in an hour. He called her back in an hour, they had the funds doubled for the holiday birthday commission. The funds were doubled. And when George [H.W.] Bush won at his inauguration, Strom Thurmond was having this reception as all senators do, and he asked me could I call Mrs. King and ask her to come. And I called Mrs. King with Senator Thurmond's request and she said you know, son, if someone had ever told me that Strom Thurmond would be receptive to black people, 'cause I remember him the days with my husband, she said but he really loves you, he's really your friend and you really delivered for me, and she said I have no choice but to show him that you have support too and people are gratified when people do good things and do the right things. And she showed up with her entourage and spent about 45 minutes with Senator Thurmond at his office, 218 Russell Center Office Building and then we all walked over together like a march on Washington to [President George H.W.] Bush's One inauguration. Story_ID: 95783 Speaker 1: Well, what do you think Strom Thurmond's story was, did he ever tell you about you know why he changed or how he even got to be the way he was in the first place? Speaker 2: You know what, the times, politics, secure in votes, secure in power, but he said he was never a racist. He was a segregationist, he did not believe in the mingling of the--the mixing of the races, but he said even he abolished the poll tax when he was governor. He even represented a young black man who was accused of rape in South Carolina. But he never felt comfortable in being perceived like other racists in South Carolina. And he always looked for the opportunity, he knew people saw him as a racist, but if people looked at his constituency record, he treated blacks no differently than he treated anybody else, he delivered for his constituents. But when we came along, in fact at his funeral recently, at his gravesite when one of his nephews was speaking, I was really touched by this. He said that Strom Thurmond was also grateful for Armstrong Williams and a guy by the name of Tom Moss, who changed him in a very important way in his life, and it really had a profound impact on him. So it was time. So maybe my father saw that Strom Thurmond has something to give me, but I also had something to bring Strom Thurmond, 'cause my father knows that I'm very direct. I was very direct with Senator Thurmond, you know sometimes he would say things. I said people could perceive that as being very racist, you don't say it that way, I said come on. And I never would believe he was a racist, and I knew him, okay, 28 years. And I want to tell you, he could not have been better to his own son the way he--you have to grow people, and he did grow me. And the way he empowered me, the way he would take me to the White House when the president want to have a function, how he would sit with me and talk to me and talk to me about politics and how Washington [D.C.] works, how he would network me with certain people, how he would support me when I put my foot in my mouth when I was in the administration. I mean, he never, ever abandoned me, but what did I bring, a different perspective on race, I brought people that he never knew before. He started to change, I mean, with the--I mean he appointed the first federal judge, he was the first southern senator to have a black on his staff, and he felt good about that. But I'll tell you the ultimate tribute to Strom and I, was in 1996 when the Washington Urban League at their annual event here in Washington, they always come up with different themes, and their theme for that particular year was the best friendships of black and white and they selected Strom Thurmond and I as one of the recipients, there were about eight, we were one. There was so much controversy surrounding it that they thought this major Civil Rights organization was given this segregationist an award. And I never forget Maudine Cooper [HM] who was president of the Washington Urban League at the time wanted to meet Senator Thurmond privately in his office to give him the award to sort of minimize the outrage and he said no, I'm proud of this. And I'll never forget when I went over it was raining like cats and dogs, he had just come out of the infirmary, and Duke Shortage, chief of staff at the time, did not think he was gonna make it, and Strom said, oh, I'm going, this is for Armstrong and I. This is black and white friendship, and he said we deserve this, 'cause we have a very good friendship. And I'll never forget when we walked down that runway and they gave us the award and the warm reception that we received. He said, son, never back down from what you believe, always stand up, 'cause people don't really know you unless they get to know you. And how do you get to know people, you extend your hand and you say, hi, I'm Armstrong Williams, and he said, we've gotten to know each other. And I'll never forget when South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] would play Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in football, they would rotate every year, one year here, one year there. Strom and I would always go to the games. He would always go with me, and I remember how some people did not want to shake his hand. And he would say, I'm your elder, how can you not shake my hand? He would force them to shake his hand. We would go to these games together. All those memories that I have. I mean, of the quality times when people were in trouble I could always call the senator. I cannot name numerous people that I've gotten jobs for through Senator Thurmond, numerous internships with Senator Thurmond on Capitol Hill. I am the one who introduced him to Supreme Court Justice [Clarence] Thomas because in Thomas' second term as chairman of EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], he wanted somebody high profile to swear him in, and I asked the Senator to do it, and the Senator was the one who performed the swearing in ceremony, and they built a relationship, but Senator Thurmond was one of his biggest champions during his confirmation hearings. So, I'm talking about from experience, I'm talking about real situations where real things happen. You know, I'm not so concerned about where people were 40 and 50 years ago, my concern is where they are now. And Strom changed and thank God he was able to realize that change before he passed away. Story_ID: 95784 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about [U.S. Supreme] Justice Clarence Thomas, when he was in charge of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], he worked on it for four years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what are your impressions of-- Speaker 2: He too is my mentor and my hero and--I mean, listen, Justice Thomas is consistent. What he advocates on the [U.S.] Supreme Court is no different than his positions when he was at the EEOC, the Circuit Court of Appeals, when he was assistant secretary for Civil Rights at the Department of Education, this man has not changed, his views are consistent. Race should not be a consideration in higher education. People need to rise and fall on their own merit, but in cases of race, like the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] and others, Justice Thomas has been vociferous against racism. It's just that Justice Thomas did not come through the Civil Rights Movement and so they try to easily condemn him because they're not like him. Listen, there are many ways of achieving achievement or getting to this thing we call equality of achievement. There are many ways of getting to a color-blind society. The civil rights groups may have one way, men like Justice Thomas and myself have another. But our goals are the same, the same because he does not believe what they believe that he somehow hates himself and hates black people, it is ignorant and it's ludicrous. What you have to do is really study his opinions for yourself, and you'll begin to understand that he does have the best interest of all Americans at heart. Speaker 1: Okay, now many disagree with that. Justice Thomas is probably the highest ranking black person in the country that, I guess, is probably--well he has the body of black Americans have an extremely low opinion of him. Speaker 2: Well, actually, the latest poll has shown that in terms of black America, Colin Powell is number one at 72 percent, Jesse Jackson has dropped from 83 to 62 and Justice Thomas is next at 47 percent. That is the latest (uncleaar) poll that was just released. So his numbers continue to surge and why because people are beginning to understand him and they're beginning to understand the failed policies of the--just does not work today. And we need new ideas, new and innovative ideas. I mean the Civil Rights Movement had a purpose from the point of dangerous segregation through the '70s (1970s) and the '80s (1980s). But we're still crying wolf about the same problems we cried wolf about 40 years ago. Story_ID: 95785 Speaker 1: So you would contend that that there's still, that these problems have been solved? Speaker 2: No, no. In fact they've gotten worse. And you would think they would have been resolved by electing all these people members to the Congressional Black Caucus, all these state legislatures, all these people in positions of power who are CEOs of America, they've gotten fatter, they've gotten richer, but the poor are still poor. It doesn't matter about parties if you're poor. Parties benefit people who are already rich and already upper middle class. What we've gotta do is help the masses and their policies have failed to help the masses, just like on the issue of school vouchers, there's just no difference with [U.S. Supreme Court] Justice [Clarence] Thomas and his reputation. Four years ago five percent of black Americans would have supported school vouchers, today it's 68 percent. You know why, because they're realizing it has made a difference, not only with their child's academics, but with their morality, their discipline, their respect for learning. It's not a panacea, but it's an alternative to some of these failed public school system. They need competition. Why should I put my kid in a failing school? Why should I suffer when you have 535 members of Congress and only four have sent their kids to public schools, four. So if public schools are not good enough for them why should it be good enough for my child? Why can't they have this choice? You know what it is it's who has the choice. And poor people for the longest have not had the choice. And just like they have recognized that this is for their best interest, they will recognize the genius and the brilliance of Justice Thomas, it's just a matter of time. Speaker 1: Okay. On the voucher issue many people feel that they--well, the black community split. Speaker 2: No they're not, 67 percent. Joint Center for political studies, 67 percent, they support vouchers, it's not split, it's 67 percent, that's coming from a black liberal think tank. Speaker 1: Okay. But the split is, at least the differences, of those who believe in and those who don't, many people feel that the voucher system will somehow destroy the public school system. Speaker 2: They're doing a good job of that on their own. You don't need a voucher system to do--the public school system has started down the road of destruction before there was ever a voucher system. That has to do with organizations like the National Extortionist Association, which is the NEA that has all this control over these schools, parents are not involved with their child's education. When parents are involved with their child's education, you can see it through parochial schools, through religious schools, you can see the difference. When parents are allowed to discipline their children, when the teachers are empowered and when you getting the best teachers from these teachers' college, I mean, you have teachers who know nothing about science teaching science. You know teachers who cannot even discipline these kids. You're having kids coming from households where the parents cannot raise the kids, so the teachers have to be the parent, you have to be the counselor, they have to be the teacher, they have to be the disciplinarian, they cannot do it all. I mean, it's like a battle ground when these kids go to school. This is not what learning should be about. Don't look at school vouchers or charter schools, look at public schools and ask why public schools are failing. Public schooling failings has nothing to do with these other issues of vouchers for charter schools, it has to do with the lack of parental involvement, the fact that this bureaucracy is out of control and the fact that these kids are not learning. Why are these kids not learning? In fact, blacks were better educated before 1960 than they are today, why? Why is it that they cannot learn? And then we have this ridiculous argument almost five years ago because they could not learn, because they could not speak grammatically correct English. We were gon make Ebonics a language. You remember that nonsense, make Ebonics a language. Thank God that people like Maya Angelou [HM] and Oprah Winfrey and others came out and said this is ridiculous. You make them learn, you force them to compete and raise the standard. You don't lower the standard by saying okay, we'll create a new language. That is sickening and it's pathetic and it's destroyed our children. Story_ID: 95786 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in the office of EEO-- Speaker 2: --C [Equal Employment Opportunity Committee]. I was confidential assistant for Justice [Clarence] Thomas and then I left Justice Thomas in 1986, I was there four years, and went on to High Point, North Carolina, where I was vice president at government and international affairs at B and C Associates for Bob Brown and Stedman was there, Stedman Graham. And as a result of us being there together, we clicked, we founded the Graham Williams Group. He runs the Chicago [Illinois] division and I would run the Washington, D.C. division. Also, while I was there, I was the executive director of the Oprah Winfrey Foundation. I ran her charitable givings for a while. And so--you know a funny thing happened when I was in--before I went to High Point, in my father's [James Williams] life time. I wasn't really living check-to-check, I was living like every other check. You know my parents would help me out, but I never asked them for money but you know I was an entrepreneur, I grew up having, I grew up having things. I don't like to wash clothes, I like to take them to the cleaners, I like to have a housekeeper. There are certain things I like, not out of luxury, but because I like to use my mind to create. And so you don't--because there're certain things I like in life, you gotta be able to afford those things. So I was doing well politically, generating tremendous publicity, but my parents were entrepreneurs and I believed in the market place. So I'll never forget I was in Baltimore [Maryland] at a meeting and someone told me about this Dick Gregory Bahamian Diet, and I studied the book on it and realized that, you know, I could do well at this 'cause I remember growing up on my father's farm when my father could not always pay his hands and workers what he felt they deserve, he would slaughter a cow and give him part of the cow, slaughter a pig and give me a roll of butter beans or whatever, so I learned from that, when you empower others, you empower yourself. So that's what multi-level marketing is, so I got involved with [HM] Dick Gregory's Bahamian Diet and did very well. I was able to generate $100,000 cash money for multi-level market. I signed up over 400 people. I had people like Jamal Wilson of the Los Angeles Lakers, Billy Joe DuPree of the Dallas Cowboys. I mean I built a huge multi leveling network. In fact, what we did was so phenomenal, wave three, you know wave three, there are these multi-leveling marketing books, and wave three, they dedicated a chapter to me because they said it was most phenomenal success anyone has ever had in multi-level marketing, because I really made a lot of money. But I was able to take a $100,000 and invest it, I was able to save that kind of money. I was receiving checks, almost $15 and $20,000 a month when I was in multi-level marketing, because I (unclear) my work and I had the personality to deal with people. And I can do number crunchings--crunches. I could make the numbers work. My entire family, my father and everybody was involved. But my father became gravely ill in 1985 with myeloma and I moved my father here to care for him, so it would not be on my mother [Thelma Williams]. So I stopped work for about five months with Justice [Clarence] Thomas, no, two or three months, and I spent all my time at GW [George Washington University] Hospital until my father died. I was so devastated by his death. But it's interesting that happened before my father died, that weekend I closed on my first piece of real estate in this building. And he died that Monday. So my father was able to live to see me buy my first home, because they always encouraged home ownership. But when my father died, I was so devastated, I just could not bear the memories or the pain to live in Washington. That's why I moved to High Point. But in two years, 'cause I started Bahamian Diet around late, early 1984, I was able to save that kind of money. So salary is not a big deal to me when I went to High Point. So I worked there, I wasn't making much money, $35,000 a year. But in some ways I was financially independent in a lot of ways, 'cause that money was really working for me and really growing. I invested in Toyota Dealerships, the walls had come down in Eastern Europe, the walls of Communism and I was with my friend who introduced me to Richard Pryor, Terry Giles, who became my financial mentor and guru, he took my money because he--the reason why I needed to make money because he gave me another challenge, he said if you can come up with $25,000, I will help you invest it and make you financially independent on that money. And so Dick Gregory Bahamians Diet was the only thing I came to realize, it was the only thing that I could to make that money fast. And I invested it in Chateau Ez in France, I invested in other real estate and so I worked in High Point with Stedman [Graham], I got a chance to travel overseas, because I held the international side for him and because Nelson Mandela was in Pollsmoor Prison, Mr. and Mrs. Mandela's adult children was in Mr. Brown's care and I managed their care for him, which 'caused me to travel to South Africa. I've spent time, I met the Mandelas, I spent summers with Winnie Mandela, I spent summers in Swaziland, so I built a lot of international contact when I was working for B and C Associates. In fact Stedman and I and Mr. Brown would always travel together. And that was wonderful, it was great experience. Story_ID: 95787 Speaker 1: My family were only two hours and 45 minutes away from High Point [North Carolina] and they would visit me often. And then I never forget in 1990 in March I was at Terry's home, Terry Giles's home, and it was in Orange County, California. And I woke up one morning, Mr. [Bob] Brown, Stedman [Graham], we were all there, and I woke up one morning, I said you know what, it's time for me to leave B and C. It's time for me to move back to Washington [D.C.], put up my own shingle, I'm gonna start my own company. It was perfect, 'cause my father always taught us, you only leave a business, a place of employment when things are great, you don't leave it when you're angry and bitter 'cause you take that with you. And there's a part of you that has not healed, but when you leave when everything is just wonderful that is the spirit that you will take to your next job or to your next business. And so we--I started Graham Williams Group, I used--I never borrowed a dime from the bank. By the time I started Graham Williams Group in 1990, the $100,000 had become about $250,000 from investments. So my father always said to me there's nothing like spending your own money. So I used my money to invest in the company. And for the first seven years I did not take a salary. But in the early '90s' (1990s), Bush One [President George H.W. Bush] nominated [Clarence] Thomas to the Supreme Court and I became his champion handling all the press, because I worked with Anita Hill. We all worked there together that's why I thought her allegations were just outrageous 'cause when she and I would go to lunch, she would say to me, she saw Thomas as a father figure. So we saw him as a father figure so it just did not make sense. So we defended him, so when you know in war, and it was a war, the victor gets to write history and enjoys the spoils. So as a result of Thomas winning, USA Today offered me a regular column, Sid Herbert was the editor at the time. So I was writing a by-weekly column for USA Today. Cathy Hughes [HM] who owns Radio One offered me a weekly radio show, it went from a weekly to twice weekly to a thrice weekly, three times a week, to a daily show. And I began to build a name and a reputation all over the country. And then a few years later, Talk America Radio Network offered to syndicate our radio show all over the country and then Sam Radio Network offered to syndicate it all over the country and then a few years later the LA Times decided to syndicate my column all over the world. And they were since bought by the Chicago Tribune Media who syndicates my column all over the country and parts of other countries. And then in 1996 or '97 (1997), [Robet] Bob Johnson [HM] had been wooing me to be a regular contributor of BET's [Black Entertainment Television] Lead Story. And he said it would be very beneficial for me that black people would not have to understand me in sound bites and not understand me and be so hateful towards me. He said the only reason they are angry at you is because they don't understand you. What you're saying is going to make a lot of sense five years from now, 'cause this country's changing. And the politics that blacks are accustomed to is not gonna be the same. And black people need to hear another voice, and he said I think you're that voice. And he said this will signal a change in our programming, 'cause this will mark the first time that we've ever given a conservative, and he said you are a real conservative, an opportunity to air their views. He said but Black America, it will be a disservice for them if they did not hear your voice or a voice like yours. So I signed on with him and I was on BET Lead Story for five years up until the beginning of 2003. Story_ID: 95788 Speaker 1: And then that same year, Byron Lewis, Jr., who owns America's Black Forum asked me would I consider going on America's Black Forum, which is on network television affiliates all over the country and all over the world. And it would have signal their first time that they would have embodied a conservative voice that would be on the contract. And so I had been with America's Black Forum every week since 1996, and that relationship only grows stronger. As a result of my being on black television, it says that you're credible with black people, 'cause [Robert] Bob Johnson [HM] is an icon among black people, and because he gave me space on his program, his top program on Sunday, a lot of black newspapers started wanting the syndicate--calling the syndicate to take my column. So my column is in about 30 percent of black newspapers all over the country. In fact, I am the most widely published conservative columnist in black newspapers all over the country. And then as a result of our radio show going nationally, we were offered a weekly television show on NET which was National Empowerment Television here in Washington, D.C. and then NET was bought by America's Voice and on America's Voice, I started a daily show. And then we bought into a network with Dr. Vince Castelli, it was called a Renaissance Network, where I was part owner, I was the COO responsible for the daily operations. But the relationship did not work out. And so within the last two years, we owned our product, we owned the radio, we owned our television and we owned 50 percent of the column. So we syndicate our product to television and radio stations and newspapers around the country. So there is no editorial or content control against control over what we do. There is no bureaucracy with us, we make all the decision, we control the product, even with what we do with America's Black Forum, we're on the contract. We're able to influence the dialogue and the guests that they have on the shows. And since our show, our numbers have been always, we've been number one and number two on cable television, consistently since 1993, our numbers have been strong. And our black audience, say for instance in 1995, our audience was 98 percent white, today it's 38 percent black and about 21 percent Latino and about 40 percent white. So it shows you--and five years ago, many black people would not have spoken to me on the street, would not have acknowledged me. Now I'm invited to their programs to speak, and when I go out and speak, at least 40 percent of my audience is black and they say to me, we respect you, we understand you, we don't always agree with you, but you helped us to grow, because we don't just get one side. In order to have a balance view of issues, you need both sides. And so when I'm out now among black people, I'm treated like a rock hero. I don't get called the Uncle Tom and the names, it's because people like Bob Johnson [HM] and Byron Lewis and any black papers like The Amsterdam News, The Washington Afro American Newspaper, The Winston Salem Chronicle have given my voice rise in their papers. Now Bill Tatum who owns The Amsterdam News will tell you that when he first signed me and he signed me four years ago, that people were sending in canceling subscriptions, but he said it was worth the price for him because they needed balance. So we ushered in an era where it was okay to have a black conservative on the pages of your newspaper and have them on your newspaper programs and so we do that and our group commentary for CNN just about every week, I do commentary for MSNBC, I do commentary for BBC, I write for Savoy Magazine where I'm a contributing editor, I write for Ministry Today Magazine, I write for Charisma Magazine, I contribute articles to Reader Digest, I contribute to American Legion Magazine. You must understand in terms of our writing, we have at least 11 million people that reads me somewhere in the world every day. We have about 20 million people that see us on television every day, 'cause we on the air every day and many markets twice a day, noon to one and then eleven to midnight. And then our radio show is broadcasted over 300 radio affiliates all over the country. Our show has become so popular and so sought after that every year we're overseas broadcasting. I mean, recently we're in Israel, Sudan, we're one of the first journalists who are allowed back in the Sudan when they were negotiating the peace agreement to lift the sanctions and we broadcast in Germany, in Switzerland, we take the show on the road, because it's a very popular show. And you know what it's a blessing for me, but it all goes back--it all goes back to my childhood and what my parents [James Williams and Thelma Williams] taught me. My parents had a vision for us and the things about life, sometimes in life we try to plan too much. The best things in life have happened to me when I just do the work, do my best, 'cause life is like synchronicity, when the pupil is ready, the teacher appears. And it's just--it's just been a blessing to watch my parent's vision for me and my siblings become a reality 'cause it's not just my success, it's started ages ago before I was ever thought about, just having good seeds and good lineage that my parents passed on. Story_ID: 95789 Speaker 1: Tell me what is, what would you say your political philosophy is, you know, you've been called a liberal-- Speaker 2: Oh, I've never been called a liberal. Speaker 1: --I mean, I'm sorry, conservative. Speaker 2: That's okay. You know better than that, right. Nobody would call me a liberal. Speaker 1: Yeah, conservative, you know black Republican. A lot of times, that's not the most welcomed thing in a black community, but what is your political philosophy? Speaker 2: Listen, my conservatism has nothing to do with the Republican Party. I was conservative before I ever really knew what a Republican Party was. My conservatism comes from my Pentecostal faith. My mother [Thelma Williams] is Pentecostal, I'm Pentecostal and I remain Pentecostal today. I believe marriage is between a man and a woman, I believe even though man sin, adultery is wrong, I believe that no one should be given through government, through laws an advantage in life, but they should not be given a disadvantage. I don't think at this day and time in our lives that a person should be given an advantage strictly because of race. I think affirmative action and programs that benefit people that need help should be based on need. You should be give it to those who are socio-economically deprived. affirmative action has become a bourgeois boondoggle. White women and bourgeois blacks are the only ones that really benefit. It does not help the masses, the poor. If you ask an average inner-city kid today about Affirmative Action, a kid in the deep south, they don't even know what it is. Parents go to school based on affirmative action, they get their jobs based on affirmative action, they get their contracts based on affirmative action and then they want to repeat the cycle with their children. It should be based on need and it should be based on geography, because if you look at inner cities, if you look at Appalachia, if you look at steel towns, if you look at different areas you're gonna get exactly what you're looking for based on need. There's no way that a child should be given 20 points based on the hue of their skin. It's demeaning, it's humiliating. We have lots of pride. There are many black families in America today who send their kids to school and affirmative action has nothing to do with it. Give it to those that really need it. Affirmative action should not be synonymous with black, it should be synonymous with need. I believe in the right to bear arms from my childhood. I think we neglect to talk about the millions of lives that are saved every day by responsible people with guns, I think it's ludicrous the lawsuit that the NAACP filed against gun owners of America, the manufacturers of guns, saying they're the reason why they're all these killings in the street. What about these thugs who shoot these guns, what about these thugs who are wreaking havoc in these communities. Speaker 1: Well the proliferation of guns in a black community, I don't know how that solves any crimes in the black community. Speaker 2: No, no, but who has the guns. Responsible people do not commit crimes. You gotta get guns out of hands of criminals, that people that would do harm, who have no conscience, who have no regard for life. That is the problem, you just toughen the gun laws, that's what you do, you enforce the laws that are already on the books. And that is not being done. Speaker 1: So that a convicted criminal with no guns is what you're saying? Speaker 2: No, they shouldn't. If you have a record, you should not be allowed to own a gun, under no circumstances. Just like if you have a record, you should not be allowed to vote, absolutely, I agree with that law. If you've broken the law and if you have a record, you have forfeited your right to participate in one of the greatest blessings that we have as American citizens and that is the right to vote. Speaker 1: Isn't that predicated on the, I guess, the assumption that the legal system is fair, I mean the justice system is really fair? Speaker 2: Any system put in by the government is not fair, it's biased. I don't trust the government. A government that is big enough to give you everything is big enough to take it away. But you know what, it's the only system that we have, and we keep tweaking it time and time again to make it better, and it will never be perfect. But I gotta tell you it's the best system in the world. Story_ID: 95790 Speaker 1: For young black men today, so many are going to jail, the figures are staggering, and the United States-- Speaker 2: Why are they going to jail? Speaker 1: --They're going to jail for-- Speaker 2: Breaking the law? Speaker 1: --Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, then blacks have nothing to do with it, they're criminals. And if you break the law you should go to jail. I don't care whether you agree with the law or not, you know it's the law, you know what the consequences are, so why break the law. I don't care whether it's crack cocaine or product cocaine. Speaker 1: You asked are they going to jail for breaking the law, yeah, but that's the reason, but have they always broken the law, you know? Speaker 2: And if they're not breaking--look, let's not confuse the period of dangerous segregation and the height of the Civil Rights Movement to what has happened in the last 10 or 15 years in this country. I mean, America is a model on the issue of race and the treatment of their citizens, we're a model. If South Africa could get half--to the half point of where we are as Americans, they would be doing great. But again, let's not make excuses for these criminals-- Speaker 1: For instance, I'll give you an example. In Illinois recently-- Speaker 2: The moratorium on the death penalty? Speaker 1: --Yeah, George Ryan, who's a Republican Governor put a moratorium on the death penalty, but the reason why is because over the last 10 years or so it's been at least 15 people, most of them have been black, who have been prisoners on death row who have been exonerated by-- Speaker 2: --Only two of them, only two. Speaker 1: --It's been more than that because there were four in one case-- Speaker 2: In terms of-- Speaker 1: --In Chicago [Illinois], recently, more than one case. Speaker 2: --Let me tell you what's interesting about that, you know who was outraged by his ruling, black people. They were outraged 'cause they feel that who's gonna be harmed by this most would be their communities. It's not white people are upset. Wonder why black people are upset, if you believe that black people are so anti-death penalty, they were fuming. Did you see the footage on television? In fact the media ABC were shocked at how outraged blacks were. Yes, injustices happen every day, they make mistakes every day, but don't confuse injustices with repealing the entire death penalty. The two are different. Deal with the injustices. Make the system better, but don't put people who wreak havoc on people's lives, who kill people for no reason at all, don't put them back on the street. And that's their issue. You can resolve both of them at the same time without repealing the death penalty. I absolutely believe in the death penalty, no question. There are thugs out there like what happened in the [Patrick] Dennehy case, the way this boy was killed, took his life. When they were searching for the body, the head was separated from the body. There's some crimes that are so heinous in this country, with the sniper case, here in the Nation's Capital [Washington, D.C.] where this kid and his mentor were killing innocent people at random, family members who did no harm, going on with their daily lives and you just gonna kill em like their animals. There are people that you need to have the death penalty in place for, and they should be put to death to serve as a reminder that this kind of barbaric behavior would not be tolerated in this country. Speaker 1: What about those who are convicted of a crime who did not commit the crime? Speaker 2: Then they should not--they should be set free, they should be compensated and we should learn from why they were convicted. But the good thing about life now is that there has been a huge technological advancement in forensic evidence. Years ago--decades ago, we did not have the kind of sophistication now. So now we can go back and look at DNA. Now we can go back and test the weather of temperature the way certain bugs were at that time were found on the body that they were able to save. And that is why they're able to go back and free these people who did not commit these crimes. Story_ID: 95791 Speaker 1: So as our technology and forensic science gets better, you will have less of these problems that you're concerned about today. But let's not confuse the fact that the majority of these people deserve to be on death row. Because what you and I are talking about is three or four percent, well it's three and four percent too many, 'cause no one who has not committed a crime should not be on death row and should not be serving time in jail. And I would be a huge advocate for them. Speaker 2: It was higher than that though. Speaker 1: I'm just using that as an example. Speaker 2: Fifteen-- Speaker 1: Well, no one, and I will fight for their rights. But let's not confuse the 15 with the 85 percent who deserves to be there. Speaker 2: It's not a percentage, it's 15 people out of about 50, I think. It's not you know 15 percent. Speaker 1: And the governor made a decision on how best to remedy the situation that he felt was in his best interest. Obviously there was a lot of controversy over it 'cause that's why he's not governor now. Speaker 2: Well no, he wasn't governor because of traffic--driver's license scheme. Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no. Let me just tell you something. The repealing of the death penalty, in your opinion. Speaker 2: No, he was already--he did that as a lame duck governor. He had already lost an election when he did that. Speaker 1: Right, but still, that's why he was able to do it, 'cause had he been governor that would not have happened. Speaker 2: But why would he do it if he's-- Speaker 1: He had nothing to lose and it was in your fact. He did not do it for principle reasons, absolutely not, that's my opinion though. Speaker 2: --Okay, all right, so yeah, that's true-- Speaker 1: That's my opinion. Speaker 2: I'm not one to belabor these things. This is about your opinion on things anyway. Speaker 1: That's okay. Story_ID: 95792 Speaker 1: I was asking you about your philosophy--what your political philosophy was? Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know, and let me just tell you something, just like there is never a case where abortion should allowed and I think pedophiles and the people who commit pedophilias, they commit the worst kind of crime it's just as bad as rape as I'm concerned and they should be given life sentences. But I also think that racism is a crime. I think it's immoral. Just like I advocate against abortion, I am just as vociferous when it comes to racism. That is why when former Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott made his very racist statement at Senator [Strom] Thurmond's birthday party, I was one the first people out front denouncing him and demanded that he not be--continue to be our senate majority leader. And it's because of conservatives like myself and the President of the United States [George W. Bush] who repudiated him that he was not allowed to be senate majority leader. So it's not just enough to repudiate issues like abortion and the death penalty, we got to do the same on the issues of race. We have to be consistent. Speaker 1: Do you have a sense or were you able to speak to Strom Thurmond after those remarks to find out Strom Thurmond actually felt about someone pouring out a dusty remark of his from a long time ago? Speaker 2: Senator Thurmond did not even know that Trent Lott was in the room. Senator Thurmond at that time would not have known he was in the room. It just a state of when you're a hundred years old. Some people are very alert when they are a hundred, he was not. Speaker 1: So that's why there's no comment from-- Speaker 2: Right, absolutely right, he was not lucid at all, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, so continue though with your political (unclear)? Speaker 2: You know I also believe that these frivolous lawsuits are just ridiculous, that somebody can spill a cup of McDonald's coffee and scald themselves and can sue for millions and millions of dollars. I am so glad to see the government and the congress finally putting a cap on these lawsuits. They're just totally out of control. I think when we talk about out of wedlock births, we need to talk about the father too, 'cause the mother does not get pregnant alone. I don't think we do enough to make men responsible in the lives of their children. I think they find ways to skirt the system, eventually they get their paychecks garnished, but that's the least thing is the money. We need to find a way to force men, if they bring children in this world that they have to be involved in that child's life. It should not be up to the government to raise your child. That should be the responsibility of parents who make a choice to bring that child in the world. Story_ID: 95793 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: You know I don't think in that context. I--you know you gotta have the same hopes and concerns for all people. You know I just--I don't know, I just wish that blacks were not so singularly see themselves as one, that whatever affects one affects all, that we believe that--that people believe as a whole they cannot progress in America, they cannot realize the American dream, believe that racism is holding them back and they need another payday through reparations. I wish we could focus on the lives of so many black Americans who've achieved against all the odds, who've made some astonishing successes in this country and that's why, track them, I mean, why they were able to overcome. We don't tell enough of the good news about black people. We like to focus on the pain, the lost hope, and as a result of us not empowering our children with strength and realize that black Americans are rich in spiritual currency and will bring a portrait of life to the boardrooms, to education, to government, to politics, to religion, because we're unable to do that there's such a disconnect, you can see it in the homes, you can see it in crime, you can just walk around and see the homeless in major cities, and many of them just feel they have no hope, they really don't feel they can make it. And they never look at the immigrant who comes here and look at a blank piece of paper and some of them will see nothing and the immigrant will see everything because from where they had to come from. I wish they could understand the beauty of all people. That just because someone called themselves your brother it doesn't mean they're your savior and have your best interest at heart. And just because someone does not look like you, and you perceive them not to share your value system that they're your enemy and you have nothing in common with them. I go back to the lessons my father taught me early on and my mother, when you close doors to others, you close doors to yourself. I wish they understand that they're not the ones that need to understand about racism and affirmative action, that's the wrong audience. The audience should be other people who they see as their oppressor 'cause they're experts in that area. They need to learn other things that they can speak eloquently about and many of them are. I wish they could understand the beauty of people, that you'd be shocked at who helps you in life, where you find comfort and who would be there in your time of hour. And I'm sure many black people listening to this today can privately relate to my story, they may not tell a story of people who've just been there to help them, Jewish people, white people, black people, Filipino people, Asian people, because of the human connection. We're more connected by the human bond than we are the race bond. Just because there are a hundred black people in a room it doesn't mean they have everything in common, they could have absolutely nothing in common. Just because you have a hundred people who are black doesn't mean you're celebrating diversity. It doesn't mean that there's diversity in the room. You gotta get to know people, know the backgrounds of what shaped them. I will tell you most people who are wealthy and have riches, they have a lot in common, their experiences are very similar. And most people who are poor who've had to struggle in life, their experiences are the same. It has nothing to do with black and white. I just wish they could life the scales off their eyes and grow--I wish they could allow--stop allowing the few purveyors of racism and racial bigotry to make them feel as though they're perpetual victims and to make them believe that they cannot achieve and then they need someone as their champion. And they go and say oh these poor black people, I represent them, racism, bigotry, they cannot get the best jobs. And yet these people are getting contracts, get an opportunity to fly around on jets, getting the big salaries, and yet the people that they supposed to champion get nothing. It's just like these people who sold cities' major corporation like Texaco and other places and they hire these high priest of blackness to represent them. And when the lawsuit is all settled and done, they won the lawsuit, but the lawyers and the representatives have the money and they end up with two or three thousand dollars. And they went through the crime and they went through the humiliation and the pain. Story_ID: 95794 Speaker 1: I can appreciate what you're saying, if I understand correctly, but can you, are you saying that black people, they should disorganize themselves as a people and go off as individuals into the American landscape? Speaker 2: Brother, absolutely, they are Americans. Speaker 1: So we should disorganize ourselves as a people? Speaker 2: No, no we're not organized in the first place. That's an illusion. Speaker 1: That's what many people complain about, they say we need more unity. Speaker 2: No, you need more individuality, is what you need. You need to be your own champion. You need to be your own negotiator. You don't get what you deserve in life, you get what you negotiate. Why would you allow somebody else to negotiate for you over your pain and your history, negotiate for yourself. You need to empower yourself. You need to stop surrendering yourself to others. Speaker 1: That means this is historically true for right now for the present? Speaker 2: For the present time. Speaker 1: But it hasn't been-- Speaker 2: No. I would say only within the last 15 years. Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: Because for the longest blacks could not be a member--attend the white universities and the white graduate schools, they could not be a member of the Greek letter fraternities and sororities, they could not be a part of the organization so blacks were forced to segregate themselves and the colleges and universities and organizations. Speaker 1: So you see now that perhaps we should not have black colleges and universities? Speaker 2: No. They're necessary-- Speaker 1: I mean-- Speaker 2: --You don't change the institutions, you change the individual, is what I advocate. Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: That's where we need to make the difference. Speaker 1: But if say South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], as a black institution, and they basically, I mean, you see the future of South Carolina State as not being a black institution? Speaker 2: It should be integrated, it should be integrated, it should look like America. I don't believe in white institutions, I don't believe in black institutions. I believe in institutions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think one of the worst things that happened in this country was bussing, 'cause you bussed the wrong people. It was ludicrous bussing the people who already been discriminated against, spat upon, given the lower rung of education, and you gonna bus them into the white communities to say in order for you to feel good about yourself and be equal and achieve, you gotta sit next to some white person. Speaker 1: I think they were actually saying that the better schools are in the white communities. Speaker 2: No, well then bus them to the black communities and make those schools better, that was the problem. That's exactly right, they should have been bussed to the inner cities and to those schools then you would have known that those schools would have been better. They had it wrong, they bussed the wrong people. Speaker 1: Okay. But in terms of disorganizing in the black community-- Speaker 2: No, no. You say disorganizing. I'm advocating individuality. We will always have organizations that we identify because the organization is a theme. I'm a Phi Beta Sigma, there are certain things that we have in common causes we pledged together, it was a frat, and it's all black, that's fraternal. But you must step outside of that organization and become an individual when it comes to your own, sustaining your own success and self-sufficiency in this country. Story_ID: 95795 Speaker 1: You see when something happens Amadou Diallo or [James] Byrd in Texas, dragging death it says nothing about me. When somebody's racially profiling, I'm not affected by it. I'm outraged with what happened with Jeffery [sic, James] Byrd because it's a human rights violation, I'm abhorred by it. It outrages me as a human being. Speaker 2: I think they drugged him because he's black. Speaker 1: But I'm outraged by it, no matter what the reason is. People do a lot of things, I'm not interested in the reasoning, it happened. Speaker 2: I think black people's organizations were interested is because-- Speaker 1: But see that's dangerous. Speaker 2: --If you had been there instead of him, it may have been you. Speaker 1: But I don't want them to be outrageous for me 'cause all people should be outraged. So you gonna say to white people you should not be as outraged because he doesn't look like you. You minimize it. No, no, everybody should be outraged because it happened to a human being. We gotta stop balkanizing pain and destruction and violence. The reason why a lot of white people are afraid to say things because we have said this is not your problem, you don't understand. It has nothing to do with blackness. We've gotta get into the fact that these are human beings, we should advocate. When those churches were being burned, we should not be upset because they were black churches, we should be upset because it's the fabric of our society. They are the stumbling blocks from which this country was built on. But when you put it into a category black, you're limiting somebody, you're disinviting somebody who at this point in this millennium, we need to move beyond that. Speaker 2: So you should look at the act and not the reason why? Speaker 1: It is the act. It's the law, there's a law in the book. It doesn't matter how you killed somebody, why you killed somebody, you're punished by the law. The law says if you commit this crime, this is your punishment. There's this crazy thing about, in this society, what is it called, where if you kill somebody black, it's more than just a crime, it becomes a special crime. It doesn't matter, a crime is a crime. The law should be the same no matter what the crime is. Speaker 2: I could agree with that but don't you think that motive is instructive and you know why people do what they're doing-- Speaker 1: The motive doesn't change the law. And if you punish the crime, they will get the message. Speaker 2: --But you can prevent a crime by understanding the motive? Speaker 1: I want to tell you this. I want to tell you something. I gotta--it's simple, I gotta come up with the term that they use for this. There's this movement afoot where they want to make it a special crime and add more sentencing time to it and if it happens against minorities. Speaker 2: Hate crime? Speaker 1: Hate Crime Legislation. Let me tell you something, that is very dangerous for black people 'cause black people kill far more white people, it's not reported than white people killing black people. Not let me just tell you something. I've talk to a lot of liberals. We had this conversation, and they agree quietly, the last thing you want to do is enact Hate Crime Legislation. 'Cause let me tell you something, it's gonna come back and bite the very people you trying to empower. That's why it becomes dangerous. There should not be no hate crime, there should be crime. I don't care if a black kills a white, if a white kills a black, it's killing. The punishment and the sentencing should be the same. You going down a very dangerous, murky and slippery slope when you start attaching race, gender and sexual preference to it. It's dangerous and minorities lose. Story_ID: 95796 Speaker 1: Sir, when you look back at what you've done, you're still young-- Speaker 2: Forty-four. Speaker 1: --Yeah, that's young-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --By our standards for this interview. When you look back over at what you've done, what would you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. God that's a tough question. I've never been asked that. I would like to feel that we've reintroduced the W.E.B. Du Bois, Frederick Douglass era of debate, that white people can think differently, they can have different ways of approaching what ails this country in fighting solutions, that it's okay to be a Republican, it's okay to be conservative and still have the interest of our people at heart. Before 19--before the era of [Ronald] Reagan, Republicans and Democrats, black and white all worked together. I mean blacks worked together. Black Republicans were never a pariah. They worked together, people like [Arthur] Art Fletcher [HM], Sam Jackson. These people were heroes in the black community. But when the era of Reagan was ushered in the standard of black Republicans changed. I also, you know, in terms of the communications that we can own our own media as conservatives and control our messages. I've never--I will never have a show--I will never, ever have a show that makes a caricature out of black people, that's demeaning. I will never have it on TV, it will never happen. I may talk about a issue that we as a society should not be happy about, but I'll do it in a very tasteful way. I have shows that empower people that celebrate people. The shows that we have you can watch with your family and your young children. You know I will have the respect for civility and I have the respect for our history. I will have the respect for people like [Reverend] Benjamin Hooks [HM], [Reverend] Jesse Jackson [HM], Bob Brown, Harold Doley and Dorothy Height [HM], people who made the foundation, the Jewish Americans and white Americans who contributed to where we are today, 'cause it took an effort on the part of all of us for us to have this progress and this change. It is their bridge that I walk across, but bridges deteriorate and so sometimes you gotta build them different and build them better. We're here to take the bridge that they built to build it better and more firmer. That is what our legacy is to bring people much further than where they did. You know people living today as if they've experienced slavery as if they went through that period. I mean I'm sure some of our ancestors are turning over in their graves, there's no reason for a child not to learn today to get an education, to achieve. An achievement is not defined by how much money you have in the bank, you can give back to society, you can help people in the simplest way. Sometimes we've lost the civility of saying yes sir, no sir, yes ma'am, no ma'am, good morning, thank you. The little things that we forget about at human beings. And it goes to show you no matter what the odds are, you can achieve as long as you're legal, moral and ethical and you're fair to all people. I don't discriminate against anyone, it doesn't matter to me what your race is, that's irrelevant to me. What matters to me is what your character is, what your value system is and when I get to know that then I can make a determination of whether we can build something together. Story_ID: 95797 Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything that you would do differently when you look over it all? Speaker 2: I would be married. I would have married early on, I would have. I would have had kids early on. Speaker 1: Do you have a candidate or is this-- Speaker 2: Oh, I was engaged, yes, yes, yes. And I have a God son, just like my son, Antonio, just like my son. But I would have married--but you know what it's--you know what, I would have wanted to marry right after I left my parents when I didn't--not have accumulated a lot, when I know somebody was there with me for the right reasons and we grow together and we build together, because you know trust is so important, loyalty. You know so many people marry today for the wrong reasons, has nothing to do with love, that's why there's this high divorce rate and so it is more of a personal thing, I would have and I would have wanted to have kids, but I've had a good life. I may seem 44, but I feel like I've lived for so long. I've had so many blessings, so many opportunities, just about all of them I've taken advantage of. But you know I could say this as a tribute to my parents [James Williams and Thelma Williams], I don't say this often but you know we all sin and fall short of the glory of God. Thank God every saint has a past but every sinner has a future, and I certainly have my shortcomings and things that have challenged me every day, I must overcome. And I strive to be a good person, sometimes it's out of my reach, but I gotta keep reaching for that, which is good. But I can honestly say as a tribute to my parents that I've never in my life smoked any kind of cigarette--I could honestly say in my life, I've never smoked any kind of cigarette, never been exposed to any kind of drugs, I never drank any kind of alcoholic beverages, beers or wine in my life, and I've never used one word of profanity in my entire life, because that's the environment I grew up in. That was nonexistent in my household. And out of tribute to my parents there are some things that I just don't want to do 'cause I have compulsive behavior and I can't do things in moderation, it's either all or none. Because of the person I am, I made a choice not to do those things because those things can lead to so many other things that could deteriorate and corrupt the soul, corrupt the spirit, corrupt the mind. And so out of a tribute to good parents, I will never do those things, because it shows respect to so many things that my parents taught me that I always want to hold dear. So I always want to sacrifice something, sacrifice a lesser good for a greater good. Story_ID: 95798 Speaker 1: Okay. This one last question, slightly different from legacy. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? I never thought about that. You know I took care of my father [James Williams] when he was on his dying bed. Parents never know what their children will become. But I think the greatest fear of a parent is that they will die alone and their children will abandoned them. And when it all mattered, I walked away from my job and everything I had to take care of my father. And I've been there for my mother [Thelma Williams], not just my parents, but my family. When my love ones are ill or in trouble, nothing comes between me and my duty to my family, be it wealth, appointments, contracts, it doesn't matter, that I understand the importance of life. It's what you do for your family, what you do for your love ones, because you cannot empower others without empowering yourself. So I was there for my father on his dying bed. I was there when he drew his last breath and to me it's a crowning achievement for me, because I know my father died knowing that we loved him and we never left his side. And it gives me peace in everything that I do. There's no guilt even when my mother passes, there would be no guilt, no regrets, no looking back, 'cause there's nothing that I could have done better than what I'm doing now. And I thank God for that. Story_ID: 95799 Speaker 1: This is right after Justice [Clarence] Thomas' confirmation when he was confirmed on the Supreme Court as a Supreme Court Justice. This was the only event other than an event, President Bush One [George H.W. Bush] had at the White House where after the swearing in, but this is the only public event that the justice would allow. He allowed his protege' to have this event. On the left, far left is Justice Thomas' wife, Virginia, in the background there is Sam Cornelius who is administrator of Food and Nutrition at the Department Agriculture while I was there and then there's Justice Thomas, and holding my hand like a father and a son. And then you could see Senator [Strom] Thurmond with his arm folded with the red flower on that he's just proud, he was so proud, he was just so proud to be there. And then to his far right, the tall guy, Stedman Graham, my business partner. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, next? Speaker 1: I have been very active with the Republican Party for them to expand the base to fulfill America's promise, expand the party's reach, particularly with American blacks in this country. We held a ceremony to refurbish Frederick Douglass' home in Anacostia, Washington, D.C., where they committed two million dollars to the refurbishing of his home and you can see the person to the far left is manager of the park service and his assistant and in the background is Senator Bill Frist who is Senate Majority Leader and at the microphone is the Speaker of the House Denny [Dennis] Hastert, to his immediate right is Reverend A. R. Bernard who pastors one of the largest churches in the country, it's out of New York, it's Christian Cultural Center and then you can see me and the guy with the hat is Frederick Douglass, IV, the great-great-great-grandson of Frederick Douglass. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Next. Speaker 1: I'm not using that picture. Speaker 2: You're not using this? Speaker 1: Uh-uh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's the family. Those are my mother's children. To the far left is my brother Gerald, my sister Mary, yours truly, my brother Kent, my brother Bruce in the background and then my brother Alvin and then that's my mother who's holding Bruce's first born and my mother's real first grandchild Jamir. So that's the family portrait. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: When was this taken? Speaker 1: Oooh. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Approximately? Speaker 1: The '90s (1990s). Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, great. Next? Speaker 1: I think we should use the bigger photo, we have a bigger photo than that. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: I interviewed National Security Advisor, Condoleezza Rice and after that we just had a photo op and we were happy. It was a fun day and wonderful interview and it was just fun chatting with her for a half hour. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Was that this year? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Two thousand three (2003). Speaker 1: Two thousand three (2003). Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Next? Speaker 1: Those are my pals, Stedman [Graham] and Oprah [Winfrey]. I was on Oprah's show that day, that was in 1989 and she was match making that day and she match make--I was matched with one of her producers, didn't work out but it was still a fun day. And Oprah was looking fabulous, that's when she was thin. Speaker 2: Oh, listen this photo is so special, Barry White, has been such a supporter of my career. This picture was taken in 1982. On the far left is Barry's son and next to his son is Rod McGrew and his wife who's Barry's manager, then me then Barry and Glodine and then Mrs. Cornelius and Mrs. Alexander. Mrs. Alexander was ahead of the Women's Bureau at the Department of Labor under Bush One [President George H.W. Bush], but Barry White was such a supporter, he introduced me to Hollywood. Somehow or another I was L.A. in 1981 and he heard me on the radio and wanted to meet me and I spent countless nights and weeks at his Sherman Oaks home and we just remained good friends up until his death. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Next. Speaker 2: This is Senator Bob Dole and a friend and we were in his office after a meeting and it was just Senator Dole during his younger days when he was Senate Majority Leader. That picture was taken like 1994. Speaker 1: [Off camera discussion] Speaker 2: I will tell you, our family had always been very political even as a young age my parents would have fund raising on the farm for senatorial candidates and statewide candidates running for office. But Steve Forbes ran for president in the late '90s (1990s). We hosted a reception for him at our 200 acre estate, estate in Marion, South Carolina. So far left is my brother Kent and in the hat is my brother Bruce and then my mom and then Steve Forbes and then my sister Mary then yours truly and my brother John and that's at the family home. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, next? Speaker 2: You know it's always--the White House Christmas party is always a hot commodity. So I attended a White House Christmas party in December of 2002 with President and Mrs. Bush and I took as my special guest, my Chief of Staff, Nancy. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother and her sons, Bruce far left, Kent and myself and mama. That's--we're attending the funeral of my father's brother, our uncle. And we had the family portrait. You can tell, we're at a cemetery standing near my father's--in fact we're standing right in front of my father's grave. And that was like in 1995. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Great. Next? Speaker 2: This is a continuation of that day of my uncle preacher's funeral, Spencer Williams, my father's brother and it's another family portrait. In the flowery dress is my sister-in-law Pam, that's Bruce's wife who's kneeling with his son, Little Bruce and the little girl on the right is his daughter Jimera(ph) and then on the far left is my brother Kent, my brother Jimmy, my brother John and then the older lady with the grey hair is my Aunt Lucille, she's the last surviving sibling of my father and then next to her is my sister Mary and me and my mother and my brother Earl. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, next? Speaker 2: You know during Bush One's [President George H.W. Bush] administration with a pretty decent access that's my brother who runs one of the largest political action committees in the country. There we are with then President [George H.W.] Bush and his Vice-President Dan Quayle. That was like in 1989. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, next? Speaker 2: Well we're in the Supreme Court in Justice [Clarence] Thomas' office and there I am with one of my best friends in the world Kevin Johnson, known as K.J. He used to play for the Phoenix Suns who lives in Sacramento, California now. He's just a very dear friend, he's like a brother and we're just spending some time with the justice. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Speaker 2: That is my debonair father. He was a handsome guy, that's my father. He's a cool dude, he was cool, man, I'm telling you with the hat, and you know what we all loved the hats if you notice. And then in these photos we wear that hat, that's our trademark, those hats. But that's my dad, he was 19 at the time, but that's my dad. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Go ahead with this photo. Speaker 2: That's when I was in South Africa, that was five days after Mandela was released for Pollsmoor Prison. I was there with him as he talked with Charlayne Hunter-Gault [HM] from PBS and I was just there having breakfast with he and his wife Minnie Mandela. That's in Soweto, South Africa. Speaker 1: And David Logan, that is my mother and the grandbaby Logan and my brother Kent, that's my sister's baby. Speaker 2: That is a picture when we were on Americas Black Forum with Julian Bond [HM], Juan Williams and Johnny Cochran Speaker 1: That's Justice [Clarence] Thomas visiting my office and there he is with my brother Alvin. Speaker 2: That's a family shot with my mother, my sister and her baby, my sister-in-law and my brother Kent, I'm in the background. Speaker 1: Another family shot with my brothers and my sister and my cousin Coleen...