 Story_ID: 137071 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is [HM] Ann Walker. Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Wyatt Tee Walker, W-Y-A-T-T, middle name, T-E-E, last name W-A-L-K-E-R. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind your middle name. You hardly see "T" spelled out T-E-E. Speaker 2: Well, that was my nickname as a child, and I made it my legal name in 1966. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did the "T" stand for anything initially? Speaker 2: Terry was my born name, T-E-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 16, 1929 in Brockton, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an ordained minister, a writer and a cultural historian, by academic training. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And today's date is the--what is this? The 23rd [sic, 24th] of June? Speaker 2: June. Speaker 1: Yeah, 2010, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we're at your home in-- Speaker 2: Chester, Virginia. Speaker 1: Chester, Virginia, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I believe today is the 24th. Speaker 1: Twenty-fourth, I'm sorry. Today's the 24th [June 24, 2010]. My mistake. Story_ID: 137072 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history. Can you tell us a little bit about your background, your family background? Speaker 2: My father [John Wise Walker] was a pastor in Merchantville, New Jersey for seventy-five years. I grew up in southern Jersey in a little place called Merchantville, which is distinguished by being the home of Jersey Joe Walcott [a.k.a. Arnold Raymond Cream], the heavyweight champion of the world. Speaker 1: Okay, now is your family history--did your father's people come from New Jersey originally or did they come-- Speaker 2: My father was a Virginian and my mother was a Virginian. Speaker 1: Okay. So were they born around this part of Virginia? Speaker 2: My father was born near Emporia [Virginia] and my mother was born in Northern Neck in--I forget the county now. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story about how the family came to New Jersey from Virginia? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Maude Pinn Walker] worked in Atlantic City [New Jersey], and my father met her there. And he married her after his first wife died, after--six months after they were married. He was twenty-one years her senior. And I'm the tenth of eleven children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Only two of us left. Story_ID: 137073 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about growing up in [Merchantville] New Jersey? Speaker 2: It was like growing up in the South. They call that section of New Jersey, Little Georgia. They were burning crosses and everything was segregated, segregated schools, everything was segregated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I had a Southern upbringing. Speaker 1: Now, were there any--now, your father [John Wise Walker] was a pastor, right? And tell us a little bit about his church and what they were doing? Speaker 2: It was a small church, but he was a race man. I grew up in a home who had a picture of Frederick Douglass on the wall. And he was my early hero. Speaker 1: Okay. Was your father a member of any organizations in those days? Speaker 2: He was what we call a race man. He resented any form of segregation and discrimination. And he spoke out against it wherever he was. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father read a lot of the black newspapers in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He was a very well-read man. He read Greek and Hebrew everyday, a very learned man. Speaker 1: Now, where did your father go to school? Speaker 2: He went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] and finished in the first class, 1899. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when--so would you consider your father like, basically, one of your mentors I assume? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely, he was my role model. Story_ID: 137074 Speaker 1: Okay, any other role models growing up in [Merchantville] New Jersey? Speaker 2: The family doctor, Dr. Isam [ph.] Wilson. He made me want to be a physician, and when I went to college, I didn't want to be a minister. So I wanted to be a doctor. I majored in chemistry and physics. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, from what I've read, now, you--so you were following in your father's [John Wise Walker] footsteps going to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Sure. Yes. Speaker 1: And you majored in chemistry and physics and you graduated cum laude-- Speaker 2: Magna cum laude. Speaker 1: Magna cum laude, right, in 1950, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Is-- Speaker 2: Then I went to seminary and finished three years later, suma cum laude. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is at the seminary at Virginia Union? Speaker 2: Yeah, the Graduate School of Religion [now Samuel DeWitt Proctor School of Theology]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, you met your wife [HM Ann Walker] during this-- Speaker 2: The first night. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I learned that my father had taught her in a summer assembly at Bordentown, New Jersey, and that's how we started talking. And we didn't start going together until my sophomore year, because I couldn't get to her. The line was too long. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. So she was highly sought after then. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was very popular. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you got married in 1950. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is the sixtieth year of our marriage. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 137075 Speaker 1: You got your M.A. [sic] in divinity in 1953? Speaker 2: M.Div. [Master of Divinity]. Speaker 1: Okay, and the same year, you became the pastor of Gillfield Baptist Church-- Speaker 2: --Baptist Church in Petersburg [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us how that came about? How did that come about? Speaker 2: Well, Sam Proctor [Samuel DeWitt Proctor] was the Dean of the School of Religion [now Samuel DeWitt Proctor School of Theology, Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]. And he told me if I went over there as a summer minister, I'd be called as the minister. And he was right. And I was the summer minister. And when they got ready to call a permanent pastor, I was--I won by a long, a big margin. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I've got to go back. I was-- Speaker 2: I was twenty-two years old. Speaker 1: Twenty-two, okay. Let me go back. I didn't ask a question I should have asked, and that is how did you go from majoring in chemistry to becoming--going to theological school? Speaker 2: I was inspired by Sam Proctor. He was the first minister I met who didn't wear a black suit. He wore a sport coat and a pair of pants that matched. And he was my ethics professor and a very--a gifted man. And he--I decided I wanted to be a minister like he, like him. Speaker 1: Now, was he involved in the Civil Rights Movement as such or? Speaker 2: Not at that time. There wasn't any movement at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was sort of a conservative. Speaker 1: Okay, but you admired him for his-- Speaker 2: Yeah, for his intellectual gifts and his preaching prowess. Story_ID: 137076 Speaker 1: Okay, now you have developed a style as a minister that has been called flamboyant and exciting. Can you tell us how you developed your style? Speaker 2: It just developed. My early hero was Adam Clayton Powell in Harlem [New York], and later, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], of course. So they greatly influenced me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you had--did you feel that you could move a crowd of people--I mean a congregation to act and do things and-- Speaker 2: Well, I just--it just evolved. I didn't know, I didn't set out to do that, but it just evolved. It was an evolution. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us how did you get involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] when you were a pastor at Gillfield [Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Well, we had a problem in the community with police brutality. And I wrote a letter about it which was very stern. And the president of the NAACP resigned because the postmaster said it could interpreted as a threat against police. And that's how I became president, taking L. C. Johnson's place. So I became president of the [Petersburg, Virginia] NAACP. Speaker 1: Is this still in 1953? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Before we go on, I should ask you something about the history of Gillfield Baptist Church [Petersburg, Virginia]. Tell us a little bit about the history. Speaker 2: It's one of the oldest Baptist congregations of African Americans in the U.S. It was chartered in 1797 as the Davenport Church. And in the 1840s, the trustees refused to sign the notes to build a new church. So the members rented a brickyard in Chesterfield County [Virginia], and they hauled bricks to Petersburg, and they built the church themselves. The present church building was built by those people. And it was a very stern and stern church. Speaker 1: Okay, very strict rules and conduct. Speaker 2: Yeah, very strict rules. If you didn't pay your dues, you couldn't come to communion. And I learned later on that my father [John Wise Walker] attended that church when he was a young man. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't know it at the time. You didn't know your father had attended that church? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's in historic Petersburg, Virginia, which was the scene of the last major battle of the Civil War [Seige of Petersburg, 1864], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Where the Union Army took the, took the City of Richmond [Virginia] through Petersburg. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, where black soldiers played an important part. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 137077 Speaker 1: Okay, so at Gillfield [Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia]--so you're president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] here in-- Speaker 2: And founder and president of the Petersburg Improvement Association [Petersburg, Virginia] and state director of the Congress of Racial Equality [CORE]. Speaker 1: All right, now, was that unusual for the NAACP and CORE to be together under the same umbrella, along with another organization? Speaker 2: It was a little unusual, Petersburg became the center of civil rights protests in Virginia. Out of it was born the Lynchburg Improvement Association [Lynchburg, Virginia], the Portsmouth Improvement Association [Portsmouth, Virginia] and another one I can't--Hopewell Improvement Association [Hopewell, Virginia]. So we had a state conference of SCL [SCLC, Southern Christian Leadership Conference] chapters. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the name Petersburg Improvement Association, I read that it was inspired by the Montgomery Improvement Association [Montgomery, Alabama]? Speaker 2: Well, absolutely. It was patterned after it. It was more a federation than an organization. Speaker 1: Okay, a federation of various black organizations? Speaker 2: Black organizations, interested in getting rid--desegregation? Speaker 1: Okay, so you were able to bridge the gap between a lot of organizations and bring them together. That's what I'm hearing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The NAACP and CORE who often, though for the same cause, don't work together, and then a number of other organizations too, that made up the Petersburg Improvement Association. Speaker 2: Right, the beauty parlor operators, businessmen, any kind of organization that was interested in getting rid of segregation. My first arrest was because I walked, I walked through a white door of the public library in Petersburg, the first of seventeen arrests in the South. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I've read--you were trying to check out a copy of a biography of Robert E. Lee ['R.E. Lee: A Biography' (1934)]. Speaker 2: Robert E. Lee, written by Douglas [Southall] Freeman. I wanted Volume I. That's what I asked for. And they arrested me. My wife [HM Ann Walker] was with me and two children. Speaker 1: So what happened to your wife and the children? Did they-- Speaker 2: Well, the Chief of Police said he didn't want to embarrass her by arresting her, and he didn't arrest her, but he arrested me and the Reverend R. G. Williams [Robert G. Williams, Sr.]. And we stayed in jail. We wouldn't accept bail, influenced by Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] teaching of Christian nonviolence. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the result? Did the library ever--I mean when did they-- Speaker 2: Well, they stayed closed for two or three months, but they opened up on an integrated basis, after we filed a federal suit in Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: And I heard that they closed the Robert E. Lee Pool down too as a result of your protests? Speaker 2: And the golf course. Speaker 1: Okay, and those eventually became integrated as well? Speaker 2: Yes, when the Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education (1954)] case. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's by 1954. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], okay, the Civil Rights Act. Were you--how did, well, I just want to get it straight, the dates for the integration of the pool and the library, that's what? Nineteen what? Speaker 2: Sixty [1960]. Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay '60 [1960], okay, all right. And you mentioned Brown versus the Board, how did that affect your activities here in Virginia? Speaker 2: That gave a push to it since the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that segregated schools were unconstitutional, that gave us the impetus to try and integrate everything, desegregate everything. Speaker 1: All right, so that encouraged you to do a lot of the activities that you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --were doing through the Petersburg Improvement Association. Story_ID: 137078 Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about meeting [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. Speaker 2: I met him years before that at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] through a, the Atlantic--Mid-Atlantic Meeting of the Inter-Seminary Movement which was an organization to bring white and black seminarians together without the threat of arrest. And he was president of his student body. I was president of my student body. And so we were the host organization, and he came as a delegate from Crozer [Theological Seminary] in [Upland] Pennsylvania. That's how we first met. And he had heard of me through Sam Proctor [Samuel DeWitt Proctor], who was doing his doctorate at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And Proctor told him that a brilliant--I'm quoting, "A brilliant science student had decided to go to seminary and become a minister," and King said, "Oh, you're the brilliant science student that Sam Proctor talked about," and that's how we, that's how we started. And then he would come to Virginia to try for a church, and he had to one station and go to another station to go to Tidewater [Virginia]. And there'd be a five or six hour delay, and he'd come up to the hill and talk with us ministers. And so we developed a friendship. We were both PKs, preachers' kids. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So we had a lot in common. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--did you meet him--I think, I have a note that you met him around 1958, is that about right or is it before then? Speaker 2: In 19--it's hard for me to remember that long ago. Speaker 1: Okay, but this is after you were--this is still when you were still in seminary then? So this was-- Speaker 2: I was a pastor in Petersburg [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Oh, you were a pastor then, so it had to be--I guess it would have to be after-- Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958], '57 [1957], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, '58 [1958], '57 [1957], okay. Story_ID: 137079 Speaker 1: You were the [Virginia] State Director of CORE [Congress on Racial Equality], as you just said a moment ago. What was a major difference between CORE and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in those days? Speaker 2: Well, NAACP had a longer history, and had a higher profile and it was just stronger than CORE, and it was, at that time church-based, and CORE was not. And the key to black improvement was through the black religious experience. And so the NAACP had a leg up on organization and people. Speaker 1: Okay, but was CORE's activities any different from NAACP? How did they differ in terms of activities? Speaker 2: Well, they demonstrated more. NAACP frowned on direct action at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, so was there any conflict in you being the State Director of CORE and being head of the NAACP? Speaker 2: Not at all, not in Petersburg [Virginia]. With the national officers, Roy Wilkins kind of dismissed me as when--and somebody told him I was going to Atlanta [Georgia] to help [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. And he said very tersely, "He'll be back". And I decided then I'd be a success. And in four years, I took two people with me. My first budget was fifty-seven thousand dollars, and in four years I years a hundred full-time people and a budget of over a million dollars. And I said to myself, "Deal with that Roy Wilkins." Speaker 1: Okay, that's when you became Executive Director of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council]-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Southern Christian Leadership Council. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960], right? Before you left Petersburg in 1960, I read that you had over three thousand black people organized here in the Petersburg Improvement Association. Is that true? Speaker 2: That's about right. We had, we had the whole town organized to fight segregation. Speaker 1: Now, that's--is there--how do you organize that many people? Speaker 2: Well, I went from church to church and primarily organized the ministers and their congregations. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And by our direct action, we inspired people. I think the key--the catalyst was R. G. Williams [Reverend Robert G. Williams, Sr.] and I going to jail and staying. That was one of the rou--of the ways in which the white power structure kept blacks in line, say, "I'll put you in jail," and we made jail-going a badge of honor. Story_ID: 137080 Speaker 1: So, did--were you surprised when you got the call from [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] to come to, to become the executive director of--well, you were already a board member, right-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]? Speaker 2: I wasn't surprised, but I was honored that he would select me, and I was anxious to go. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't feel bad about leaving Petersburg [Virginia]-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --and the movement here? Speaker 2: I felt I had taken them as far as I could take them because I had made many black people as uncomfortable as I made white people uncomfortable. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So the time had come to-- Speaker 2: Because I believed in drama in our struggle against segregation, and that upset a lot of people. Some of my members at Gillfield [Baptist Church, Petersburg, Virginia] told me I needed to leave white folks alone. I told them they need to leave me alone. Speaker 1: Okay, so is there--that's--okay, so you felt it was time to, probably time to go anyway? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And Gillfield had starved me out. They never raised my salary, and I had a wife [HM Ann Walker] and four children, and I was anxious to get established somewhere else. Speaker 1: So when you got to Atlanta, what condition was the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in? Speaker 2: It was mostly an idea in Dr. King's briefcase and my challenge was to invest his large image into the organization, which I think I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Who was on staff there then? Was anybody else on staff? Speaker 2: There were two people on staff in addition to Dr. King. And I took two people with me, so we had a staff of five and a budget of fifty-seven thousand dollars. And four years later, we had a budget of a million dollars and a hundred full-time field secretaries. Speaker 1: Okay. I've read that you went there with Dorothy Cotton and James [R.] Woods. Speaker 2: And James Woods, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Who was there from SCLC when you got there? Speaker 2: A lady named Lillie [Thomas Armstrong] Hunter and a Ms. [Ernestine] Brown. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: We had--we didn't have any field secretaries. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Harry Blake of Shreveport, Louisiana was our first field secretary. Speaker 1: I think later, now, later Bayard Ruston came down and-- Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Not--okay. Speaker 2: No, after I took over, Bayard Ruston's influence and contact with Dr. King was minimized. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the conditions I made was that SCLC had to be run from Atlanta [Georgia] and not from [Harlem] New York. Speaker 1: Okay, and a couple of other New Yorkers came down to SCLC, Ella Baker and Bob Moses [Robert Moses]. Speaker 2: Well, not, not really. Ella--I, Ella Baker was the interim director, and I supplanted her. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And Bob Moses, he was already there too, wasn't he, when you came down? Speaker 2: He came down and worked with us just a little while, about two or three months. But he didn't stay. He went to Mississippi on his own. Story_ID: 137081 Speaker 1: Tell us about the--were you at the ground floor of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] too? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was organized in Raleigh, North Carolina at Shaw University. And we had in mind that maybe we'd take the energy of the students and make that into the youth chapter of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. But they decided they wanted to have their own organization, and we didn't stop them. We helped them organize. For a while, they worked out of our office in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. And we interviewed someone not long ago, and I--[HM] Willie [McCray]--I can't think of his last name right now. But was a driver in Atlanta, you know, that would drive them in the South. And he was talking about Ruby Doris Robinson [Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson] and the motor pool in Atlanta, and--and this may have been with SNCC though instead of with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I'm not sure. Yeah, that's probably, yeah, that was SNCC, yeah. But, so, did SNCC and SCLC work well together? Speaker 2: I wouldn't say we worked well. There was some friction because SNCC didn't plan very well. And that was not our style. And the primary thing is they were students. They didn't have mortgages. They didn't have car payments. They didn't have families. So they would get up and go to jail any time. We couldn't do that as adults. We'd already made commitments to our families. Story_ID: 137082 Speaker 1: Tell us about Project C with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Speaker 2: [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] said if we could crack Birmingham [Alabama], we could crack the South. Birmingham was the largest and most racist city in the South. And he told me to develop a plan for attack. And [HM Reverend] Fred Shuttlesworth wanted us to come. And he, it [Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights] was our strongest affiliate. So I developed Project C, which was accepted by Dr. King's Executive Committee without changing a comma or a period. And that was the plan for attacking segregation in Birmingham. And everybody, expert or naive, would agree that Birmingham was the chief watershed of the nonviolent movement in America, and led directly to the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which had an effect of desegregating America. And I think that was my chief organizational accomplishment, the planning of Project C and executing it. Speaker 1: Now, what were the key components of Project C? What was supposed to happen? Speaker 2: Well, using Christian nonviolence as a means of desegregating Birmingham. And the calculation that [Birmingham Commissioner of Public Safety Eugene] "Bull" Conner would do something to help us, and he did. Speaker 1: Now, what did he do to help? Speaker 2: Well, his brutality, the water hoses, the dogs and the unsolved bombings. Speaker 1: So his predictable brutality-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --basically dramatized-- Speaker 2: Dramatized our struggle. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, did the--what difference did the media make in all of this? Speaker 2: They made a tremendous difference because they publicized during the Cold War, that peaceful demonstrations in the South were being attacked by dogs and dosed with water hose, pneumatic water hoses, and while we were trying to influence, spread our influence to the Soviet Union. So we were the counterpoint of international diplomacy. And that helped propel the [Civil Rights] Movement against desegregation into an international issue. Story_ID: 137083 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your arrest. You and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] were arrested in Birmingham [Alabama], and-- Speaker 2: Well, the last thing Dr. King told me before he went to jail, he said, "Wyatt, don't you get arrested," but I had a smart mouth. And I was always [coughing], pardon me, I was always talking to policemen. I'd tell 'em they couldn't arrest me for talking, and they arrested me. I got arrested late in the [Civil Rights] Movement. And Dr. King and [Ralph] Abernathy and Bernard Lee and A. D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King], [HM Reverend] Fred Shuttleworth, we went to jail because we lost a Supreme Court [of the United States] decision called Walker versus Birmingham [Walker v. City of Birmingham, (1967)], parade without a permit. And that occasion, the picture that I took of Dr. King in the Birmingham jail, and he took a picture of me in the Birmingham jail. Speaker 1: And we have them. How did you manage to get a camera into jail? Speaker 2: I smuggled it in. I smuggled it in through my rectal opening, put it in--put Vaseline on--I can't even think of it. Speaker 1: That's incredible. Speaker 2: It was a Minolta camera, not much bigger than the size of cigarettes. And the UPI [United Press International] supplied the camera, so they took credit for the picture for years. And I tried to get it and finally, it's been straightened out now that I took the picture. Whoever took the picture had to be in jail with Dr. King. I was that person. Get the picture, honey. Speaker 1: Yeah, we're gonna show it later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, but Dr. King wrote his famous letter from the Birmingham-- Speaker 2: But that was an earlier arrest. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: That was in 1963. But this is 1967 when we arrested--after we exhausted our remedies all the way to the Supreme Court, Dr. King insisted that we follow the regime of nonviolence and civil disobedience required that we take the penalty, whatever it was, and we went to jail, in 1967, October, 1967. Story_ID: 137084 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the, some of the other personalities involved in the [1963] Birmingham campaign [Birmingham, Alabama]. Tell us a little bit about [HM] Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth. Speaker 2: Bravest man I ever met. Bravest man in the Civil Rights Movement. And they have named the Birmingham airport [Birmingham-Shuttesworth International Airport] after him and erected a statue in Ingram Park, and he deserves all of that because he kept the fires burning in Birmingham, regardless of the brutality they imposed upon the black community. And he never waivered. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He tried to send his children to integrated schools. They beat him with chains. He's in ill health now, but he's a great person. If it had not been for Shuttlesworth, we would not have won Birmingham. Speaker 1: Now, what about [HM Reverend] James Bevel and the youth march? Speaker 2: Well, he organized the children, for the children's march which broke the back of resistance in Birmingham of the mercantile industry. When people saw television pictures of fire hose washing youngsters down the sidewalk in Birmingham, they, they said, this is enough. Segregation must end. And the children's march [Birmingham Children's Crusade] broke the back of resistance in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And James Bevel was responsible for that. Story_ID: 137085 Speaker 1: Now was--the March on Washington was in 1963 as well, same year-- Speaker 2: That summer, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and Birmingham [Alabama] helped make it the success that it was. Speaker 1: Now, was the March on Washington part of the Project C at all? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Okay. How did the march come about? Speaker 2: Well, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] decided to follow A. Philip Randolph's plan some years before that and it gave affirmation to our struggle. And we had offices in New York [New York City, New York], in Atlanta [Georgia], Washington [D.C.], Birmingham [Alabama], all across the South. Most of the people who came to the March on Washington were just ordinary people and made it the great moment in history that it was. Speaker 1: How did the celebrities get involved in the march? Speaker 2: I think that was probably because of Dr. King's large image. And I think they wanted to be a part of making a better America. Speaker 1: Did you play--well, what role did you play in the March on Washington? Speaker 2: I, I organized from Atlanta. I had the Southeastern United States task. And [HM Reverend] Abraham Woods [Jr.] and I worked from Atlanta, organizing across, as far as Texas. So I think that was strategic in bringing so many people to the March on Washington. Speaker 1: At the time, did you have a sense that you were making history? Speaker 2: Not at all. As I say, it just evolved. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were propelled by our faith and religion that this was the proper thing to do. And it was the key. If it had not been for the black church and black ministers and their congregations, we'd never had a March on Washington, and it became the venue for Dr. King's 'I Have A Dream' speech, perhaps the most important oration since the Gettysburg Address. Speaker 1: Okay. I've often wondered, as we were sitting home watching the March on Washington on TV, if you were in Atlanta, could you have seen it on television? Speaker 2: I was at the March. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, but I just wondered if people in the South could actually see the Civil Rights Movement on television in the South? Speaker 2: I doubt it because so m--(coughing)--so many of us were there. Story_ID: 137086 Speaker 1: I guess your crucial Civil Rights [Movement] days were around 1963, '64 [1964], in that area? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, and you said you went to jail again in 1967 because of losing a court case. But in '66 [1966] you started working on a Negro Heritage Library project. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were you away from SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] at that point? Speaker 2: Yeah, I became a vice president in charge of Marketing of the Ten-Volume Negro Heritage Library that I developed. Speaker 1: Okay, was there--what went into the--did you actually leave SCLC at that point? Speaker 2: Yes, I left SCLC in '64 [1964]. And I worked with Negro Heritage Library till 1967. (coughing) Speaker 1: And in--well, tell us about becoming the pastor of Canaan Baptist Church in [Harlem] New York. Speaker 2: Well, the chairman of the board thought--the only card I had was my Negro Heritage Library card. He thought I wanted to sell some books. And then he found out I was the fellow who used to be at Abyssinia [Baptist Church, Harlem, New York] and used to fill up Abyssinia at two services. And then so, they asked me would I become interim minister during the period of mourning for [Reverend] Dr. [Edward M.] Moore, who had passed. And I told him okay. And I served for seven months as interim minister, and when their year of mourning was up, I was the only candidate for the pulpit. And I became the minister of Canaan for thirty-seven years. Speaker 1: This was 1967, right? Speaker 2: September, 1967, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 137087 Speaker 1: Tell us briefly about your work as a cultural historian. Speaker 2: Well, at Canaan [Baptist Church, Harlem, New York], I was introduced to a genre of music called the prayer and praise hymns. "You can't make me dial Jesus on the main line," and so I began to resurrect them from black people's consciousness, and I developed a choir of senior citizens, about forty of them, and they began to fill the stands. And I conducted and arranged and composed for them for twenty-five years. And that piqued my interest in the prayer and praise hymns, and I had done my doctorate on black sacred music and social change. And I alleged that if you listened to what black people sing religiously, it is a clue as to what is happening to them sociologically. Speaker 1: Now, this was era when there were quite a few books being written about black theology, in fact, it was a black theological movement where ministers, black ministers and theologians were going back and recovering our history-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in the black church and defining the difference between the black church and the mainstream churches. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you've written--there's quite a few books-- Speaker 2: Fifty-two. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, fifty-two books. All right, and some of them are 'Somebody's Calling My Name' [1983], 'The Soul of Black Worship' [1984]-- Speaker 2: 'Common Thieves!' [1991], 'Soweto Diary' [1994]. See, I worked on two continents against segregation. I worked in South Africa in the election that brought [Nelson] Mandela to power. And I worked in the U.S. as Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] chief of staff. So I worked on two continents against segregation. Speaker 1: You know, there are still--despite the Black Power Movement and the Pan-African Movement, there are black people that still do not seem to cherish any link to Africa at all. But how do you-- Speaker 2: That's a mistake. That's why I'm a cultural historian because I think as a culture, you can't have a social revolution without a cultural revolution. And you gotta know who you are. 'The Jewish Mystique' [Ernest van den Hagg] is a example of that. Story_ID: 137088 Speaker 1: Sir, now, you taught for many years at United Theological Seminary in Dayton [Ohio], and, and you said you were involved in the apartheid movement, anti-apartheid movement, and you developed an organization--you were the cofounder of the Religious Action Network [for Peace with Justice in Southern Africa], RAN, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's when I was in the America Committee on Africa. Speaker 1: When did you first meet Nelson Mandela? Speaker 2: I first met him in 1994. I took twenty-two high-profile ministers to South Africa so we could meet the people on the ground that were fighting against apartheid. And it was shortly after Mandela had been released from jail. And that's the first time I met him. And then when he became president in 1994, his people called me and wanted to know could he come to worship with us when he came to the U.S. as president of South Africa. And I said, of course. And so he came to my church [Canaan Baptist Church, Harlem, New York]. That was his first stop. Story_ID: 137089 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for African Americans today? Speaker 2: To recognize their connection to Africa the continent, and as Africa goes, so go the hopes of black people in America. It is a definite connection. We need to take the tools of the West and invest them in Africa to make it the continent of consequence. Story_ID: 137090 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the legacy of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and where were you when Dr. King was assassinated? Speaker 2: I was in New York [New York City, New York], and I'd just come back from California. He had installed me as the pastor of Canaan [Baptist Church, Harlem, New York] ten days earlier, March 28 [1968], and ten days later he was dead in Memphis [Tennessee]. So I was his man in New York, so to speak. Story_ID: 137091 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I would say the [1963] Birmingham [Alabama] campaign, which led to the desegregation of America. That was the turning point in the desegregation struggle. My organizational talents were best used in Birmingham in that campaign. Story_ID: 137092 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about your family? Speaker 2: Well, my wife [HM Ann Walker] and I are celebrating sixty years of marriage this year. And we have four children, Wyatt [T. Walker], Jr., Anne Patrice [Walker-Powell] is the eldest, only girl, and two [sic] boys, Robert [Walker] and Earl [Walker]. And I have a granddaughter who just finished college, in Savannah [Georgia], Savannah School of--[Savannah] College of Art and Design. She finished with Latin honors and is employed by--Honey? Speaker 1: HM ANN WALKER: Carter's [Inc.]-- Speaker 2: Carter's-- Speaker 1: HM ANN WALKER: --Baby Speaker 2: --In Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She and I are doing a book together. I'm doing the text. She's doing the illustrations. It's a book of human stories, and she's doing the illustrations that match the stories. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what are they stories about? Speaker 2: They're just funny stories that I've collected over the sixty years of my ministry that stuck with me and teach a lesson about human conduct. Speaker 1: Is there a story you can tell us before we end? Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell you one. When I went to SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], my first assignment was to arrange for the SCLC convention in Nashville [Tennessee]. And [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] (cough) told me, said, Wyatt, I know we got to have big churches for the rallies, but try to involve the small churches. And I went up to Nashville, and I decided to make a small church the registration headquarters. And it was the Mt. Zion A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], A.M.E. church. And so when Dr. King and [Ralph] Abernathy came up, they rented a car and came over into the Colored section of Nashville, looking for this registration church. And they were going slow through the community looking for somebody to ask about its location. And they saw a fellow with a billed cap turned sideways. They said, let's ask him. And they asked him, and he said, Dr., Dr. King and Ralph Abernathy. He said, where do you want to go? So he told him to go to Mount Zion A.M.E. Church. He said, "Stay on this street and go down to the lumber yard and hang a right and go two, three, four lights--no, Dr. King, turn right here and go down to the junior high school and hang a left, and then he said, Dr. King, said, I don't believe I know where that church is. So Dr. King thanked him for trying, and they pulled off, slowly looking for somebody else to ask. And Dr. King was sitting in the passenger seat on the right-hand side. He says, "Ralph, pull over, said, that fellow we asked, said he's running behind the car. Something must have happened." So Ralph pulled over and the fellow ran up to the car, all out of breath, said, "Dr. King, Dr. King, right after you pulled off, my brother-in-law, he came up and he told me to tell you that he don't know neither." It's that kind of story. Speaker 1: Oh, second grandchild--you know, I was-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we got a grandchild in New York [New York City, New York]. She's in eleventh grade and she wants to be a dentist. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your parents [John and Maude Walker] get a chance to see you become successful as a minister? Speaker 2: My mother was killed in an automobile accident before I became famous and my father he saw the, he saw the--my beginning of my days with King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and then he passed away. Speaker 1: Okay. So was he proud of what you were doing? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Was he proud of what you were doing? Speaker 2: He had some questions about whether I should leave the church or not because I resigned the church in Petersburg [Virginia] to go with King, and he wasn't too kindly disposed to that. But he knew it was dangerous. Story_ID: 137093 Speaker 1: Now, is there any other question I need to ask you before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: All right, well, last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, because of my organizational history and the [1963] Birmingham [Alabama] campaign, I would like to be remembered as the man who desegregated America because the Birmingham campaign led directly to the desegregation of the nation. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And that story has not been told. Story_ID: 137094 Speaker 1: How did you get the money to go to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]? Your wife [HM Ann Walker] thought it was a good question to ask. Speaker 2: My parents [John and Maude Walker] were too poor to send us, and I wanted to go to college. And my oldest--my middle brother [James Walker] had been a GI. He had a GI bill. And Virginia Union said his grades weren't sufficient for him entering. And my mother wrote the president [John Malcus Ellison] and said, she had another son that had good grades. Could he take the GI bill? Of course, that wasn't possible. So that September I found myself on the Havana Special [train] with a hundred dollars clenched in my fist going to Virginia Union. And I didn't know until she got killed in an automobile accident that that hundred dollars was the--my mother and father had mortgaged their life insurance policies to let me go to college. That's how I started. And at that time, it was forty dollars a semester, and I had twenty dollars left to buy books...