 Story_ID: 357853 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, middle name, B-U-S-H, which is also my maiden name, and the last name is Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January, 30, 1919, in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --licensed to practice in Missouri, Illinois, and before the United States Supreme Court. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth--oh, oh, what, what is today's date? I, I need for you to give us today's date. Speaker 2: I don't know what today's date is (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. What-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sunday, December (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) December the-- Speaker 2: Seventeenth. Speaker 1: --seventeenth, ha. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --two thousand six [2006], right? Speaker 1: Two thousand six [2006]. Speaker 2: All right. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: You're in the offices of Wilson and Associates [St. Louis, Missouri], my law firm. Story_ID: 357854 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask just for practice. And, and they, they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The first question is: do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite what? Speaker 1: Color. Speaker 2: Color? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm wearing one, sort of lemon. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Not really. I like all the seasons. What I don't like is a place that has only one season. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, where my son [Robert E. Wilson III] is (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question in this series is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I think I do. Would you like to hear it? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am, I would. Speaker 2: (Laughter) To thine own self be true-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and it must then follow as the night, the day, thou canst not then be false to any man ['Hamlet,' William Shakespeare]. Story_ID: 357855 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you now about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James T. Bush, Sr.] side. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we'll start with our mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Well, she named me after her, so it's Margaret Berenice Casey Bush [Margaret Casey Bush]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I need a Kleenex. Speaker 1: Now, now-- Speaker 2: The only name that I can spell that is her, Berenice, B-E-R-E-N-I-C-E, Beren- and she pronounced it Berenice. Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: You know, I can't recall the date very well, but it's, her birthday was in February. Speaker 1: Of what year? Speaker 2: I'm trying to--see, nobody told me. I had to get this. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, you give, give us a guess, you know, close guess. Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-five [1885] maybe. Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-five [1885]? Okay. Story_ID: 357856 Speaker 1: Now what do you know about your mother's [Margaret Casey Bush] side of the family? These are the Caseys, right, I guess? Speaker 2: The Caseys, yeah. Speaker 1: How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Not beyond her father because was [TW1]name was John W. Casey. He was born, as I understand it from our history, on a plantation in Vicksburg, Mississippi. We do not know who his parents were, but he was not--better, maybe positively--he looked foreign. He looked like he might have been from Mexico or one of the other countries in South America. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when he was a very young boy and a slave, he ran away from that plantation. He wandered down to the levy and got a job as a cabin boy on a boat that was coming up to St. Louis [Missouri]. And that's how he got to St. Louis: he just ran away. Speaker 1: So was he--because he got a job as a ca- as a cabin boy, does that indicate that he was working in a house, maybe as a house servant in the, on the plantation? Speaker 2: Have no idea but probably was. At any rate, he was hired. And what was so fortuitous, that on this riverboat was a woman who was the cook. She was an African, but a free African, from someplace up north. And she sort of took him under her wing as a--and looked after him, a surrogate mother, in fact, and later on married him off to her daughter (laughter). It was his first wife. Speaker 1: That's quite a story. Now that's a-- Speaker 2: And my mother is by his second wife-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause the first wife died when she was young. Speaker 1: All right, so, so he was a young man, you know, during slavery before-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --before the end of the Civil War. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, all right. So he would have had to have been born I guess in 1840s, I suppose. Speaker 2: I would think. Story_ID: 357857 Speaker 1: Any other stories about that side of the family that they tell? Speaker 2: Well, there's a story about my grandmother, who was my mother's [Margaret Casey Bush] mother, who was born in New Orleans [Louisiana] and was the daughter of an African descendant woman who was, as the story goes, I guess one of the persons who was living with a, some person rather high up in society in, in Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's, this is during the Civil War. And when it became hot and dangerous, he put them both on the riverboat and sent them to St. Louis [Missouri] for safety. And she was, her maiden name was Cynthia Morgan [Cynthia Morgan Casey]. And the rumor is that this was somewhere related to J.P. Morgan. Speaker 1: Okay. So she may be related to J.P. Morgan? Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no idea that this is true, but this was all rumor. Speaker 1: Okay. So did your--are there any other stories from that side then? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather [John W. Casey] was a very industrious person, not very lettered, as I understand, but industrious. And at one time he was a valet for one of the governors in the State of Missouri. And because of that relationship, when the World's Fair [St. Louis World's Fair, Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St. Louis, Missouri] in the turn of the century was here, my father--my grandfather was granted a concession at that World's Fair, and they sold soft drinks and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: That's like 1904 is what they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen o'four [1904]. Speaker 1: --telling me, yeah. Speaker 2: He was, he was one of the people who had a concession. And there was a tragic side to that because my mother was a part of the family where there were all girls and one boy. And this boy was my grandfather's support and help, and was killed tragically in a streetcar accident on his way home one day from where he had gone uptown. And then my mother stepped in and became the person in the family who went with my grandfather and worked in the concession stand during the World's Fair. Speaker 1: So this all happened during the time of the World's Fair? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or just, yeah, just prior to it. Speaker 1: Did they have any stories about the World's Fair that they passed down? 'Cause that-- Speaker 2: Not that they shared with me-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --except that one, which I just described. Speaker 1: I know there's--recently on public radio they were discussing the World's Fair in St. Louis and the African village that they had set up in St. Louis. It was an African village, supposedly, at the World's Fair that caused a lot of discussion amongst black people. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: They, they, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not-- Speaker 1: --didn't talk about that? Speaker 2: Don't know a thing about that. Story_ID: 357858 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Margaret Casey Bush] talk about growing up, and what did she say about growing up in, in St. Louis [Missouri] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they had a, they had a good setting in which to grow up. They, they lived in south St. Louis, 6100 Vermont [Street], which is deep south St. Louis, where it's interesting now that that's almost entirely Caucasian. But the first people who, who were there were African Americans. Speaker 1: Okay, is that considered a, a, more of the plusher parts of town now, I mean south St. Louis? Speaker 2: Middle income and stable. But there were a number of, of African American families who lived in south St. Louis when my mother was born. And this was long before there were any Caucasians to speak of. It was just sort vacant, you know, land. My father--grandfather [John W. Casey] built two buildings. One was a duplex, and the other was a four-family flat, and they're still standing. If you drive down--what's that highway going south from St. Louis? You can see it up on the hilltop (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so he was involved, he was involved in contracting too, building-- Speaker 2: Not-- Speaker 1: --building-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure he was a builder himself. No, he just managed to make enough that he was able to buildings these-- Speaker 1: He was able to buy two-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And that's where these young children were reared. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did--what schools did your mother go to? Did-- Speaker 2: Interestingly enough, she went to the school that was around the corner from the house. It was built during the time she lived there. I have no idea whether it's still standing or not. But, I'm not--I had the impression just listening to her that it was a school that was built for African Americans in South St. Louis by the public school system. Speaker 1: Okay, which is the knit--the territory now is all way, you're saying then? Speaker 2: So far as I know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --very, very sparsely. There may be still--I'm sure there are still families, some down there, but not many. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Where did she go to high school? Speaker 2: She went to Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Sumner, okay. I know I've heard of Sumner-- Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: --and Vashon High Schools in St. Louis. It's two of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Vashon came later. Speaker 1: --traditional--okay, so Vashon came much later. Speaker 2: And then Sumner was the older of the two. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And Vashon was named for a prominent family here of, of educators, the Vashons, yeah. But it was built much later than Sumner. Sumners goes way back (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did your mother go to college too? Speaker 2: She ended up being a kindergarten teacher, so she took teacher training-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then taught in the public schools, the kindergarten. Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us a little bit about your mother's personality? Now what was she like and-- Speaker 2: Well, first of all, she's a very strikingly beautiful woman and with a--the, the best word to describe her was vivacious. I think that's probably what attracted my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] (laughter). She had a wonderful personality and had a kind of a zest for life. She laughed a lot and was a wonderful mother. And to this day, I can recall the one phrase that she said over and over again to me: make this (audio fade) place in which (audio fade). If she said it once, she must have said it a hundred times in the course my (laughter)--make this a better place in which to live. Story_ID: 357859 Speaker 1: Was she [Wilson's mother, Margaret Casey Bush] critical of, of, of society, I mean the way things were? Did she ever-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure I would use the word critical. She was unhappy and disturbed by it, because St. Louis [Missouri] was very segregated during my childhood. And the isolation was firm and severe. We had absolutely no contact except when we went shopping to stores that were on Easton Avenue [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive], which was the shopping area. And then we had some contact with people of other groups. It was a very segregated society when I grew up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that is not to say that it was, in my case, unpleasant. We lived on a street called Cote Brilliante [Avenue]; can't get any more French than that (laughter). Speaker 1: How, how do you, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: C-O-T-E is the first name, which Cote stands--is that street in French? I'm not sure. And Brilliante, B-R-I-L-L-I-A-N-T-E, Cote Brilliante. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's still over there (laughter). And this was the home that my father [James T. Bush] bought, even before he married my mother. Story_ID: 357860 Speaker 1: Now let's, let me go to your father then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We'll, s- talk about his side of the family. Then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: But, what was your father's full name, and can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: James-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --T., Thomas, James Thomas Bush [James T. Bush, Sr.], B-U-S-H. And his father was Thomas Bush, and I think they just named him James Thomas. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July--I know that one better--July 17th, and I want to say--he died when he was, he was eighty-some years old when he died. Don't make me have to work back from that. I don't remember the exact date. Speaker 1: When did he die? Do, do you know when he--well, what, when-- Speaker 2: He was-- Speaker 1: --when did he die? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: When did he pass away? Speaker 2: He passed away in St. Louis [Missouri] in--stop and think about the year now. This is, this is 2000-something (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He's been gone about twenty years. Speaker 1: So, died in the '80s [1980s], or, or-- Speaker 2: He died, he died-- Speaker 1: --or '70s [1970s], or? Speaker 2: Let me just back up. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: Let's get, get that, because I, I don't recall enough. Speaker 1: Okay, say, was, was he older than your mother [Margaret Casey Bush]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, considerably older. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was-- Speaker 1: So he's-- Speaker 2: --about ten or twelve years older than she. Speaker 1: Okay. And so she was born in 1885 or, or-- Speaker 2: He was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) thereabouts-- Speaker 2: --born in-- Speaker 1: --in the 18-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Eighteen-- Speaker 1: Seventies [1870s] some-- Speaker 2: --Se- yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Eighteen seventies [1870s], okay. All right, so we, we're, we're at least in the ballpark with it, so. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, well, tell us about his side of the family. Where, where was he born? Where was he born? Speaker 1: He was born in McKinney, Texas, M-C-K-I-N-N-E-Y. Speaker 2: McKinney, Texas (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 2: Well, what about his side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 1: Just back to his parents-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --both of whom were very young slaves at the time of the Emancipation Proclamation. Speaker 2: Were they living in Texas then in, in McKinney? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But they were, they were slaves on neighboring plantations. My grandmother [Ennan Bush] was on one plantation, and my grandfather, as the story goes, was on the other. And they were sort of sparking apparently across the fence (laughter). And so their masters let them get married. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you imagine somebody letting you get married? But that's what happened (laughter). What is fascinating, and I still have not been able to trace it all the way back, they owned land in Texas where my father was born. They owned the farm in McKinney. Speaker 2: And they acquired that land after the Civil War, I guess, after the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And we--I even went down there to try to find a little background. And the records are just sparse about--and I was trying to find out--I could found the title where the, the--you know, I saw them, their name on the title, but I couldn't trace back to the point where somebody transferred it to them. So, I still don't know how they acquired it, but they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --owned it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then they ultimately sold it. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a question that's interesting that you raised that question because so many people don't even raise the question, when they say their ancestors had land. Well, after the Civil War, you had to--it wasn't being given out, so, you know, so readily, so. Speaker 1: It's very fascinating. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But the [TW2]owned it. They had title to it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: And that, you know, you could speculate maybe the, the landowners, their masters gave it to them. I don't know. But they actually owned it. Herman Thomas [ph.] and Irman Bush [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is on the title. Speaker 2: There's a story there. We just don't know what it is now, but there is a story (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 357861 Speaker 1: Was your father [James T. Bush, Sr.] then raised in, in Texas? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on that farm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And 'til the day he died he would not allow lamb in our house. We could not eat any lamb. We, it could not be cooked (laughter) because of that experience, 'cause apparently he had to take care of the sheep. And the stench was something that he couldn't stand, and so we never had lamb in our house as long as he lived (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was sort of funny. I love lamb to--I discovered it after he passed away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he, he was on that farm and helping to do the chores. And I think that's when he made up his mind that he was gonna have a better life. He did not like farming. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did he do? Did he go to school or move or what, what-- Speaker 2: (Nods head) He, he went to grade school in McKinney, Texas. The farm was sort of out from McKinney, and they walked to this school and back every day. He got up far enough so that he could attend Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal School; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], which was then I guess a kind of a trade school. Speaker 1: Yeah, what they call an industrial school in-- Speaker 2: Industrial school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) those days, yeah. Speaker 2: --that was the word they used. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And without quite knowing how, my father managed to get funds and enrolled in Prairie View and was graduated in 1900. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his first job was teaching Indians [Native Americans] on one of the Indian reservations. Speaker 1: In Texas? Was it in Texas? Speaker 2: In Texas, yeah. And while he was teaching, he saw an ad in one of the newspapers about an examination for clerks on the Railway Mail [Railway Mail Service], and he decided to take the exam, and apparently did very well, and was hired, and became a Railway Mail clerk. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the run he was on was from Texas to Missouri; did that for about twenty years, during which he had mixed emotions about it because it was very difficult. He was apparently on a run from Texas to Missouri where he was the only black person in the crew. And the whites were very ugly, and you know, kind of petty things, you know, to undermine him. Nonetheless, he was determined and ended up being clerk in charge before it was over. I think the one mistake he made in that in my judgment was unfortunately, was that he was two years from retirement and quit. He was just sick of it. And if he'd stayed two years longer, he would have had a lifetime pension. And when the Depression [Great Depression] came, he would not have been in the trouble he got in because of that. Story_ID: 357862 Speaker 1: When did he [Wilson's father, James T. Bush, Sr.], I guess, make St. Louis [Missouri] his base, his home base? Speaker 2: While he was running on the railroad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've not checked the records recently, but he bought a residence, ten or twelve-room house, on Cote Brilliante [Avenue], as I mentioned, before he married my mother [Margaret Casey Bush]. Speaker 1: Now, how he was able to do this on the railroad salary to--or did he have other income? Speaker 2: No, he did it on that sa- (laughter) apparently. I don't, I don't know that he was, but he was all--he, he wanted to be a lawyer and had thoughts of going to University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. So, apparently, he was saving his money to go to law school. Somewhere along the line he decided something must have been a very good opportunity, and he bought this residence on Cote Brilliante-- Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's-- Speaker 2: --and was--while he was on that run. He met my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] on a riverboat. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Do you know (laughter)--my, my understanding is that back in those days this was one of the ways people entertained themselves. They would take rides on the riverboats, and one day a week the riverboat was open to black people. And so on the day it was open, my father and several of the other crew would often go down and ride on the riverboat where there were lots of pretty girls (laughter). And among those pretty girls was my mother, and that's how they met. Speaker 1: Okay, about what year is this do you think were they, that they met? Was it-- Speaker 2: Well, they married in 1916, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it would have to be during that period, between, say, 1910 and 1916, when he was on the run. Speaker 1: So he worked for the railroad for six years, is that it? Speaker 2: Oh, I think longer-- Speaker 1: Was it-- Speaker 2: --than that. Speaker 1: Oh, it was longer? Okay, about ten? Speaker 2: He was out--it was close to twenty. Twenty years was retirement. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so he started back in 1890s-- Speaker 2: That's right-- Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: That's right, in just-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --turn of the century. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And he only had two years to go-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but could not take it. He was, you know, emotionally, you know, so wounded by all of this that I think he just decided he didn't want to be bothered. And so he began to study and read about real estate, began to learn about that business, and quietly started selling real estate as he was working up. Story_ID: 358084 Speaker 1: All right, I just want to say before we get started for the second roll that Charlotte Ottley and Silvia Whitlock are observing this interview. Okay-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we can pick back up, yes. So we'll just pick back up where we were. We were talking about your father [James T. Bush, Sr.] and, and he, he-- Speaker 2: And buying a house [in St. Louis, Missouri] (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You were saying, what's behind that? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's big, big, he, he, he bought a fair, a fairly large house. And-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --and he and, and your mother [Margaret Casey Bush] got married in 1916? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that's two years before you were born. And-- Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: Three years, oh, 1919 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was born 1919, yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. I'm sorry. Yeah, so, so they met on a riverboat, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, okay. Now do, do you have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have one brother [James T. Bush, Jr.] and one sister [Ermine Bush Byas]. Speaker 1: Are they older than you or? Speaker 2: I'm in the middle. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: My brother is older, and my sister is younger. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my brother is ninety years old, celebrated his birthday two days ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My sister lives in a suburb of Rochester, New York. Story_ID: 358085 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The earliest one. Speaker 2: The earliest one? Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, this is a kind of a searing one for a little tiny girl. I loved to go downtown with my mother [Margaret Casey Bush], who went shopping. And one bright, sunny, spring morning mother and I went shopping downtown St. Louis [Missouri]. And I was tripping along, you know, holding her hand, and something caught my attention. And I let go of her hand, and I reached back to get her hand, and I grasped the hand of a total stranger who was Caucasian. I must have been about four years old. And I looked up at this woman, and she looked down at me with this complete look of horror--I'd not seen a look like that since--and took her hand and--you know, I immediately took my hand away. She took her hand and wiped her hand as if I had put dirt on her (laughter), you know. And I knew I was spotlessly clean. You know, I'd just come out of the tub, and I was lovely. So my first reaction was there's something wrong with that woman. And sec- second reaction, at four years old, is that I knew this would hurt my mother. I never told her. Speaker 1: Now were you aware at four years old of, of the race differences of-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) St. Louis, or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course not. I did not understand what I'm--you know, I realized afterward what it was. But that was something that I, I found astonishing (laughter). You know, here I was this lovely little girl with my bow ribbon on, and I was all dressed up and looking lovely, and this woman acted as if I had put dirt on her. That was the, the gesture. Story_ID: 358086 Speaker 1: Well, what, what was your neighborhood like? So you, you're in this, this big house, right, you're being raised in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they were all of them. Mine, ours wasn't the only big one. There were other big houses along there, and there were--it was a wonderful street to live on, the 4200 block of Cote Brilliante [Avenue]. It, I, I suspect, unlike other neighborhoods, there were all economic levels in that one block. On the corner of our block was W.C. Gordon's home, which was a, you're talking about a beautiful, spacious, wonderful mansion. That's what the Gordons had. And he was the leading undertaker in the city [St. Louis, Missouri]. And then in between were all of these other people, various levels of income, some high, some medium, some low, but we were all on the same block. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a, it was a congenial kind of situation in which you've--I was found getting into something that I had no business. My mother [Margaret Casey Bush] knew about it before I got home, (laughter) you know, that kind of thing, and it was true of all of us on this block. Some were, you, you know, some of them were working, and the, the parents were working in service, some were, there were a couple of Railway Mail [Railway Mail Service] clerks, as I recall, a, and some people teaching in the school system. It was a wonderful block to grow up in-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --segregated but very attractive. And everybody kept their property up. It was, it was an attractive block, as were several other areas. You know, black people lived apart, but it was not all ugly. Story_ID: 358087 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights, sounds, and smells. Well, I can remember the ice man. (Laughter) He, he came around in a, and delivered ice, you know, big blocks of ice that you put in the refrigerator. We didn't have any electricity with the-- Speaker 1: Did he use a horse or, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, of course, but there were no, you know. Back in the early days, there weren't many cars. My father [James T. Bush, Sr.] finally owned a car, but this was a rarity. We loved the postman. I don't know. I think it was 'cause he was friendly. We all knew the postman, and he would come up and down the block delivering the mail (laughter). And we would trip along beside him, and he'd talk with us, you know. And then there were vendors who came up and down that street selling things, and the, you know, my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] and others would go out and buy from these people. And one time I remember--I don't even know--I kind of vaguely remember that--I don't know what you called these people, but they sharpened utensils, like knives and things. You'd take it out there, and they'd sharpen them, and then you'd have some sharp, sharp knives for a while (laughter). This was, it was a, it was an interesting place to live. Story_ID: 358088 Speaker 1: Now what was your personality like as a little girl? I mean what, what kind of a little girl were you? What did you like to do? Speaker 2: I was I think a typical little girl. My father [James T. Bush, Sr.] was not a modern man, so he favored my brother [James T. Bush, Jr.] more than he favored me, which made me rather ticked off (laughter), because when we'd get ready to go for rides in the car, my brother always sat in the front seat. Speaker 1: There's only one brother, right, and-- Speaker 2: Only one brother (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) two, two sister? Speaker 2: And he always sat in the front seat. I had to sit in the back. So one day I decided that I was gonna get out there ahead of time and get in the front seat so I could ride in the front seat, and I did it. And my brother came out, and he was incensed and tried to dislodge me and couldn't. We were about the same strength back (laughter) in those--and I set. And then my father came out, got in the car, and said, "Give your brother the seat." I never got over it. I was just crushed (laughter), you know; give your brother the seat. Well, you know, that's--he was a male chauvinist (laughter), well. Speaker 1: That, that, that's a story that's probably been played out millions of times-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: --all over the--yeah. Story_ID: 358089 Speaker 1: But we had lots of friends and playmates. And baseball was something everybody loved back in those days. And when the Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals] would be playing and getting close to winning, the radios were, you know, going all over the place. And so we list--we listened to baseball. We liked baseball. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So it's been around a long time (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause you had, you know, St. Louis [Missouri] is a big baseball town, with the St. Louis Cardinals and the-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You had the Browns [St. Louis Browns; Baltimore Orioles] back in the day. Speaker 1: That's right, and the Browns-- Speaker 2: That's two teams-- Speaker 1: --were there. Speaker 2: --St. Louis Browns too. Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: And there was a Negro League team here as well, right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Was it the St. Louis--what was the St. Louis Negro League team? Speaker 1: I don't remember the name of the league-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but there were black players, and, and they played over on Tandy Park [St. Louis, Missouri] in front of Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], where I went to high school. Story_ID: 358090 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then in those days, we had Poro College [St. Louis, Missouri], which you may or may not know about, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --Annie Malone-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was, was the founder of Poro College. And it was a, an institution which taught young women how to be in business with hair products, and she was very successful. In fact, I think she was probably among the first women to be a millionaire in--black women to be a millionaire in this country. Speaker 2: Right, I-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: There is a traveling exhibit of Poro College that was in Chicago [Illinois] just a couple of years ago-- Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: --at, at DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], right. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Annie Malone and-- Speaker 1: I've not seen it. I wish they'd bring it here (unclear)-- Speaker 2: They, they showed the beautiful artwork-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --that they used in the ads where they did-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --drawings of black women as queens and that sort of thing back in the 1920s. Speaker 1: And Mrs. Walker [Madam C.J. Walker] up in Indianapolis [Indiana], you know, lots of people say she was the first, but Annie Malone taught her. She went to Poro College and got her training and then went on. So I'm glad to hear that because I, I was beginning to think that, that people were, were losing this history about a very fine woman-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think you're right, though, that-- Speaker 1: --who founded-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and financed the orphans home here, Annie Malone Children's Home [Annie Malone Children and Family Services, St. Louis, Missouri], which is still flourishing, and still strong, and wonderful building. She did all that. She was--and a very modest person, to know as a person. My mother [Margaret Casey Bush] and Mrs. Malone were, were friends. I, I was around her a good bit. And the story is that she, she went to some bank to trans, some, some transaction, and you know, the banking people didn't know who she was. And whatever she said, he said well, he, he asked for some astronomical sum for whatever, what she wanted to do, and she just handed it to him from her purse (laughter). She was carrying all this money around (laughter), and they were kind of blown away by it. So, the other thing that was so exciting is that she built that building, the Poro College building on the corner of Pendleton [Avenue] and St. Ferdinand [Avenue], and we used to have almost all of our culture events there. We would have concerts and distinguished speakers. It was the center of the cultural life of our area. Speaker 2: There's an auditorium there and-- Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, an auditorium and a dining room, and it was spacious and lovely. Speaker 2: So it was more than just a hair care business. It was-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. You know, the school part was, you know, in another section. But here was this whole area where the community could come, and often did. And I can remember people going with their tuxedos and (laughter), and the ladies with their fine gowns to concerts. It was a very important part of our lives. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then it got to be an important part of mine later on because--I don't want to jump ahead, but that's where I went to law school [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], in that building. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, well, we'll get to that and make sure we mention that-- Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when we get to the law, law, law school. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But that's, that's interesting. And she was really a lot more than--as Madam Walker was too. They, they, they-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they provided a lot more-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --than hair care. Speaker 1: But she was a, she was an icon and, and, and, and a very community-minded person. Story_ID: 358091 Speaker 1: Now I read that your mother [Margaret Casey Bush] was very much involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 2: My mother? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah and my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] too. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--were, were you aware what they were doing when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we knew. Well, my mother was on the executive board or committee of the NAACP for years, and my father supported her wholeheartedly. And Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] used to come and speak and you know, all of the early leaders of the NAACP. Speaker 1: Now did you, did you meet Du Bois? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: All right, well tell us about that 'cause most of us have never met him and (laughter) so-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know, I was just a little girl, you know, but, and I was sort of awestruck because he had this, you know, he had a goatee, and he was very proper looking. I, I, I'm sure he, he had a sense of humor though. But he was a gracious, cultured gentleman who was a profoundly impressive speaker. And even as a little girl, you know, I wasn't understanding all of it, but I just thought he was fascinating. And whenever he came to town, there were huge crowds that came to hear him. He was a very courageous man because there were people who didn't like him at all (laughter). He was stirring up trouble. Speaker 1: Were these other black people you're talking about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, no, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: --or, or white people? Speaker 2: Most black people were very appreciative of Du Bois. And he made a, an unusually important contribution to our growth and, as a people, because he refused, just refused to, to assume that he was a second class citizen. He was not, and he knew it. And somehow or other, I acquired some of that too. I know I'm not second class. I'm just tired of being treated as if I were (laughter). Yeah, and he was, he was, he was a visionary as well, because the local branch of the NAACP sprung from the creation of that organization back in 1909 and has been a force in this community for many, many years. And just as here in St. Louis [Missouri], it was the same in Cincinnati [Ohio]; it was the same in Atlanta [Georgia]. All over this country the influence of the NAACP and that early leadership was crucial to our development as a people. Story_ID: 358092 Speaker 1: So your mother [Margaret Casey Bush] and father [James T. Bush, Sr.] were part of the local leadership here in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother especially. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: She was, she was on the local board of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] here for oh, many years. This, this is kind of an aside, but she was elected as one of the delegates to a convention in Indianapolis [Indiana] when I was a little girl, was still on Cote Brilliante [Avenue]. And I didn't--you know, I was going, but on the day she left, they left in my father's seven-passenger Marmon car. They took my, my father's car, and my mother, and a friend of hers, and the president, and the treasurer of the local branch, both of whom were gentlemen. So these four people drove up to Indianapolis for a week (laughter). And I realized much later my father was very avant-garde. It just didn't happen, you know. Your wife goes off with two men and another woman and stays a week. What is this (laughter)? But nobody said a word, not one word, because everybody knew that Dr. W.P. Curt- Dr. Thomas Curtis, who was the president, was above reproach, and my mother was above reproach, and those other two were above reproach, so it was quite all right. And we stayed home with Mother Reeves [ph.]--she was our housekeeper--and my father. Speaker 1: That's interesting, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And because my mother had a sister who lived in Indianapolis, which made it nice for her because she was able to visit with her, my Aunt Maime [ph.], she was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --and her family. Story_ID: 358093 Speaker 1: So, now, where did you start school? Where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started school at a, at, in some portables at Cottage Avenue in St. Louis [Missouri], which was on the grounds of Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. This is during a period when apparently the population of our people was growing, and they did not have enough schools built, standing to take care of them, so they put up portables. These were, they were permanent structures, but they were little frame houses. And they had a potbelly stove in the wintertime that heated us. (Laughter) That's where I went to my first kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My favorite third grade teacher was Julia Davis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Everybody in St. Louis [Missouri] who knows anything about anything knew Julia Davis, one of my favorite teachers. Speaker 1: And what, what, what, what made Julia Davis so special? Speaker 2: Well, she was an excellent teacher, and she was also absorbed with history, and so she kept everything. And she, she, she taught and preached history wherever she went, wherever she did. And anybody who was anybody knew Julia Davis. And now they have a library here named for her-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the Julia Davis Library [Julia Davis Branch Library, St. Louis, Missouri], and a collection of her, of her--her collections started what their collection is there, artifacts and important documents about the early history of St. Louis and schools. Speaker 1: Okay, did she, did she have a particular focus on black history in St. Louis? Speaker 2: Um-hm, oh, absolutely, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So is it now like the black collection in the library that has--is that special collection hers? Speaker 2: I'm not sure it's called a black collection. Speaker 1: Or African American (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it is a collection of that--it's called the Julia Davis collection, but it is substantially includes many of the things she collected and, and, and kept as a record. And I, I, I, my impression is she was a St. Louisan too. I, I've always known she was here now. And she was a, she was a history buff. She really wanted people to understand and know their background. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she, she was a--she was not shy (laughter). When Julia Davis was in the room, you knew she was there (laughter). Story_ID: 358094 Speaker 1: Now did she [Julia Davis] bring to town some of the, the popular his--I mean some of the--I know some of the pioneer black historians during the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] were, I guess, Car--Carter G. Woodson or, or Speaker 2: Well, I--yeah, they're okay but usually under the auspices of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because Julia Davis didn't begin to have that kind of community impact until she retired from teaching and then went into--but part of that, the NAACP was at a crucial--and the Pine Street YWCA that was the other--YMCA, I'm sorry. Pine Street YMCA [St. Louis, Missouri], Phillis Wheatley YWCA [St. Louis, Missouri], Julia Davis, and of course, the churches: St. James A.M.E. Church [St. Louis, Missouri], and St. Paul A.M.E. Church [St. Louis, Missouri], and Lane Tabernacle C.M.E. Church [St. Louis, Missouri]. These churches were all very strong. Speaker 1: Now did your family belong to the church? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, what, what church did you-- Speaker 2: St. James A.M.E. Church-- Speaker 1: Okay, St. James A.M.E., okay. Speaker 2: --which I would not join because I didn't like the way the ladies ran up and down the aisle. Speaker 1: Did they? They would get filled with-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I didn't understand that. It was too much emotionalism for me. Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's sort of unlike A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]. That's more like Baptist, to-- Speaker 2: Well, this was A.M.E. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But in those--A.M.E.? Speaker 2: This was A.M.E. when I was a little girl. And so my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] and father [James T. Bush, Sr.] left me alone. They didn't push it. Speaker 1: Okay, what do they call that then? I, I know when I was a kid they used to say that people got happy. But, there, was, was there a word, a term for it? Speaker 2: I have no idea (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know. All I can remember is they had on little caps, these ladies, in the church. And they were very sedate people, but then they'd get up and have all this flailing in the aisle, and I couldn't understand that. I just thought it was strange. And so when my mother wanted me to join the church, I said no. So they left me alone. Speaker 1: Well, no one in your family did that, did they, or, or did they? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Members of families that I knew, I mean the grandmother particularly. Speaker 1: So, so was church a big part of life? I mean did you go there a lot? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we went every Sunday-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --for the most part, when I was a little girl. Speaker 1: Were you, were you involved in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went mainly to Sunday school. We didn't go to church that often-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --went to Sunday school. Story_ID: 358095 Speaker 1: All right, now, now was music a big part of growing up? I know there's a lot of music (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was. Speaker 1: --history in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 2: It was--my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] spent a lot of time and energy on culturing me (laughter), I guess you'd say. I not only had music lessons, but I had elocution lessons to teach me how to talk and speak. And Eva Bowles [ph.] was the teacher. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And we'd go on Saturdays to Mrs. Bowles' home, and we would have how, now, brown cow (laughter), and all that kind of thing, so. Speaker 1: You know, that was a big, that was really a big feature of growing up in those days, elocution lessons and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean for, for, pe- for people that were supposed to be, you know, trying to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, move up, you know, elocution lessons were big. And you don't, you don't really, they don't seem to be as big anymore. People don't really spend as much time on that. But-- Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: Elocution. Did, did, did you have to do a recitation, like, once a year (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, you know, we'd have-- Speaker 1: --or on special occasions? Speaker 2: --we'd have where we had to stand up and memorize first and then stand up and, and say it aloud. I did all of that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, any other classes or anything? Did you have-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Any, any other classes? Now you took music culture classes, right? You said-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or-- Speaker 2: And I took some dancing lessons too-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --ballet dancing. And I was in a couple of productions where I danced around (laughter), did those [head movement], (laughter) yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham is from East St. Louis [Illinois], I believe, right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: --she, you know-- Speaker 2: But she came later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And then she came later. Speaker 1: Okay, she would have, you know, about your same age, I guess, or, or, I would say. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: I was good at mathematics. And when I went to college I minored--I majored in, in economics and minored in mathematics. I was a good student. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did very well, and I was valedictorian of my class, Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --received a scholarship to Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama], which there's a story behind that too, and I might tell you 'cause it was sort of incredible really. Story_ID: 358341 Speaker 1: We're talking about the Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] story of the scholarship. Was Talladega your first choice for a school? Speaker 2: Yes, and only choice. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was because two of my wonderful friends, but older than I, went to Talladega and came home after that first year and just raved about this wonderful school. And all of us who followed Constance Curtis and Alice Williams around made up our minds we wanted to go to Talladega. Speaker 1: Now, now before we get you--I think we kind of sped by-- Speaker 2: We kind of skipped over. Speaker 1: We sped, we sped by Sum- Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Yeah, we sped by Sumner. Speaker 1: But, yes, so, I know you were valedictorian, but, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --are there some stories from Sumner High School you, you want to tell us? Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I-- Speaker 1: It's the oldest black high school in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: --it's the oldest black high school in St. Louis. My problem with Sumner is that I went there too long. And so by the time I had gotten to my senior year in high school, I was so tired of Sumner I didn't know what to do. And that's a story. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --did you go there longer than most people or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What, well, why, what happened? Speaker 2: Well, the reason was that apparently during the time when I was going from seventh and eighth grade, and then nine, ten, eleven, twelve, the schools were overcrowded, and Sumner had empty rooms. So the powers that be made a decision that they would move the seventh and eighth grades at Marshall School [John Marshall School, St. Louis, Missouri], where I was going, to Sumner. So we did our last two years of grade school in the Sumner building. And then I went an additional four years as a high school student in that same building. And I was tired of it (laughter); I really was. It kind of, you know, and that was why, it was because of a logistics problem. They didn't have enough places to put us. So I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we went to, we went to the high school building for our seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate from Sum- Sum- Sumner? Speaker 2: Nineteen--from Sumner? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-five [1935]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, so, so were, were you part of--well, I guess you got involved in a lot of things I guess at Sumner. Were you, were you, were you, were you-- Speaker 2: Well, you know as I-- Speaker 1: --in clubs and-- Speaker 2: --think back, I was, I was involved in a lot of things, you know, but none of it grabs me now. I mean I was not very athletic, so I didn't get into athletics much at all, except tennis. I played tennis, but not competitively, just for fun. But Sumner was mainly going to class every day, getting that Latin and whatnot. Story_ID: 358342 Speaker 1: We had wonderful teachers, had an excellent education. And the reason was, that there were so many faculty members at Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] who had Ph.D.s. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean they were very well-educated, but they couldn't get any jobs 'cause there weren't any openings for them in the larger collegiate community. Speaker 2: Because they were at-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --at- af- African Americans? Speaker 1: They were African Americans, so they had to teach at the high school level. But you know that every other person I've had in my class was doctor somebody; they had Ph.D. (laughter). It was, it was incredible. And of course that's not true now. But back then there were only so many colleges where people with advanced degrees could teach, and the opportunities were limited. So many of these people were teaching--this is--when I went to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], one of the professors said to me: their mothers would have to have been there. He said, "Where do you go to school?" And I said, "Sumner High." He said, "I thought so." And I didn't know what he was talking about. But he said, "You, you came out of a school where there were some excellent professors, right?" I said, "Yeah." Well, but that's why: they were all--and I'm this is not just Sumner. I'm sure all over the country where, in black communities, is the same thing. They weren't--the colleges, the, the, were limited to the few black colleges and universities [HBCUs] and weren't that many. But here were all these people who were well educated, so they had no choice, which is not true today, you know, thank goodness, but-- Story_ID: 358343 Speaker 1: Now did Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] interact with the other high schools in St. Louis [Missouri]? I mean did they have inter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That-- Speaker 1: --collegiate, I mean a-- Speaker 2: --that started while I was there. Speaker 1: --inter, yeah, exchange-- Speaker 2: And not intercollegiate sports, but I was a part of the Sumner A Cappella Choir, which was a first for St. Louis in any high school. And the director was a wonderful musician named Wirt Walton [Wirt D. Walton]. And that choir became so good that we began to sing almost in every high school in the city. And that was the first opening where kids from Sumner could interact from kids from some of these white schools, the beginning of this process which we finally got around to having complete integration. But the choir was, was extremely well-received and very good. I, I mean I wasn't a very good voice (laughter), but, I mean I learned. And, and we had some excellent voices of young kids who--so that was my, my main emphasis, the acappella choir. And then I was a writer. I liked to write, so I would do the yearbooks and all this. And I, I look back on my high school experience, and college was better (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --much better. Speaker 1: Well, when you were a teenager in St. Louis, were you--I, I know you were, you were studying hard and everything, but--- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were you aware of the popular culture in St. Louis in the black community? I know that St. Louis is credited with being a birth of, giving birth-- Speaker 2: In the-- Speaker 1: --to the blues and, and-- Speaker 2: Kind of on the periphery. Speaker 1: --the home of Josephine Baker and all-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --this sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was aware of it but not that close to it. Speaker 1: So you never went to the big shows or that sort of thing? I know there must have been some live (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cab Calloway. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Remember Cab Calloway (laughter). We all went to hear him (laughter). And then there's a fellow named Doc Cheatham. Does that ring a bell? Well, Doc Cheatham was related to a Dr. Cheatham in St. Louis whose daughters were my close friends. And so to them I had a touch of this popular culture, because whenever Doc Cheatham came to town, we would go and hear this (laughter). But it was through this connection. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: We had our own insular social. You know, my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] was a member of several clubs, and the children of those members were friends of mine. And we went on picnic together and had fireworks on the Fourth of July together and that kind of thing. But it was--now that I look back--and the, the Municipal Opera [The Municipal Opera Association of St. Louis; The Municipal Theatre Association of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] was the other outlet. They had free seats, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a whole section of free seats. And a group of the parents would get together, and we would walk from our homes to Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri] and sit in the free seats and see the opera and then walk back home (laughter). So it was, it was, it was a good childhood. Story_ID: 358344 Speaker 1: Well, let, let me go back to one thing before I take you to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], just one, one more thing, and that, that's kind of a sweeping kind of thing. But how did the Great Depression affect your family-- Speaker 2: Ooh. Speaker 1: --and life? Speaker 2: It, it kind of, kind of did us in. By the time of the Great Depression, my f- my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] was doing very well in business prior to that. And so we moved from Cote Brilliante [Avenue] to Enright [Avenue] into a bigger house, twelve rooms over there, fourteen over here or something (laughter). I don't remember what it was, but it was a huge house, 4149 Enright. I never did like it though 'cause it was dark inside and not enough sunlight. But at any rate, you know, that's where we lived. And business was very good. My father was selling real estate and making loans. And he had a, he had a connection with a group in Denver, Colorado, of African Americans called the American Woodmen [Supreme Camp of the American Woodmen]. And this was per- a fraternal organization that accumulated a lot of resources from the members, I assume, and investments and whatnot. And they had, they had the ability to give lines of credit to, to people, and my father was one to whom they gave a line of credit. And there was a practice here in St. Louis [Missouri] back in those days of selling property to black people for a very small down payment and very small monthly payments for several years and then a balloon at the end. You had to pay it off at the end. And when the balloon came due, instead of these real estate brokers refinancing it so they could continue to pay it, they called in the balloon note, which these people could not pay, of course, and they'd take the property back. And it was, it got to be a racket in the black community. People were you- losing their property right and left. We'd get the small down payment, regular payment, balloon note, couldn't pay, take it back, start a--this, you know. And they were-- Speaker 1: So, so this is a form of predatory lending-- Speaker 2: It was, well-- Speaker 1: --similar to what's going on now, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but it was, it was, it was designed and calculated to make money for them at the expense of the black community. And my father, watching this, decided that he would ask the American Woodmen in Denver to give him a line of credit. I think it was a hundred thousand dollars. I don't remember exactly, but it was a substantial sum. And then he watched the foreclosures in the newspaper, the Daily Record [St. Louis Daily Record]. And when he saw a foreclosure in the black community and a balloon note, he'd call the people and say you wanna refinance? Oh, oh, of course. He would refinance it, and then he'd go down and pay it off, and he broke it up. And the brokers on Chestnut Street, which was a street where all the real estate, couldn't figure out what was going on at first, because their little gig had now suddenly been stopped by whatever, somebody. These people were getting money from somebody. They didn't know where it was coming from. And they finally learned that it was my father and James T. Bush and Company [St. Louis, Missouri], which was his name. And so one of these people called up my father, said, "Mr. Bush, we'd like to talk to you. Why don't you come on down to our office." And Mr. Bush said, "You want to talk to me, you come out here to my office," (laughter). They ain't (unclear) they blew their mind. You come to me; you want to talk, you come to me. And apparently they came, and he told them that, you know, what they were doing was inappropriate, and what he was doing was quite appropriate, in light of what they were doing. And that broke it up. Story_ID: 358345 Speaker 1: From then on, black people began to get loans and began to be treated right. Meanwhile, my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] got very well-off because he was, you know, he was making good commissions. And we would have, you know, done very well, except he was stretched out himself with properties on which he had substantial balances, and then the Depression [Great Depression] hit. And in one fell swoop, I mean, all of the stuff that my, my father had gotten foreclosed, and we lost our home (laughter), da-dah, da-dah, da-dah. And I can remember we ended up going to live with our housekeeper, the woman who was our housekeeper when we were little girls. She took us in. But to his credit, he bounced back in the '40s [1940s], in the '50s [1950s]. And he died in I guess '62, 1962. But he'd, he had learned a lesson. His, his, his first office had been in the People's Finance Building [St. Louis, Missouri], which is a, an impressive downtown building that was owned and operated by black people, had all the dentists, all the doctors. Everybody was in this building, including my father, who had this big, long office in the downtown on the first floor (laughter). He decided that was not gonna be this time, so he bought a home for us on West Page [Boulevard], where we still are, and a part of it became his office. And he died after he got that settled up and-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) recovered. So it was traumatic for us, but you know, that's life. And the fact that he was able to bounce back and do some very impressive things, and mainly Shelley vs. Kraemer [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948], which I suppose we'll get to-- Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) shortly. Speaker 2: That's-- Speaker 1: That's one of the most significant (audio disturbance). Story_ID: 358346 Speaker 1: (Audio disturbance) Now, now tell us about Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] now. Now we've got you-- Speaker 2: Talented, wonderful school. Speaker 1: --graduating as valedictorian and-- Speaker 2: Talladega College (laughter)-- Speaker 1: And you cho- Speaker 2: --in Talladega, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's the one you wanted to attend and-- Speaker 2: Well, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I, I didn't, I didn't have any other choice because of these two friends, Constance Curtis and Alice Williams, both of whom were childhood friends, and both of whom went to Talladega and came home their first year just raving about this little, tiny school in Alabama. They, they, they purposely--it wasn't, it's not very large, but which had such a beautiful setting in the hills of north Alabama, and has this incredible history of having been found by freedmen, and having been financed by the American Missionary Association, and, and having this wonderful opportunity to get a classical education. We're one of the few colleges in the country, even today, who can say that six college presidents who are graduates at Talladega are African American: president of Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], president of this--da-dah, da-dah; they all come from Tallede- said it was a--it, it still is, but kind of fall on some hard times, but I think it's gonna pull itself together. But that was my first--it, it was like, you know, having come from St. Louis [Missouri]. The other thing I should tell you about St. Louis, it was the dirtiest city in the world because all the manufacturers here were using this terrible coal. So you never saw the sun in St. Louis. Your nails were always dirty. So I didn't know what it was like to see the sunlight and things green and pretty because it was so dark all the time. The smoke was awful. And it wasn't until Mayor Tucker [Raymond Tucker] came along, who was a chemist among other things, who figured out what the problem was and quietly stopped them from using this coal, or at least got the board of aldermen to stop. And the, the businesspeople were confronted with this law before they realized what had happened. There were no big fanfare. They just passed a law that you couldn't burn this kind of coal anymore in St. Louis. And almost overnight the city became what you see now, bright and beautiful. But when I was growing up it was always overcast and dark. We never saw the sun hardly because of all of this stuff. And how did I get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So Talladega-- Speaker 2: --how did I get off on that? Speaker 1: Well, because Talladega was pretty. Speaker 2: Well, Talladega was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --like heaven, you know, I go down there with all this--I thought it was a, and, and it still is, it's a, it's an ex- a, a perfectly beautiful setting in north Alabama. Story_ID: 358347 Speaker 1: So, well, did, so your schol- everything went smoothly? You got your scholarship, and you went to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]? Speaker 2: No, no, it didn't go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It--oh. Speaker 2: --smoothly at all. Speaker 1: Okay, well, well-- Speaker 2: They, it, I got the scholarship, and I thought things were going smoothly. And a, a few days after commencement, the principal of Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] got a call from the outfit that gave me--the Swope Shoe Company I think it was. They wanted to meet the recipient. And so Mr. Brantley [George D. Brantley] called my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] and father [James T. Bush, Sr.] and told them that he'd like for them to arrange for me to go down and be interviewed. And I went down to this place on Olive Boulevard--never forget it--downtown. I don't know quite where it was but downtown. And I went in for this interview, and I was interviewed by a Caucasian woman who came across to me as being third-rate. And so I was a little big taken aback inside that this is the person I'm interviewing with. I didn't understand why I would have somebody who seemed so--she just didn't come across as somebody that seemed at a level that I expected her to be. Let me put it that way. So we sparred for a while, you know, back and forth with these questions. And finally, she said to me, "Where do you want to go college?" I said, "Well, I've decided I'm going to Talladega College," and her comment: "Well, why don't you go to so-and-so," and she named another school. And I said, "Because Talladega is a much better school." And I think it, the tone of my voice said to her I think it is a much better school, you idiot. I think that was my tone of voice. I didn't use the word you idiot, but I--well, two days later we, my parents got a call from Mr. Brantley saying Swope Shoe Company had withdrawn the scholarship. And my father said to me, "Well, you'll just have to go to Stowe Teachers College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri]." Yeah, well, by then, you know, the Depression [Great Depression] had taught me, you know, you roll with the punches. So I enrolled in Stowe, and I was just gonna go to Stowe; wasn't anything else to do. Speaker 1: And where is Stowe? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Where, where is Stowe Teachers College? Speaker 2: It's a, it's a, it's a teachers college here in St. Louis [Missouri]. It's now merged. Now it's Harris-Stowe. But back then the two teachers colleges were segregated, so Stowe was the black one, and Harris [Harris Teachers College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri] was the white one, and I enrolled. That's when I discovered I was nearsighted because they gave me an eye test, and I couldn't read the chart. And I went home and told my mother that I had to have glasses, and my father didn't believe it. He thought that I was playing a game with him, so he took me out and bought the ugliest pair of glasses you ever want to see (laughter). But I mean, I, first time in my life I could see, you know, when he got--I thought they were wonderful (laughter). I think he was trying to--and then they realized I really had, I'm nearsighted. And that was when I first discovered it. I always sat in the front of the classroom in classes. I didn't know it had something to do with my eyes. But suddenly I realized I had an eye problem. And, anyhow, I enrolled in Stowe. Meanwhile, the principal of Sumner High School, who was George W. Brantley [sic.], was so incensed by what had happened to me that he called together the faculty of Sumner and they decided that the faculty and Mr. Brantley would put up the money and give me the scholarship. You ever heard of anything (laughter), have you? That really happened to me. And so I came home from Stowe Teachers College thereto later, and my father said, "Pack your bags. You're going to Talladega." And I thought he was, you know, I thought he was teasing me. He said, "No, you're going." So that's how I got to Talladega, the faculty and principal of Sumner High School. And the sequel to that, many, many years later, when my father was back on his feet, he called me into his office one day and gave me the list. He said write a check to each of these people for the amounts shown, and we repaid them all (laughter). It's, it's just sort of wonderful. Speaker 1: That's quite a story. Speaker 2: But that's how I got to go, and I loved it. I was, I was, just it was a fascinating place. Story_ID: 358348 Speaker 1: And I was, I was good at little theater. That's how I learned to talk and act (laughter). And I made some lasting, wonderful friends-- Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) one of whom is the daughter [sic. mother] of Silvia Whitlock, who is watching us do this. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Her name was Edwina Whitlock [Edwina Harleston Whitlock], and we were great buddies. She was a bit mischievous though. And I think we could have both been put out of school two minutes--two days after I'd gotten there because a fellow drove his car up Battle Street [Talladega, Alabama], which is the street our dormitory's on, and parked his car. And I'm walking down the drive, the walkway, with Edwina. And she's much more observant than I, and she saw this guy leave his keys in the car. And she said, "Come on let's get in here and teach him a lesson," and I got in the car with Gussie [Edwina Harleston Whitlock] (laughter). Gussie drove off with this man's car, and we rode around the block (laughter). When she came back, he was standing there looking bewildered. And, and my friend, Gussie, as only Edwina could do, she got out of the car, walked around, dropped the keys in his hand, said, "Now that'll teach you a lesson not to leave your keys in your car," (laughter). Can you believe (laughter)? She was a character but adorable. So that was my first year at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Indeed, I would say that of all the years of my life, my years at Talladega were the, were par- far the happiest. It was a wonderful experience. You made some lifelong friends, and I got a superior education. Story_ID: 358349 Speaker 1: And then in my senior year, the dean of women [Hilda Davis] sent for me, and I said oh, heavens, what have I done (laughter). And instead of chewing me out about something, she said, "You have just been chosen to be the Julia Derricotte [sic. Juliette Derricotte scholarship] fellow for 1939, 1940." I said, "What is that?" And she said, "It's a scholarship that will give you a trip around the world and six months study in India." And I nearly flipped. I said, "I beg your pardon?" (Laughter) And she repeated it. And that's what it was. Speaker 2: So what's the name of it again? It's the-- Speaker 1: The Julia Derricotte fellowship, a trip around the world and six months study in India. And that happened to me in-- Speaker 2: That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the spring of 1939. And I left the United States-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: May the 3rd, 1939, with Betty McCray from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], two of us, left on the USS Normandy, this French, beautiful French ship, for London, England. And about a year later, we came back by way of Hawaii and San Francisco [California] after having spent six months in India at a college called Visva-Bharati [Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan, India], which was founded by Rabindranath Tagore, the distinguished Indian poet. Story_ID: 358096 Speaker 1: You were telling me off camera that, I mean before we were rolling that you had a chance to meet the great Indian poet, Rabindranath-- Speaker 2: Rabindranath Tagore (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Tagore-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right? This long beard-- Speaker 2: And he was the founder of this college that we went to, Visva-Bharati College [sic. Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan, India]. It was about a two-hour train ride from Calcutta [Kolkata, India] but out in the country, really. And we stayed in a complex that was sort of like a summer resort, you'd be, would be the screened-in--'cause I thought it was warm; you know, it never got very cold there--screened-in with concrete walks in front, and then we had a two-deck bed. One of us slept--it was kind of a dormitory. And we were given a, a manservant, somebody who was there to help us whenever we needed help. We did not go to classes with the students. Now that I didn't understand. I thought I was gonna be in the classes with--but, but we, but we had tutors, and then we met with the students in, in, in social events. Now, in the midst of this, since this was '39 [1939], as you know, we got into a war [World War II, WWII] (laughter). And we were traveling on Japanese ships. And when the Japanese, you know, attacked Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], we were-- Speaker 1: You mean on the way back home you were traveling-- Speaker 2: No, we were not-- Speaker 1: --on Japanese ships? Speaker 2: --on the way back home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were sitting there in India when all of this happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were afraid we might be sitting there for years (laughter) because we were traveling on Japanese ships. Speaker 1: So the, your itinerary, you, you were booked to come back on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh at, oh yeah. Speaker 1: --on Japanese ships? Speaker 2: When were booked, we were booked all the way, yeah. Speaker 1: On Jap--well-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: --the Normandy [USS Normandy] was-- Speaker 2: Well, the Normandy was a French vessel. When we got to the Mediterranean, from there on around to Hawaii, we were on Japanese ships. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And they were lovely. The Asama Maru and the da-da Maru, they were all named Maru (laughter), and they were lovely. So I said, "Betty [Betty McCray]," you know, because England declared war on Japan for India, and the Indians were furious because nobody had consulted them. Speaker 1: 'Cause the Indians were under British colonialism, right-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --at that time? Speaker 2: But they were still under British control, you see, so Britain, Britain declared war on Japan. And we, I said to her, "You know, if this gets out of hand," as it finally did, you know, it got to be a world war, I said, "We may get stuck over here and can't get home." And that's when we decided we would cut short the trip. We were supposed to stay a year. We cut short the trip and started back home. Story_ID: 358097 Speaker 1: Now before we get you started back home, I just want to ask you a few questions. Now these questions, I mean some of these are obvious. I mean Gandhi, Mahatma Gandhi, was a world figure when you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --were there. Speaker 2: And on the way (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he was-- Speaker 2: --on the way back we met him. Speaker 1: --and engaged in the struggle, you know. So, so I mean what--did, did you know who he was before you went over? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and wanted to meet him-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and, and did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He gave us an audience. We also had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --an audience with the Tagore [Rabindranath Tagore]-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --at this college [Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan, India]. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Tagore. Now, people may not know much about him, but he's, as you say, he's an important Indian poet, so. Speaker 2: He's a, he was, he's a poet, and Indian, and a very distinguished poet. People who know Indian history and culture revere him. And he is the kind of person--or was, 'cause he's, of course, passed on now--that was almost otherworldly. When you saw him he had a huge white beard, long, and white hair, and you felt you were in the presence of somebody that was otherworldly. He did the talking, and we just sat and listened. And he, you know, spoke to us about his life and all. But you had a feeling you were in the presence of somebody who was otherworldly. He was just that, and he was a mystic and a part of Indian history. People who know anything about--this is talking about East Indian history and not, not American Indian [Native American], Eastern Indian history. His name is a, is a classic because this--and he founded this school that we were in--didn't have a long con- you know, it was very short, but it was an audience, you know. And he wanted to know about us, and we told him. And he said he liked Americans (laughter), and we said we're glad (laughter). But he is, he is one of the cultural icons of the Indian culture. Story_ID: 358098 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Now this is a, see, it's probably an obvious question. Anybody watching this in the future is gonna wonder why I haven't asked you before now, but how, how were you perceived racially and ethnically, I guess, in India? You look like many of the people who are native of India. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they could tell-- Speaker 1: And--okay. Speaker 2: --'cause we were wear, wearing American clothes. We were not wearing saris. And they knew we were not, not Indian, and they, and we were respected. Speaker 1: And were, were they aware of the status that you had in America, I mean as an African American and, and the second class citizenship (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Somewhat. Speaker 1: --that you had to endure? Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhat. Speaker 1: And--all right. Speaker 2: And we had a chance to meet with some of the students, and they asked us about segregation and what it was like. They also had some strange notion because everywhere we went: please sing for us. And I'm looking at Betty [Betty McCray], and she's looking at me, and neither one of us could sing worth two cents. And we would protest and so, and they'd even, they said well, all Negroes sing (laughter). They had this strange notion that if you're black from America you're a singer. Speaker 1: I guess, and you know, maybe they're basing that on the student groups that were with Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], the Jubilee Singers [Fisk Jubilee Singers]. Speaker 2: Could be. Speaker 1: The Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know what it was based on-- Speaker 1: --singers-- Speaker 2: --but I-- Speaker 1: --used to tour the world. I don't-- Speaker 2: --I find it fascinating. And finally, you know, it got to the point I says, Betty, let's just learn something and sing for them. Then so (laughter) they wanted to. So we, we got a little song together and we sang. But I mean it was hilarious 'cause they had the impression that every black person in this country, in the United States, sings. It's a misperception. Story_ID: 358099 Speaker 1: What did you think of the caste system? Was that, was that, was it profoundly apparent to you then, or, or not? Speaker 2: Apparent-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --disturbing, but didn't touch us personally because we were kind of--every--despite the fact that we were traveling alone and, and we were moving from country to country, we were supervised by the people who were expecting us. We were not wandering around except one place, and that was in Singapore. When we got to Singapore at midnight, and they knocked on our door and said we're in Singapore, come on, and they said what? I said we're not dressed. We said y'all put your housecoat on. It won't make any difference. And we walked around in Singapore in housecoats, and nobody paid us a bit attent- (laughter), 'cause it was everybody was dressed like that anyway, interesting. But we helped them to understand more about us as a people, and we obviously learned more about them as a people. The caste system was in place, but it was not--how should I put this? It was on its way out when we were there. Everybody understood that this had to go. And, and it, not had, you know, just, I mean they, you know, there were people who still want to--but at one point, you know, they were untouchables in India and in other places I guess. But that no longer exists-- Speaker 1: Well, I don't know. I've heard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) down there, but-- Speaker 1: --the Dalit still have-- Speaker 2: And it may, may, maybe-- Speaker 1: --they still have--they're struggling with that-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) yeah. Speaker 1: --on some level now. Story_ID: 358100 Speaker 1: And Nehru [Jawaharlal Nehru] was--oh, we, we, we, we started on our way back from Calcutta [Kolkata, India]. And if you know your geography, Calcutta is on the east side of India, and Bombay [Mumbai, India] is on the west side, so it's like going from New York to California. So we went from Calcutta to Bombay, and in the course of it, stopped along the way. And one of those stops was to have an audience with Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi]. And we, we actually had twenty minutes (laughter) with this wonderful human being. And he's very clever. You know, he, he, he--we, we, we had learned some Hindi by then, and so we were gonna--we did--we moved in vimoksha and bowed, you know. And you know what he said to us? "Good afternoon ladies, and please be seated," (laughter), in perfect English, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was an English lawyer-- Speaker 1: Of course-- Speaker 2: --when he trained in Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England]--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: --(unclear) and, and, and the other technique, and I'll always remember this as long as I live, he asked us questions for the whole twenty minutes and so we were answering his questions. And then, as we get ready to ask him, the twenty minutes is up. So I, we realized afterwards that this was tactic that Gandhi used to keep people from misquoting him or doing whatever. He controlled that, and of course, we were young. We were, both of us were twenty years old. He just had us in the palm of his hand. And what are you doing? Where have you been? And finally, we told him that we had been to Visva [Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan, India], and he was impressed with that. And he said, "Now, well," he said, "you're on your way home?" And we said, "Yeah." He said, "You can't come to India and stay six months and expect to learn anything. That's what's wrong with you Americans: you're in too big a hurry," (laughter). But he was a great, great impression. And he was in his, in his little loin cloth but speaking perfect English. 'Cause, you know, he was a trained lawyer, English barrister (laughter). Speaker 2: What an experience, I mean to meet Gandhi in those days (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Story_ID: 358101 Speaker 1: And then, you know, on the way, the next stop, we had dinner with Nehru [Jawaharlal Nehru], who was then the prime minister, you know. And I'd, I, I--he's entirely different from Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi]. This was a polished, extremely intelligent human being, Nehru, who confidentially said to us that he liked American food, but he couldn't let anybody know it (laughter). And since he's gone now I can say this, but, and we had a good visit with him. He talked about India, and we talked about America, and was a, just a very happy thing. All of this was arranged as a part of this fellowship. Speaker 2: Did, did, did it cause you to think more deeply about your relationship, I mean in, in, the African American relationship to, to the rest of the world? Speaker 1: Oh yes, and I think this is one of the things that motivated me when I became chairman of the board of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to send a fact-finding set of teams to Africa. You got to go to places to understand. You can't be reading out of books. You have to go talk to people. And it, and it worked. Well. Story_ID: 358102 Speaker 1: So okay, well, you got back here in time to--did, did you come back on the Japanese vessels or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We came on those all the way to Hawaii. And then we learned that there was a, a regulation of some kind that says that American nationals traveling between American ports have to travel on American ships. Have you ever heard of anything like that in your life? They would not let us travel from Hawaii, which is an American territory, to the United States on the Japanese ship. We had to change our plan. Speaker 1: Now is that because of the war [World War II, WWII] or was it ongoing? Speaker 2: No. This is some kind of, then--I don't what it is now--some kind of regulation that apparently the shipping industry has put in place to benefit themselves. But it turns out that the entire football team of the university of somebody, American, was on the ship coming back from having played a game in Hawaii, so we had a good time (laughter). They were glad to see us, and we were glad to see them, and it was fun. So now we'd been around the world-- Story_ID: 358103 Speaker 1: You went back to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] and-- Speaker 2: Went back to Talladega (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now tell us about Dean Davis at Tal-- Speaker 2: Hilda Davis. Speaker 1: --Talladega, Hilda Davis, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, my mentor and a wonderful dean of women. She was a spinster, had her Ph.D., and came to Talladega just a couple of years before I did, I think. And she was dean of woman, and also I think she taught some courses in the English department. She had a great influence on me because she--I went to Talladega with not, not knowing how to use a semicolon. I can do all the rest of the part, but I couldn't get this semicolon. And I said to her one day, "Ms. Davis, I really can't figure out this semi." She said, "Come on, I'll tutor you." And she gave me some tutoring lessons, and I finally figured out when to use a semicolon. And I, during my entire life at Talladega, she was a very mentor, wonderful. My parents [Margaret Casey Bush and James T. Bush, Sr.], you know, of course couldn't provide me with much in the way of money, less, much less, so I had to stay on campus during the Christmas holidays the first year at Talladega. I guess I was only person in the dormitory 'cause everybody else went home. And suppose if I had said something to some of my friends I could have gone, but I didn't. And so she and the librarian surprised me with a Christmas present (laughter), and I'll never forget it. It was a perfectly lovely shade of blue. You know, we used to wear twin sweaters. I don't see them much anymore. But you have a jacket sweater, and then you'd have a cover sweater, and they were called twin sweaters. And you wore them together. And here, this pretty baby blue sweats, sweater set that they gave me for Christmas, and I was so touched because, you know, it had never occurred--I didn't feel bad about not having to go home. You know, they--if you can't go home, you just can't go home. She died I guess a few years ago and had left the academia. But she, she, she had a generation of youngsters there that she influenced for good. Story_ID: 358104 Speaker 1: Now did you run for class office or anything like that in Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --come to think about it. I wasn't a politician. I did a lot of little theater stuff though. I mean I was the lead lady in two or three productions (laughter), whatever they were. Speaker 1: You can remem- remember the plays now, or? Speaker 2: I remember one, and I can't think of the name of it, but I was on trial for murder. And I, I guess I could go back and find the name. But this was a case in which the jury was picked from the audience and seated just like--and then they put on this play. And then the jury had to come back and find whether that you were guilty or in-, and they found me not guilty. So I must have played my part well (laughter). Speaker 1: That sounds like an interesting concept-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was-- Speaker 1: --for a play. Speaker 2: --it was, it was, yeah, it was a great program. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so what did you major in? Speaker 2: I majored in economics and minored in mathematics. Speaker 1: Who, who were some of the other teachers that made an impression on you? Speaker 2: Bus Haynes [ph.] was a historian. There was a--I'm trying to think of the name of the guy who was--Dean, G- Gene Cater [ph.], Gene Cater was the dean of the college. He was a real force. Some of the others I can't remember, and I'd have to go back and look. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they were all fine, dedicated. I don't think there was a single person while I was at Talladega who wasn't dedicated to encouraging and, and supporting these students. And the aim of the college was to educate humane, articulate leaders, humane, articulate leaders, and they were doing a very good job of it then, and I think they're doing a very good job of it even today. Story_ID: 358105 Speaker 1: So well, when you were a senior then, what did you see as your career path? Did, were you gonna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had not the faintest idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let me tell you what I did at college [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] without my parents [Margaret Casey Bush and James T. Bush, Sr.] knowing it. I knew what I didn't want to do. I didn't want to teach. I didn't want to be a social worker. I didn't want to be a nurse. And I realize now I was eliminating all these female things (laughter). And I said to myself: the only way you can avoid this is not to take any courses that will qualify you to be any of these things. So I went to college and deliberately didn't take any education courses, so I knew I couldn't teach (laughter), and I went down the line. And that's how I ended up in the economics and mathematics, because I was determined I wasn't gonna do any of these things I didn't want to be. And I realize now that I was rebelling against what are considered to be female positions. So I came home with my degree. None of this my mother knew. I mean I chose these courses (laughter) without my mother, or didn't choose. So about the third or fourth day after I was home, mother says, "Well, now what are you gonna do?" I said, "I don't know." And she said, "Well, you could always teach." And then I dropped the shuck. I said, "Mom, I can't teach." She said, "What are you talking about?" I said, "I didn't take any education courses." Well, she (laughter)--it took her a few minutes to grasp the, the, the enormous significance of that. And then she said to me, "You mean you have a college degree and can't teach?" I said, "Um-hm." And (laughter) my mother was a gentle, very--I started to say proper, but that's not the word. She was not a person screamed and yelled; you know, she just didn't do that. But in her fashion, she went up in the chandeliers (laughter) when she found out I couldn't teach. And my father was sitting in the big chair in the living room listening to this conversation. He looked up and said, "Leave her alone." And when dad said something everybody listened, you know (laughter). So she left me (laughter). And then a few days later, a high school friend of mine, who was a polio victim, came to see me. And I thought she was just, you know, coming to, just to visit. And I was sitting on my front porch. And she, she's a polio victim. And I have two sets of steps coming up to my house, and she was coming up with her braces. And I said, "That's Dorothy Freeman, my goodness." She got all the way up the steps and I greeted her, and we say down on the front porch. And she said, "What are you doing?" And I said, "Nothing." She said, "What are you gonna be doing?" I said, "I don't know." And then she said to me, "Why don't you go to law school? Everybody can use a little law." I had never thought of law school, never even occurred to me, and I said, "What?" "Law school." And she said, "I'm gonna make an appointment with the dean, and you go talk to him." Story_ID: 358106 Speaker 1: Now this was this law school [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] that the State of Missouri had created out of whole cloth to keep a young black law- young man from going to the University of Missouri law school [University of Missouri School of Law, Columbia, Missouri]. You know this story, hm? You know this-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --story? Speaker 2: Well, tell, tell, tell us this story, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, Lloyd Gaines was his name. Lloyd Gaines was a graduate of Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] proper, and he decided he wanted to be a lawyer. And he had finished college, and he applied to go to law school at the University of Missouri at Columbia, Missouri. And they turned him down and said to him that they would pay for him to go to any law school in the surrounding states like Iowa or Illinois. He said no, I want to go to law school at Columbia, University of Missouri. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a common practice in the South, to send-- Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: You know, it was a common practice in the South to offer to send you-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, and that was the way they-- Speaker 2: --and, and actually send you out of state. Speaker 1: --that's the way they did it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, they'd pay you. And a lot of us got very good educations by going to all these schools all (laughter) over on the state's money, my sister [Ermine Bush Byas], in fact. They didn't offer any courses in dietetics at, at Lincoln, where she started out, so she got money from the state and went to University of Ohio State [sic. The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and finished her, her work. Well, at any rate, Lloyd Gaines said no, I want to go to the law school in Missouri. And they said we're not gonna admit you. And then he got the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] involved, and they filed a law school [sic. lawsuit] against the, the university, went all the way to U.S. Supreme Court, and Gaines won. And they ordered the university to either admit him or provide substantially equal education. Now, that decision came down in June of whatever year that was. I guess '38 [1938]. Speaker 2: It was 1938, yeah-- Speaker 1: In '38 [1938]. Speaker 2: --thirty-eight [1938]-- Speaker 1: It was no way-- Speaker 2: Gaines vs. Canada [Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada, 1938] I think-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there was-- Speaker 2: --was the name of it. Speaker 1: --no way they could have created a law school between June and the opening of school in September, so we all assumed Lloyd was gonna go to law school. But you know what happened. He disappeared, physically disappeared, and no one has seen him since, and no one has accounted for him. You, you knew this? No? Speaker 2: No, that's a story I don't know. Speaker 1: Well, this day-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to, to this day, nobody knows what happened to Lloyd Gaines. And I'm hoping some enterprising, you know, research student or somebody will really try to dig in. Because the thing that is so strange to me is that their, the family never filed a missing person's report or sought any kind of relief with the judicial system and the, and the law enforcement system, never; the family never did. And I don't know whether this was fear or what. But this guy physically disappeared that summer and has not been seen or heard from his since. There have been rumors that somebody saw him in South America, but they're unconfirmed. But what this did was to give the Missouri the time to create a law school out of whole cloth, and that's what they did. And they didn't put it on the campus of university in, in Jefferson City [Missouri]. They put it in St. Louis [Missouri] in the Poro College building that Annie Malone had built. And that's where I went to law school. Speaker 2: That's incredible. That's really an incredible story. Speaker 1: And it was a--they had a, they had a library, the, the whole thing. I have, I--we need to--I would really be interested in knowing how much money the spent. We had a library that was adequate; we had classrooms; we had everything, but it was separate. And that's where I went to law school. Story_ID: 358350 Speaker 1: Talking about Lloyd Gaines' unusual disappearance and the con- the creation out of whole cloth, as you said it, of the Lincoln University law (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: --school [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] in the Poro Society building. Speaker 2: Poro College building, and it's-- Speaker 1: The Poro College building. Speaker 2: --and it, it, it functioned until 1954 [sic. 1955]. Speaker 1: Now tell us, how who were the professors? Where did they come from? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Who were the professors who taught? Were they all black, or were they black and white, or-- Speaker 2: All black and, and most of them came from Howard University [Washington D.C.]. Dean, Dean William E. Taylor [sic. William L. Taylor] was the dean. And he was a former professor at Howard. Scovel Richardson was one of the teachers. Another, unrelated to me, a fellow named James Bush [James C. Bush] was one of the teachers. And there were a couple of the local lawyers who taught courses, Daniel Bowles, Silas E. Garner. And it, it attracted young people from all around the country. I graduated in the class of 1943, I think, yep. Speaker 1: Now were these professors the students of Charles Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston]? Were, were they, were they, were they part of that Howard tradition that produced Thurgood Mar- [Thurgood Marshall] you know, the other great lawyers that came out of there? Speaker 2: I, you know, I, I can't answer that. I don't know because I don't know what Taylor's connection was with Thurgood and that, and that, and I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered if the State of Missouri would not be careful not to put-- Speaker 2: Not to, yeah-- Speaker 1: --those type of men in charge of a black law school. I mean if I was, if I was gonna make-- Speaker 2: If they didn't-- Speaker 1: --somebody disappear, I'd probably be careful about that too. Speaker 2: Could be. I don't really know the answer to that. But it, it should be easy to find out because, you know, you can get the names of the professors. Speaker 1: Well, what was the, what, what was the flavor of the law school? Was it a civil rights activist kind of a flavor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --or was it? Speaker 2: It was not. It was not. It was a straight academic law school. It did not have a Charlie Houston who conceived that, you know, this the best. Speaker 1: So our suspicions might be correct that these were not the-- Speaker 2: But the fact that most of us passed the bar meant we got a good education. You can't pass the bar if you don't know (laughter). You just don't do that. And I don't recall, now that I think about it, I don't recall anybody that was in my class who didn't pass the bar, well, some bar, not necessary Missouri bar. Story_ID: 358351 Speaker 1: How did you--did you like law, law school [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: I loved it. I mean I (laughter), I had a feeling that I had stumbled on my calling, and I've analyzed why, you, you, you know. Law school does not have textbooks; we have casebooks that are organized like a textbook. But everything you read is somebody versus somebody. It's a, really happened to somebody. And they're organized by subject matter and, and it was just fascinating to me because I had never--and this was not esoteric; this was for real. This was John versus so and so and something happened. And I think it was the reality of it that I just, that I just loved it. So I went home and announced I was going to law school for three years (laughter). And my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] had a fit, and my dad [James T. Bush, Sr.] said, "Leave her alone," (laughter). And then when I finished, I took a civil service exam for lawyers, and not only passed, but came out in the top three, and was appointed a U.S. lawyer for the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture, making more than some teachers make after ten years. So (laughter) it was--my mother was duly impressed (laughter). But that's what happened. And it's been a, a positive career for me. Story_ID: 358352 Speaker 1: I know you went to Chicago [Illinois] to--you, you had finished. No, you didn't finish at--did you finish at-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I finished (unclear)-- Speaker 1: I'm kind of confused. Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my-- Speaker 1: Did, did you finish at Lincoln [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Did you finish at Lincoln law school? Did you finish law school? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I finished. My, my, my, my husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] is the one who didn't finish. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were classmates. And World War II [WWII] intervened. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, so you met your husband in law school, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's where I met him-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --at this law school. He was from Chicago. And we were classmates. And our third year, Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] hit the fan, and they began to draft people like you wouldn't believe. Everybody got drafted, and the bar examiners and the people who ran the bar made the decision that any senior who was being, you know, who was gonna get caught in the draft could take the bar ahead of time. They were trying to get them to get the licenses before. And that didn't affect my husband because he had--they had already gone and gotten him (laughter). But I decided I wasn't going anywhere. They weren't drafting women, but I decided I'd take the bar anyway with all these guys who were taking it. And the dean of the law school told me not to take it, and I didn't tell him I took it anyway (laughter). Can you imagine what it would have been like if I had flunked (laughter), but I didn't; I passed. So I was technically a lawyer before I got my law degree, 'cause I got my law degree the next month. I think the bar exam was whenever. Speaker 1: So, so you passed the Missouri bar (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I passed the Missouri bar. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I got my law degree (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So when did you pass it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in 1943. Story_ID: 358353 Speaker 1: And my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] was my first client. He had all these rent cases. He handed me all these folders, says, "Here," (laughter). So I started out being a real estate lawyer, you know, 'cause it's right there. And I'm, you know, I, I, I found it a very rewarding. Speaker 2: Okay. So, what, what did you--you worked for your father for a while you said. Then, then you worked for the U.S. government with the-- Speaker 1: I took a civil service--well, let me back up 'cause it's very important. I didn't feel I had enough expertise to open a law office myself, so I went to work for David Grant, who was a very well-known lawyer here [St. Louis, Missouri] and who was respected and admired by lots of people. And so that's where I had an office, and he's responsible for me trying my first case because Dave was a flamboyant, very attractive, wonderful human being. And I was sort of his clerk, you know, you know, just whatever. And one morning, Monday morning--I would go to court with him too. That was the other thing. He took me with him, and I would just sit and watch, you know. One Monday morning after a happy weekend when some convention was here, David came by my house. And it was kind of dropping by with people. Some convention was here, and it was quite lively. So they--we were all down at Rascella [ph.], and he handed me a wad of money to take to the office on Monday. And he said, "I don't want to carry this around all night." So I go to the office. He said I got--no, he added then, "I've got what's and so and so versus so and so on the docket," was a divorce case. And I said, "Fine, I'll get the file out and get it ready." So the case was on the docket for 9:30 that morning. And his office was at Jefferson [Avenue] and Market [Street], and the courthouse was at Market and 12th [Street], just down the street (unclear) you hop a bus and get there in about five minutes. I kept looking at the clock, nine o'clock, no Dave. And when it got to be ten after nine, I said well, what I'll do is--he must be going on to court. I'll take the file and go down there, and he'll have it. So I go down to get in the courtroom, and they begin to call the docket. When they get to our case and Dave's not there, I just piped up and said, "Pass to the second call, please, your honor." "Very well, pass second call." And they started calling the second call and Dave wasn't there, and then I knew I had to try this case (laughter). Well, I had watched him, you know. So I said the best thing for me to do is act like I know what I'm doing. So I get--called my case, I step up. "Would you call your first witness?" I called my first witness. If you can't try an uncontested divorce, you have no business being a lawyer. You know, it's one of those kind of things. This was an uncontested divorce. So I call my client, got on the stand. I asked the question, da-da. "Any questions, your honor?" No, stepped down (laughter), and then I called--you have to have two witnesses who verify. I called the two witnesses, and they got on the stand. And I asked them to verify (unclear). They stepped down. I said, "This my case, your honor." "Very well, divorce granted." I nearly fainted (laughter). I mean I was so--I actually tried my first case. To this day, I do not know whether David Grant did this deliberately or not. I never got around to asking him. But I have a feeling he did it quite deliberately 'cause he wanted me to get (laughter) my first case under my belt. And then he showed in the office about afternoon. He said, "Well, how did it go?" (Laughter) I said, "Fine," (laughter). So, it was a, you know, trying your first case is always traumatic for a lawyer 'cause you don't, you know, you, you're really not sure about this and that. And, and the thing that I do remember is that after any case you have to fill out forms, and you have to do that, and I didn't know anything about that. And I looked around the courtroom, and I saw Mr. Ellis Outlaw, who was sitting across at another table, who was a lawyer. And I went over and sat down beside him, and I said, "Mr. Outlaw, what do I do with this," (laughter)? And he said, "Nobody would know you didn't know what to do with it," (laughter). And he helped me fill it out and file it with the court. So it was fun. Story_ID: 358354 Speaker 1: And after that I began trying cases for Dave [David Grant], in the midst of which I took this civil service exam for lawyers and passed, came out in the top three, went for an interview, and was hired by the federal government, United States Department of Agriculture in the Rural Electrification Administration [REA]. And this is the program that had just been started to light up the farms, you know. Speaker 2: Now, now what year is this that you start with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty-three [1943]. Speaker 2: Nineteen, nineteen forty-three [1943]. Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-three [1943]. You know, this was Lyndon Johnson's [Lyndon Baines Johnson]-- Speaker 2: Oh, this is all the same year. Speaker 1: Yes, it's all-- Speaker 2: It's all the same year. Speaker 1: --the same year, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I graduated from law school [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], went to work for Dave that summer. All this is in the same year. And REA was another wonderful experience for me because this was one of these alphabet agencies that had been started in the '40s [1940s] as a part of the Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] administration. And Lyndon Johnson from Texas, who was then a young senator [sic.], had been bugging President Roosevelt about doing something about the farmers not having any electricity. And he finally got the [U.S.] Congress to pass this legislation that allocated some funds to begin the process of rural electrification. And to show you how the government poured money into it, our agency was in fact the law firm for the farmers. I mean they had to form cooperatives, you know. It's all, they were all--and we helped them fill out the papers. And we would be on the phone and, and advising them what to do to get start- this is what we did. The government paid lawyers to advise the farmers so they could get organized to bring in electricity to the farms, incredible. This is why this country, this country has such potential and has achieved so much that it is, it is a marvel, and there's so much yet to be achieved. And I just don't want us to blow it. What they say: Egypt lasted three thousand years? I want us to last three thousand too. Speaker 2: Well, we got I think seventy to get to three hundred (laughter), I mean, so. Speaker 1: Yeah, we just got two hundred. See, we got a long way to go. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But there's something, if, if we can just get the American people to grasp it, that there's something intrinsically and fundamentally incredible about this country, mix of people, all kinds of people. But we're not fighting like they're over there in Iraq, you know. I mean I'm not mad at the Arabs that over here. You? I mean I have Arab clients (laughter). I mean I, I don't understand all that nonsense over there. Why are we doing that? I mean, over here we get along. Speaker 2: So, Department of Agriculture, now was, was it Lyndon Johnson-- Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: The, that, what was that pra- pro- project called of Lyndon, the REA? Speaker 1: REA. Speaker 2: REA. Speaker 1: Rural Electrification Administration, REA. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And it was just one among many. You know, there were other alphabet things too during that period. This was, this was a very creative period in American history, and the government had its role. I mean, here we were, the, you know, a whole floor of lawyers in this--and, and, and the office is right down there in the Boatmen's Bank Building [St. Louis, Missouri] because they had decentralized all the government agencies and sent them all around the country to get them away from Washington [D.C.] in case Washington got bombed. So REA was out here and some parts of it was out--all over the country they sent the agencies, moved the whole office. And then after the war [World War II, WWII] they moved them back to Washington (laughter). It was amazing. Story_ID: 358355 Speaker 1: How long did you work for REA [Rural Electrification Administration]? Speaker 2: At least three or four years. Speaker 1: Okay. I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got married during that period. And when my husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] came home from the [U.S.] Army he still had to finish law school. And he decided that he would finish his law school education in Chicago [Illinois], which was his home. And I went to Chicago and lived there with him while he went to law school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which was another one. You know, they paid for his education, which was that other program, G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], amazing program. Speaker 1: So he finished at Kent College of Law [Chicago-Kent College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] in Chicago, right? Speaker 2: That's right in Chica- Chicago College of Law--Chicago-Kent College of Law. Speaker 1: Right. Okay, so you, but you didn't, you didn't stay there long, right? You didn't stay in Chicago very long? Speaker 2: Just long enough for him to pass the bar. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I thought I was gonna stay, until that first winter. And I have never been so cold in my life. And I, I was volunteering legal services for the Legal Aid Society. So I'd go downtown every day like I had a (laughter) full-time job. I didn't have to work. You know, I, but I helped them. And one, one cold, windy morning, as only it can be cold and windy in Chicago, I started to cross a bridge to get to the office. It's some bridge you have to cross to get to this--(unclear). And the wind was so powerful that I could not cross the bridge. It kept blowing me back (laughter), and I said I don't need to live in this city (laughter). I couldn't deal with the wind. And as soon as my, soon as I pass--I mean soon as my husband got through the law school, I said I'm going back to St. Louis [Missouri], and he said I'll go with you (laughter). And that's how we ended up back here. Story_ID: 358356 Speaker 1: So you came back [to St. Louis, Missouri] in 1947, I think it is, or it's what I have here, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's about it. That's about right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what's the--I think we're at this Shelley vs.-- Speaker 2: Kraemer. Speaker 1: --Kraemer [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948] case, yeah. Tell us about that. Is it, is it time for that yet? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Shelley vs. Kraemer, this is 19- yeah. Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-eight [1948]? Speaker 1: Yes, that's when the decision was made (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Decision, right it, right. Speaker 1: I guess it started I guess when you (unclear) soon as you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --got back. Speaker 2: Well, this was the case in which my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] was involved. These were the Shelleys. J.D. [J.D. Shelley] and Ethel Shelley were residents of Mississippi, Starkville, Mississippi. He was employed as a laborer somewhere, and she was working in, as a domestic in some family home-Starksville [sic. Starkville], both of them born there. And they got married when they were very young, had several kids. And she decided that the children were getting old enough so that she needed to be home looking after them. So she told the lady that she was working for that she was gonna leave. And the woman asked her if she'd find somebody to replace her, which she did, young person. The story is that this young person went to work for this same woman, and the woman accused her of having taken her watch. And the young woman, one Sunday, a group of law enforcement types I guess came to wherever she lived and dragged her out and gave her a beating and threw her in a ditch. The Shelleys saw this, and Mrs. Shelley said, "We have to go and get her." And so Mr. Shelley went and rescued this girl and got her some help and release. And that night he said to his wife, "I'm leaving, and I'll send for you." And he left town, because it was just that dangerous. And these were very mean-spirited people. He left that night and came to St. Louis [Missouri] to live and said, "I'll send for you and the children," and that's what he did. He found a job immediately 'cause there were lots of job during then. And he was working for one of the plants, and he finally sent for his family. They came up here to live, and they were all crowded in two rooms in some part of the town. I'm not sure where it was now--but managing. I think she found work in some, one of the factories doing something. And they decided that they would live on his salary and save hers, very good financial plan, you know, and that's what they did. So they lived, they rocked along for several years. And then Shelley, after they had accumulated some money, said to his wife one day, "I think I'll buy a car." And she said, "A car?" She said, "We have all these children. You need to buy a house." (Laughter) And Mr. Shelley had never even thought about buying a house. And so he then went to work the next day, and he, he had a nice foreman that he felt was a friend of his. And he said to the foreman--this is the story that he tells: "I, I wanted to buy a car. My, my, my wife said I should get a house. What do you think?" And the foreman said, "What kind of family you have?" He said, "I got wife and six kids." He said, "You have any money in the bank?" He said, "Yeah." He said, "You got enough for a down payment?" He said, "Yeah." He said, "Well, then you buy the house (laughter); take your family and put them in a house." This is what the foreman said to Shelley. So Shelley came home that night and said to his wife, "Fine, we'll buy a house." And that's how this started, Shelley vs. Kraemer. Story_ID: 358357 Speaker 1: And the Shelleys [J.D. Shelley and Ethel Shelley] didn't know even where to look for one, much less, you know. So they had a--they went--they had a deacon of their church, where they were going to church, who had been doing some real estate sales [in St. Louis, Missouri]. And they went to him and said, "We want to find a house." And this guy then saw a sign on this house where the Shelleys bought for sale. And the sign, as I understand it, had a realtor named Brunei Realty [Brunei Realty Company, St. Louis, Missouri] on it, which was one of the downtown big real estate firms. Mr. Brunei and my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] were very good friends. And what I've been able to figure out that the owner of this house on Labadie [Avenue], Shelley house, came to my father and said, "I want to sell my house." And my father said, "Well, doesn't it have a restrictive covenant on it?" He said, he said, "Mr. Richard, I don't care what it has on it. I want to sell my house." So then he said to Brunei, "I want to sell this house, but I don't think I can put my sign." And Brunei said, "I'll put my sign on it, and then when they call here, I'll give them to you," (laughter). And that's what I think they did. And sure enough, somebody came; the Shelleys came. And we got referred, and we sold them the house. Did have a restrictive covenant on it. Speaker 2: Now that's a-- Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: That's a, a feature of the, of the, that, that bars the resale of the home to black people or others, right? I mean it's in, it's in the, the deed or something of the, of the house. Speaker 1: I, well, Shelley [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948] was the deciding case that dealt with all that issue because there was a protective association in that block and around that area that immediately, when they found out the Shelleys had moved in, filed suit to stop them from going. And because my father had been instrumental and getting them--he put up the money so that they could get a lawyer. And they tried it in the lower court and won. The lower court said the covenant wasn't controlling for--number one, there were other blacks in that area, in that, in that--not the particular block, but in that area who'd been there since the 1800s (laughter). And there were other technicalities. And they thought when they won in the lower court that that was the end of it. But there was a protective association of whites in the area who got together and said no, no, no, we're gonna appeal this to the Missouri supreme court [Supreme Court of Missouri]. Story_ID: 358358 Speaker 1: So, the Kraemers [Louis Kraemer] take this to a higher court. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I can't recall the time, the exact time when the Supreme Court of Missouri ruled. But I can remember that there was a huge headline in the morning paper: Supreme Court denies housing or something. And, and, and here was this newspaper, and my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] was reading it at the breakfast table. We were all sitting around the table. And it was the first and only time I ever saw my father look discouraged. I mean it was a shock to him. And my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] was sitting at the foot of the table, and she said, "Oh, dad, you can't give up now," with her pretty pert self. "Oh, dad, you can't give up now," (laughter). And he got up from the breakfast table and went to the telephone, and I can hear him calling all of the black real estate people in the city [St. Louis, Missouri]. There weren't that many of them, but one by one he called them and asked them to come to a meeting at our house that evening. We had a (unclear) that was kind of like a meeting place. And sure enough, they all showed up. He had me there. And the discussion and the subject of the meeting was this decision of the Missouri supreme court. And after, not a long discussion, somebody said, "Well, what do you recommend that we do?" And my father said, "I recommend that we form an organization and take this to the United States Supreme Court." And they said, "Fine, let's do it," (laughter). And then, "What shall we call ourselves?" "We're gonna call ourselves the Real Estate Brokers Association of St. Louis." And then my father turned to me and said, "Incorporate us," (laughter). And here I was just out of law school [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] practically--incorporate us. I said, "Fine," (laughter). And that's how it started. I didn't have a thing to do with the legal side of that process, which is called an application for a writ of certiorari. I really didn't know a thing about (laughter) getting a writ of certiorari from the U.S. Supreme Court. What I did was to help with the mobilization of the community and helping to raise the money to take it to the Supreme Court. Speaker 1: Now who, who did the legal work then? Speaker 2: A lawyer named George Vaughn [George L. Vaughn] and a lawyer named Herman Willer. George Vaughn was the lead attorney. He was an African American. And Herman Willer was a graduate of Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I think he was Jewish. And the two of them put together the petition for the writ of certiorari, which went up to the U.S. Supreme Court. Meanwhile, the group decided they would form a citizens' committee, and they got a huge list of people, about a hundred, to serve on this committee. And we had some stationery printed, and we began to get out mailings to the churches. And the result was that we mobilized the total black community around this suit [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948]. Story_ID: 358359 Speaker 1: And the, the question was whether the [U.S.] Supreme Court would even hear us because the, the, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had filed several cases before that seeking a writ of certiorari, and they had been denied because this was not state action. I mean these were private people doing this, and so they wouldn't let them in. But the argument in Shelley [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948] was that they were coming to a court of law in the United States to enforce something that was not legal. And once they invoked a court action, that's state involved, and that was the theory on which they went up to the Supreme Court. And they can't use the state to enforce covenants that are based on race. Well, I think they filed that petition in late December, somewhere around that. They had oral argument. The first part of the year, in January, my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] and George Vaughn [George L. Vaughn] went to the hearing. And immediately after they granted certiorari in Shelley, then the unite--the NAACP was able to get them to take two other cases that read easy, one from Detroit [Michigan] and one from the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. So the court combined all three, and then the oral argument was held. And George Vaughn went up to argue. Thurgood Marshall was there, you know, the whole--it was a, it was high drama (laughter). And the court listened. Well, no, first of all, the thing that shocked them was that three of the justice- was it three? Yeah, three of the justices recused themselves, so it was only a six judge court. Speaker 2: On what basis did they recuse themselves? Speaker 1: You don't have to say. You don't have to say. Speaker 2: Could it be that they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, it could be. Speaker 2: --had property that-- Speaker 1: We, we've never-- Speaker 2: --had restrictive covenants too? Speaker 1: No one has ever done the research to find out where these guys lived, but we all think they lived in property that had restrictions on them and therefore recused themselves. Now somebody ought to do the research and find out, 'cause everybody can find out where these justices lived. We didn't do it at the time. We were just so shocked that we were only gonna have six judges. That means we, in order to win, we had to get four votes. If it's a tie vote, we lose three to three. Well, anyhow, this is some more drama. But they had the argument before these six justices, and this was I guess in January, yeah, late January. And then from January to May, no word at all. So we were, you know, February, March, April, and you know, what is going on, you know (laughter)? And then George Vaughn gets a call on May the 3rd from a clerk at the Supreme Court saying the Supreme Court has ruled in your favor in Shelley. Well, you know, this is like (laughter) Juneteenth (laughter) celebration. It was just very exciting, all kind of big rally. We had one big rally at a church. The church was packed. And the Shelleys were there, 'cause it was, it was an incredible decision. Story_ID: 358360 Speaker 1: Had it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so the question is why, you know, why? How could this happen after all those years when the court just simply wouldn't listen? And I had my own theory. Number one, Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] was president, and Harry Truman was from Missouri. This case arose in Missouri. Thomas Hennings [Thomas C. Hennings, Jr.] was our senior senator from Missouri, and he and President Truman were very good friends. Thomas Hennings was a friend also of Jordan Chambers, and Jordan Chambers was the black guy who was the committeeman of the 19th Ward [Ward 19, St. Louis, Missouri] and the leader of the black people, publicly in these elections. And Tom Hennings and Chambers were very good friends. And I think that my father [James T. Bush, Sr.] spoke to Jordan Chambers (laughter), and Chambers spoke to Hennings, and Hennings spoke to the president (laughter), and the president sent the word (laughter), let's meet. I can't prove this. Speaker 1: Well, well, one thing that probably had an impact was the recusing of those three justices, that it, it reduced the number of justices to, to vote on the case to six, right, out of nine, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, only six. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you only had to convince nine--I mean six. And the three that, if they did have house, restrictive housing covenants, they probably would be people who would have voted against you. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And they-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --they were eliminated from the-- Speaker 2: But it was very interesting that they, they recused themselves and wouldn't, wouldn't hear it. Story_ID: 358361 Speaker 1: Well, anyhow, certiorari was granted, and the Shelleys [J.D. Shelley and Ethel Shelley] won. And, and it was a wonderful, wonderful victory, not just for African Americans but for this nation, because it, you know, made it's an open, an open country again. People could buy property where they wanted to buy property if they had somebody who wanted to sell it to them. And one interesting development after that was that I belonged to an organization of women in this country called Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.]. And the St. Louis [Missouri] chapter of Girl Friends, at my persuasion, decided that we would celebrate an anniversary the, guess it was the thirtieth, fortieth, something anniversary of Shelley vs. Kraemer [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948]. And we had a great big celebration and brought in young Bill Hastie [William H. Hastie] to be the speaker. We commissioned and had a marker put on the Shelley house, which was still there, and, and, and had it designated as a historic site. And so it's now a part of history, and documented, and in the record. Speaker 2: Okay, now this is done like some years later, right, after-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --you're right-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --after the fact, yeah. Story_ID: 358362 Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the next big case in St. Louis [Missouri] after they-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I didn't have any big cases after that [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948]. That was the biggest. And it really, really wasn't my case 'cause I wasn't among the lawyers who tried it, you know. I was just one of the advocates but very close to it because of my father's [James T. Bush, Sr.] connection. I guess if, if you move from there to another way in which I've been involved legally, it would have to be in connection with a law which was passed in the City of St. Louis called the land reutilization law [Municipal Land Reutilization Law of 1971]. And I guess that was adopted in, in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Now we shouldn't be jumping that far ahead, should, should we? Speaker 2: Well, we, what, you, you tell me what (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Let's go, let's go, we should go probably to--now, at a certain point-- Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Let's see, I don't know if we're ready to go to Brown vs. the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], but now you--oh, I heard that you--I read that you ran for [U.S.] Congress in 1948. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I did that (laughter). Speaker 1: Now what happened? What, what, tell us-- Speaker 2: I got-- Speaker 1: --about that. Speaker 2: I won my precinct (laughter). Oh, dear, I am really, you know-- Speaker 1: And you were a Progressive Party candidate? Speaker 2: I was a Progressive Party candidate-- Speaker 1: Henry Wallace [Henry A. Wallace]. Speaker 2: --with Henry Wallace. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, my one foray into politics, and it was, it was interesting. We were advocating for the, you know, openness and fairness and whatnot. Speaker 1: And so those were--what were the specific positions of the Progressive Party and, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, you've got me going way back, but I think some of the basics: fair housing, equal education, and civil liberties. You know, it was, it was-- Speaker 1: And these were not on the agenda of your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not-- Speaker 1: --Republican Party-- Speaker 2: --not really. Speaker 1: --or the Democratic Party? Speaker 2: I mean these, these were things they shied away from because they considered them too controversial. I think that's why the Progressive Party got started. And of course-- Speaker 1: And when you think about it, that sounds amazing that-- Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: --things like fair housing and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, but that can-- Speaker 1: --equal rights would be-- Speaker 2: You have to understand this was-- Speaker 1: --radical for political part (laughter)-- Speaker 2: It was, this is back in the '40s [1940s] now. You know, we just, we were still fighting the Civil War in a way (laughter), so that people were not interested in giving people any rights. We had to take them. I mean they were not giving up any rights, and there was a lot of segregation still, most of it, if not de jure, in fact, in this country. I mean this, this law school [Lincoln University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] I went to was a clear example of it. I mean you--the money that this state, Missouri, put into that law school, to create it and maintain it for however long it existed, was a, a colossal waste of taxpayers' money, now that I think about it, to set up a separate law school to keep us from going to law school in Columbia [University of Missouri School of Law, Columbia, Missouri] was ridiculous. But they were that adamant about keeping us apart, and separate, and unequal. Speaker 1: So did you enjoy running for Congress when you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I had, I enjoyed the campaigning, but I, you know, politics is not--I, I, I found my, my niche with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That, you know, this business of party politics is not something I, I function well in, 'cause I wanna, you know, I don't wanna have to compromise too much. But it was a, it was a lively campaign, and everybody was civil, and I think people were just kind of bemused at Margaret Wilson [HistoryMaker Margaret Bush Wilson] running for Congress (laughter) on a Progressive ticket. My mother [Margaret Casey Bush] and father [James T. Bush, Sr.] didn't object though. They were supportive and was a good exposure. I, you know, that was the end of it. I, I'm not, that's not where I fit. Story_ID: 358363 Speaker 1: In '54 [1954], Brown vs. the Board of Education, [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] I mean how did that--I mean, I'm supposing you were following that case, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: --all the time. Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And my, my son [Robert E. Wilson III] was in the first integrated class, 'cause he's born in 1950. So he was just getting ready to go to kindergarten when that decision came down. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can remember my, my husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] walking him to school, to this integrated school, where he went to school, for the first time in the history of the city [St. Louis, Missouri]. I was kind of astonished by the decision. I really didn't--and I think if it hadn't been for Earl Warren, we probably would not have gotten that decision, but he was the chief justice. And Earl Warren was from California, and I think his, his weight resulted in that decision, which was clearly correct. But we've been so many years ruling against us on most things that it was astonishing, really. Story_ID: 358364 Speaker 1: Now, what were the steps now? In the next four years you become the president of the St. Louis [Missouri] chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], by 1958. So that's-- Speaker 2: Nine [1959], '9 [1959] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) four years later. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What happened in those four years to propel you to the presidency? Speaker 2: Well, let me--it, it, it wasn't anything that happened in the four years that precipitated that. The NAACP was headed by a very dynamic trade unionist named Ernest Calloway. And he was doing a pretty good job, but there were people who felt very strongly that the trade unionists were trying to capture the NAACP branch and control it. And he was facing this rumble. And I had been active with the NAACP for several years and had started something called the Job Opportunities Council [sic. Job Opportunity Council] with a group that I belonged to. And I was on the exec- executive committee and practicing law. I had no intention of running for nothing (laughter) at this point. And out of the clear blue sky came a small committee. I'm trying to--I can't even remember who the people were now, but they came to my office one day and said, "We'd like you to run for president of the NAACP." Well, now Ernest Calloway and I were very good friends. I said, "What," (laughter)? And I said, "Oh no, I, I'm not gonna run against Calloway; that's absurd." And I left it there. But the next time I saw Calloway I said to him, "I had this delegation come and ask me to run against you for president." He said, "If you will run, I will step down." And I did one of these. I said, "What?" He said, "If you, you will run, I will step down." I said, "Why?" He said, "Because I think it's better for you to be president than for me to be president." This is a very wise guy now I realize. He understood what this meant in terms of the, not people, but in terms of the integrity of the branch. So, well, I was just flabbergasted. I mean I, you know, I did not seek this position, but I said, "Well." But he said, "I think you should tell them that you'll consider it," and that's what I went back and did. And then he announced that he was not gonna run. And then they got another person to run against me, a minister of one of the churches. But I beat him (laughter), and that's how I got to be president. Story_ID: 358365 Speaker 1: It was a very exciting period because there were pockets of problems here in this city [St. Louis, Missouri] that we tackled. The main one was this Ranken Trade School [David Ranken Trade School; Ranken Technical College, St. Louis, Missouri], which-- Speaker 2: Yeah, now what's the story on the Ranken Trade School? Now that's an interesting story from what I understand. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: That, that, that's an interesting story from what I understand-- Speaker 1: It is an interesting-- Speaker 2: --the Rank-- Speaker 1: --story, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and one for which the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] local branch can take complete credit because it was an NAACP thrust. We had asked Arthur Kennedy [Arthur J. Kennedy] to be head of the labor and industry Committee. And Kennedy was the owner of a sheet metal shop here and you know, in business for himself. And he was complaining because there were no places where our young men could go and get solid training in the trades; it just didn't exist. School had discontinued it. Ranken was the only one that was available, and they would not let black people in. Speaker 2: This is a public--a private school or-- Speaker 1: It's a private school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: David Ranken [David Ranken, Jr.] was--and that's a story in itself. He was immigrant from Ireland, came here broke to stay with some relatives here who got him on his feet and got them into their businesses. And he always had this vision that he wanted to start a school that would train young people in the trades so that they could make a living without having to go to a full-blown college. Well, his, apparently his relatives with whom he worked did very well, very successful. And he--don't hold me to all these details, but somehow or other, he made a lot of money, and so he put his dream into motion. He organized, got incorporated, funded it, and got Ranken Trade School started before he died. And then when he died, he left his entire estate to them. And this is a school that always has money (laughter). At any rate, now how did I get off on David Ranken? I was trying to get back to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah you were telling-- Speaker 1: --to Calloway [Ernest Calloway]. And any-- Speaker 2: --who he was, yeah. Speaker 1: But at any rate, this is one of the thrusts when I was president. Kennedy kept fussing because he couldn't get anybody to figure out how we could get these young people trained. I said, "Well, start sending them over to Ranken. Let's see what happens." And he sent them over there, and they refused them. So then we, and I'm as president and he as chairman of the labor and industry, decided we would walk over and speak to the president of Ranken. And we got as far as the door to the office, and we were stopped by people who said we were not welcome and would we please leave. And so we left. Story_ID: 358366 Speaker 1: And then I was talking about this with my husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] that evening. He said, "Has anybody ever looked at rail--Ranken's [David Ranken, Jr.] will?" And I said probably not. He said, "Well, let's go down and look at it," which we could do 'cause both of us were lawyers. So then I'll never forget, it was a bright sunny April, one of those wonderful days you can have in St. Louis [Missouri]. And we wandered down to the civil courts building up on the tenth floor, which is the probate division; went to the file and got the case number for David Ranken--it's down there--and handed it to the clerk. And the clerk looked at it. He said oh, this is in the archives, 'cause it was old. He said this will take a little time. And I can remember my husband saying very dryly, "We have nothing but time;" (laughter) we have nothing but time. So we sat there and waited. And the guy came back with this rather thick file, which was all handwritten, because back in those days they didn't have typewriters. This is, this, this file is back in the early 1900s, 1906, nineteen-something; it was somewhere around. See, but everything was handwritten, very beautiful Spencerian handwriting. And we turned and flipped, and we got to the will, and it was several pages. So I said to him, "Well, you start from the front and read toward the middle, and I'll start from the back and we then, and we'll meet in the center." So we did this. When we got to the middle--my husband's a kind of, kind of--how should I characterize him (laughter)--brusque. He said, "I don't see anything in this will about white men and boys (laughter)." And I said to him, "Nothing in my side either." So rather than, you know, think we meet, we decided we would read together from back to front, or front to back. And we sat there and went through it again, reading it word for word, front to back. There's absolutely nothing in this will restricting that school to white men and boys. So it was a hoax that everybody had accepted. And then, because I was chairman of--I mean we had president of the local branch of the (unclear) said, "Ah-ha," (laughter). And I, next day I can remember I went to the archives and, and way about five, I got the list of every member of the board of directors of Ranken [David Ranken Trade School; Ranken Technical College, St. Louis, Missouri]. And it read like a who's who of businesspeople in the metropolitan area. You know, these were all of the movers and shakers. And I drafted a one-page letter, which I sent original to each one of them certified mail, return-receipt requested, calling their attention to the fact that there was nothing in this will of David Ranken that required segregation and that would they immediately consider opening the school to all. Story_ID: 358367 Speaker 1: You were president of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] from '58 [1958] to '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And tell me now, during that period, the country was in some intense civil rights activity. And there was often rivalry between CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and NAACP. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And can you--and I, I know one of the, the quotes I have from you is that--I think Ms. Ottley [Charlotte Ottley], who was here a moment ago, said that: "You always said that if you don't care who gets the credit, you can get a lot done." Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and CORE and NAACP worked together here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We didn't have that problem. Speaker 1: Well, good. That-- Speaker 2: And Marian Oldham and Charles Oldham were my good buddies (laughter). Speaker 1: Now how did you work that out here? Speaker 2: We, we've been friends, you know, long before any of us were in these organizations, and we grew up together. Speaker 1: I know-- Speaker 2: So we had a, we had a wonderful working relationship with CORE. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, you know, when the Jefferson Bank [Jefferson Bank and Trust Company] thing and we got all the lawyers. We were the lawyers; got all of the other lawyers in town [St. Louis, Missouri] involved (laughter). It was a, it was--I'm, I'm surprised about the, the conflict between these (unclear) because that didn't happen here. Speaker 1: Okay, it happened a lot of places. I'm sure you're aware of that-- Speaker 2: I'm sure, but I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it was-- Speaker 2: --I think it's such a waste of time. I mean we're all trying to do the same thing. We gotta communicate and, and strategize together. That's--we used to have Sunday meetings, CORE people and NAACP people. And we'd figure out the strategy: and you're gonna do this; I'm gonna do that (laughter), and then we'd come back and report the next Sunday. Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds like it would make sense. Speaker 2: It makes good sense. Speaker 1: But, yeah. Speaker 2: You do what you have to do it. And we always provided the lawyers. Speaker 1: Yeah, there, there's--okay. Speaker 2: It was a very wonderful relationship. And Marian Oldham was one of the leaders in CORE here, and she got arrested and went to jail. And I went down to see her because I wasn't gonna go to jail. I mean I (laughter), I'm just not. I'm chicken. I'm not gonna go to jail (laughter). I said, "Marian, how is it?" And she said, "It's awful." I said, "Well, why?" She said, "Somebody has to do it," (laughter); somebody has to do it. You know, you can almost write a piece about it using that title because she's right, you know. It was terrible what was going on here. Speaker 1: Yeah, somebody might have to go to jail to-- Speaker 2: Somebody has to, yeah. Speaker 1: --to test the law that's not-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --not fair-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --right? Yeah. Speaker 2: I said, "Well, my role is to get you out, get the bonds," and--I'm not going to jail. I couldn't. I am just not gonna go to jail. I can't deal with it. I'm chicken (laughter). Speaker 1: But there's a role that--so, you had actually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --decided what role-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you were going to play. And the CORE, CORE was the most act, the street-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --activists are. Speaker 2: That's right. They were, they were tremendously effective here in the long run. Speaker 1: What were some of the issues that CORE addressed here? Speaker 2: It, they were all economic issues. Black people had no jobs worth anything here. The banks wouldn't hire them. You know, nobody was hiring us, except in very menial capacities. All this city and it didn't make sense when there were capable, competent people in our group. And that was the issue. It just had to stop, and it did stop. I mean you go in these banks now and they're full of all kinds of people, including African Americans. And I can--it's, it's very interesting that I went into Jefferson Bank--it's a bank that's no longer even here now--after the, after we had gotten this fight and they'd opened up, and here was this attractive young black guy, white collar, standing behind the counter doing something. And, and they were having a celebration of some anniversary of the Jefferson Bank. And I just politely said, "Oh, I'm so glad to see you here." And I said, "I assume you're gonna go to the Jefferson Bank celebration. And you know what he said to me?" He said, "No, I got this job on my own," (laughter). I got this job on my own. Speaker 1: He had no idea that-- Speaker 2: No idea at all. And I said to him, kind of quizzically, "Some take the heat so others can enjoy the treat." Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he got it on his own (laughter). Story_ID: 358368 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about model c--well, not, be, before we get to Model Cities, tell me about the March on Washington. I know you probably went to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for that. Speaker 2: I was president of the local branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] during the March on Washington period. And there was a lot leading up to that, you know. It was sort of the culmination of a push to get more opportunities for our people all across the board, 'cause they were just excluding us, you know, all of this war stuff and whatnot. And we were getting none of the jobs, none of the (unclear). And our branch decided we'd send--we'd, we'd get on a bus and take a busload to Washington [D.C.], which we did. And it was, it was sort of (laugher) incredible really, now that I think about it, because as we drove along, got closer to Washington, we'd see these buses coming in from everywhere. And the City of Washington was deserted. I think everybody had closed their doors and (unclear) I don't know what people thought was gonna happen (laughter). It (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they got out of town? Speaker 2: --was deserted. The streets were clear. There was no activity. It was almost as if, you know, everybody thought that this was gonna be some cataclysmic event and very dangerous. And I think the fact that it went off the way it did and it was so very peaceful and orderly, shocked the nation. They didn't quite know what to make of this, 'cause there were an awful lot of people in Washington that, that day from all over this country. And not a single person was hurt; there was no violence; and nobody lost any money (laughter), you know. It was, it was, it was a very remarkable demonstration of, of what's fine about this country. And, and I was very amused because I rode on the bus, and when I got there, I discovered my husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] and my son [Robert E. Wilson III] had flown up on the plane (laughter). So I had a place to, to go get myself a bath and whatnot in the hotel where they were. They didn't say a word to me. They met me there without telling me (laughter). Speaker 1: So, but the March on Washington was like a showcase for a lot of the civil rights leaders that never (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --really had much-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --national exposure before, you know, not, not just Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but Roy Wilkins of the NAACP-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were, they were all there through the whole thing. Speaker 1: --James Farmer-- Speaker 2: And, and, and fortuitously too, and, and many people may have forgotten this, Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] death was announced. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: It was almost, you know, there was something about that that just sort of seemed incredible, that this man should breathe his last day on the day of this event. It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: --just--'cause this was in a, in a way a culmin- culmination for, for what he stood for and what he was trying to achieve. And it was, it was well done. Story_ID: 358369 Speaker 1: What troubled me though is that the follow-up from that was, in my judgment, dismal. You see, if I'd been running it, I would have gotten the name and address and telephone number of everybody in that crowd. Speaker 2: That wasn't done? Speaker 1: Beg your pardon? Speaker 2: I, I don't know, see, so, but you're saying that wasn't done? Speaker 1: That was not done. That was not done, and there was no organized follow-up. Every one of those people there was ready to do something at home, and it wasn't followed up. That's a tragedy 'cause we, we, we had a gold mine of committed people who were ready to do more than march, who were, who were willing to stand tall. I think we had a nucleus of people who would have put up money every month for a year to build that fund that we needed, and it wasn't done. So, and that's I guess one of the things that I'm very conscious of. Demonstrations are fine, but you gotta be disciplined, and you have to have a plan to follow up. Otherwise, it's, it's, it's just, you know, a demonstration. And, and I, I'm just appalled, and I think what an opportunity we lost. There were a million people there, and many of them were young males. And can you imagine if we'd had that organized now, and they were putting in whatever they were gonna put in a month? We'd have a big fund to work with (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, what is your perception of--what was the leadership of the march [March on Washington], as, as you perceive it, you know, as, as you looked at it then and now? I mean what--who was in charge of it? Speaker 1: Well, see, I wasn't, I wasn't close enough to that structure to know who dropped the ball. But I just know how to organize and get things done. And you don't do it unless you've got a working set of names and numbers. And, and not to have gotten that was to me incredible (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, it does seem--'cause most, most people that organize block clubs know you have to have your, your sign-in sheet. I mean most block club organizers know you have to have a sign in sheet and protect that sign-in sheet too-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and make sure that every has it-- Speaker 1: And I'm, you know--something Speaker 2: --has it. Speaker 1: --should have been--should have been (cough) it wasn't even thought of apparently. And it was too bad because this was a potential--and may still be, but there's no way of knowing, you know, unless we send something out: were you at the March on Washington? Sign this (laughter). But we lost a grand opportunity. I mean I just, and I think everybody there was willing to go home and put up money regularly and build a, a, a strong force for good. Story_ID: 358370 Speaker 1: Do you have any reflections on the national leadership of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in those days, Roy Wilkins, or any of the other national leaders? Speaker 2: Well, you know, Roy Wilkins is one of my favorite people. I mean I, I, I dearly loved him because he, he, he held that association together, and he was not really--he--it was a coalition. But Roy was not in charge of the logistics of the discipline of it, I don't think. And then maybe I'm being too critical. I don't know, because--but it just seem to me if you, when you bring that kind of group of people together, you ought to make something happen that is exciting, you know, and that has a long-term impact. Speaker 1: Well, I was just, I was asking about Roy Wilkins in general as a leader of NAACP, not just about the march [March on Washington], you know, what you, what you thought of him. Speaker 2: Oh, I think there's no question but that he was a, an effective leader. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And he had the, he had the great respect of the leadership of this country. Speaker 1: Now, now--okay. Speaker 2: I didn't have any differences with Roy. I think Roy had some differences with me (laughter), and I'm not sure it was, was all Roy. I think a lot of it might have been many. I, I think, see, we had, we--one of the reasons I was elected chairman was to have an orderly transition of leadership in the NAACP, and I knew that. See, Roy could--was past retirement age, and he was failing. And, and we'd had--and, and I think that's partly why I was selected chairman. Story_ID: 358371 Speaker 1: Now when were you elected chairman of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the-- Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Think it was '74 [1974] to '83 [1983]. Yeah, I served as-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --chairman from '74 [1974] to '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: What are your reflections on that, that period of time? I, I know there was a, there was a, at some point there was a big conflict with Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] with-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry, big conflict? Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a conflict with Benjamin Hooks at one point. I think you, you had to-- Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, what happened? Speaker 2: You know, when Benjamin Hooks took office, the NAACP was solidly in the black. And I take a lot of credit for that, because when I became chairman, NAACP was solidly in debt, deep in debt. And one of the first jobs I confronted was how to change this and how to get over this hump, and we manage to do it. Well, you know, I expect, you know, the people, you know, in charge to do their jobs well. And you know, I don't look over people's shoulders much until something goes wrong (laughter). And I woke up two years after Ben is out; we were back in the red again, and I was fit to be tired. And I dogged him after that (laughter), from then on, 'til he dogged me out. I was furious and I think rightly so. It was irresponsible, no excuse for it. And I guess they've recovered now, but it, there was no excuse. You know, this guy should have been watching the ship and doing what he's paid to do, and that's--you, you get an organization that's in the black when you take over, you keep it in the black, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like-- Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: --the organization is too important to let (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Speaker 1: --slip into-- Speaker 2: And I had worked-- Story_ID: 358372 Speaker 1: I mean those of us who were there, it was a, it was a st- and I think the one that, the thing that really made the difference was the Mississippi case [NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co., 1982]. You know about that? Speaker 2: No, tell us. Speaker 1: It was this, the group of merchants in Port Gibson, Mississippi, sued us for damages because the boycott had affected their businesses based on a law that had been passed by the Mississippi legislature [Mississippi State Legislature], which someone of those merchants had introduced and gotten passed. And I can always remember: I'm sitting in my library one, one, and it was one day in the week; it was not a weekend. And there was an interruption of the news, the program, for a news flash. And the guy said, "Million dollar judgment has been rendered against the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]." Well, I sat straight up in my chair. I said, "What? Million dollars." And then Roy Wilkins came on, and one of the reporters said, "Well, Mr. Wilkins, what are you gonna do about this?" And Mr. Wilkins said, "The Lord will take care of us." And then I really sat up, and I said, "The Lord will take care of those who take care of themselves," (laughter) to my, to the television. And I picked up the phone and called the secretary of the board in New York [New York], and I said I'm gonna be on a plane to New York in the morning. I want you to call me a list of a thousand members of the NAACP who can give us or lend us a thousand dollars tomorrow. And that's how it started. And on the plane going up there, I wrote out the language on this telegram, the mailgram that went to each one of these thousand people. And that went out, and then, you know, the miracle happened, you know. The, the people in this country good, of goodwill began to realize that the NAACP was in serious jeopardy. And before it was over, mail bags were coming in with money so that we had to hire extra help to process the mail and count the (laughter) money, from little people and big people. It was a, it was a miracle. And by the time that case was over, the NAACP was in the black. Speaker 2: Now this was in the '60s [1960s], right, when the-- Speaker 1: This is in the '60s [1960s], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, when this, this-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I remember that. I believe-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I remember that case. Speaker 1: And it was a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and the case itself we lost, and every step of the way, from the lower court, to the middle court, to the upper court. We did not win until we got to the United States Supreme Court in 1984. Was it '84 [1984]? Think it was '80 [1980], '83 [1983], '84 [sic. 1982], somewhere around then. Speaker 2: It took that long? Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, you know, it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --had to go through all the court process at three levels. And to this day, you know, I can, I can remember how, how rewarding it was to hear that decision when the United States Supreme Court unanimously held that boycotts are a form of free speech. And you have a right to boycott. It's not a restraint of trade (laughter). And that was a, you know, the NAACP case, not a, not a trade union case that gave them a, a tool that had never been decided before in the Supreme Court. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So it benefited the trade union movement as well as us, 'cause now it's inviolate, but 'til then it had not been. Story_ID: 358373 Speaker 1: Somehow, during the Benjamin Hooks' [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] administration, what, the money was--I mean the, the organization [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] ran into the red and-- Speaker 2: I can't quite hear you. Speaker 1: I said some, somehow during the Benjamin Hooks' administration the, the organization ran back into the, in, into the red, right? And you, how was it done? I mean how did it happen? I mean how did--I mean what was the money used for where, you know? Speaker 2: Well let me tell you, I, maybe I should take some of the blame for it because I was not watching the figures carefully. I assumed the treasurer was watching them. And I guess what I, I really have concluded is, as a, as a, and in retrospect, the one (unclear) thing you should never have in an organization is a close personal relationship between the treasurer and your chief executive. They should always be at arm's length. And in this case, the treasurer and the executive were both from the same city; they had been longtime friends; they sat on boards together; and they were very, very close. And I think that that's was our Achilles' heel. The treasurer just simply was, would not, did not lower the boom, I gather, when he should have on what was happening. He'd have to know. He was the treasurer. He was reading the--and I was relying on him, you know. So I learned a lason- lesson, which I have not an opportunity to put into practice. But I commended to everybody don't ever have your treasurer and your chief executive too close. Speaker 1: Now, now there was a worse scandal, I guess, that Ben Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.] was a part of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see, that's after my time. Speaker 1: --later. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: You, you weren't on the board. Speaker 2: I don't know a thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: --about Chavis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you weren't on the board when, when that went down? Speaker 2: No, I was not on the board. I had-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was way after my time. Story_ID: 358374 Speaker 1: Let me go back to ask you about Model Cities. We didn't talk about Model Cities, but, but tell us about what, your activities at Model Cities. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I had been working in Jefferson City [Missouri] for a number of years in something called the Department of Community Affairs. But it meant that I had to commute back and forth. I'd go up on Monday and stay all week and then come back on Friday from St. Louis [Missouri] to Jefferson City and back. And it was a very dynamic chap named Don Bourgeois [Donald Bourgeois], who was head of the Model City program in St. Louis, and he was looking for a deputy. And somehow or other we got together, and I said, "Well, I'll consider it." And in fact, I was chosen to be the deputy director. So I returned to St. Louis as a deputy director, Model City program, which I was just fine. I was very excited, you know, gonna work with Don Bourgeois. Speaker 1: Now what, what, what year is this? Speaker 2: I can't--don't hold me to the years in this 'cause I don't quite-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --remember, but-- Speaker 1: So, it is, it, what, about '65 [1965], '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], something like that. Speaker 1: Sixty--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we can get the thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Anyhow, we started out primarily to create these community organizations and to get them funded and get them doing things in their neighborhoods and all that. And then one day Don Bourgeois walked in and said, "I'm leaving." I said, "What," (laughter)? Just, you know, out of the clear blue. Apparently, he had been offered some position in Chicago [Illinois], from whence he'd come, and, and, and he left (laughter). I hadn't been there that long. So there I am, overnight I'd become acting director of the Model City program. Well, it turned out that, you know, I mean I got it together, and we worked it on. But my attitude was that this was federal money, and so it was not, you know, it wasn't--it was Model Cities, but it was really federal money, and so I didn't feel that I had to deal with patronage at all. You hire people on the basis of their ability and competence. And that's (laughter) when I ran into a collision with the mayor [Alfonso J. Cervantes], who wanted to--and the thing it all kind of got precipitated by my protege, [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith, who had graduated from law school and was doing some things with the state, but whom I'd had a conversation, I said, "But Wayman, why don't you come on back and practice law in St. Louis and help us with Model City program. We need a lawyer. We need, you know," and he did. Well, I didn't bother to tell the mayor. I just hired him. And (laughter) so I gave weekly reports to the mayor's office about what I was doing, you know, just bullets, you know. In one of those bullets I said Wayman Smith is now lawyer for the Model City Agency. And the mayor, of course--I, I, I'm speculating about this. I don't really--but I think the mayor was unsettled because, you know, I guess political people like the, the people to think that they're beholden to them, you know. That's the pra- the patronage thing, isn't it? I don't know much about--(unclear). Anyhow, the mayor was furious, apparently, when he found out that Wayman was aboard, and he didn't have anything to do with it, and Wayman knew. Story_ID: 358132 Speaker 1: Okay, so, Mayor Cervantes [Alfonso J. Cervantes] was dissatisfied with the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dis- dissatisfied. Speaker 1: --appointment of [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith. Speaker 2: And, and when I, I made it clear to him that I was not gonna be involved in this business of (unclear) so then he fired me [from the St. Louis Model Cities program] (laughter), which I knew he was gonna do (laughter). And I can remember I was on the elevator coming down that day with a friend of mine named Joe Clark [ph.]. And then Joe Clark was just, he said, "Margaret [HistoryMaker Margaret Bush Wilson], what's gonna happen?" I said, "I'm gonna get fired. What else is gonna happen?" I said, "I'm probably one of the people who can get fired and it won't hurt," (laughter). And it was one of the judges in the, in the, in the circuit was on the elevator, and he could hardly contain himself from laughing 'cause of the way I said it. Well, but you know. Story_ID: 358133 Speaker 1: So then that's when I went on to Lawyers for Housing [St. Louis, Missouri], and we did our thing. Speaker 2: Okay, oh, now, did you join them and, or did you, was it something that you started or something that you-- Speaker 1: No, I (cough) I was approached by the person who was putting that together. This was a program funded in part by the Department of Housing and Urban Development [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] that, on the theory that if you funded a law firm to do nothing but work with these neighborhood groups and do all their legal work, that this would expedite them being effective, called Lawyers for Housing. And the head of it was a chap named Peter Fischer. And he, he, not knowing him personally, but he knew about me from Model Cities. And he called me up and asked me if I wanted to come and join that firm. I said why not (laughter). So, there were three of us, three lawyers with a support staff, sponsored by the American Bar Association and funded in part by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. So we didn't have to earn any fees. We were paid lawyers. But our clients were all these neighborhood organizations who were doing their projects and developing their housing programs. And we had it going, and we did a good job with doing all their paperwork for them and every- and it, to this day, I'll never get over it. We had a thousand units of housing up for firm commitment, which was just a step before you get funded. And the neighborhood groups were all excited, and we ready to roll. And Mr. Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] got elected president, and with the stroke of a pen he canceled it all. And, and I had some of those (unclear) and I, I said to some of these neighborhoods, now we're gonna do this. We're gonna play by the rules. And one of, then they confronted me after this and said see, we should have burned the city down. And what can you say? It was, it was, it was ridiculous. You know, Nix- Nixon did that. Speaker 2: All that work. Speaker 1: All that work and all that effort over, and, and stroke of the pen he canceled it. So we never recovered. It was one of the kind of heartbreaking things in my life, because I, I really had faith in these neighborhood people. And they worked with us, and we had developed this, and it would have been exciting. And it just got canceled by a new president (laughter) who had no sense of anything that had to do with--it was all politics, as far as he was concerned. Story_ID: 358134 Speaker 1: Tell us about the land revitalization law (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Land reutilization. Speaker 1: Reutilization, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Land reutilization law [Municipal Land Reutilization Law of 1971]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: This is an interesting story. One of the things we discovered with this Lawyers for Housing [St. Louis, Missouri] and working with these neighborhood groups: the reason we had so much land around St. Louis [Missouri] that was just sitting there, some of it with buildings on it, some of--was that the city owned the land and could not give good title to it so somebody could buy it because it was something in the, in the law and the ordinance of the city they couldn't give good title. So we're sitting, these three lawyers sitting in Lawyers and Housing [sic. Lawyers for Housing] said now wait a minute. This is a problem we ought to be able to solve. If the, the city can't good, give good title, then we've got to figure out how it can give good title. And so we did a little research, and we discovered that Kansas City [Missouri] did not have that problem. Kansas City was doing just fine. The city trade--got their, that tax delinquency, take the property, and they could sell it. So we wandered up, went up, the three of us went up to Kansas City and sat down with the city attorney and found out how they did it. And they had an ordinance which gave them the right to (unclear). We went back to St. Louis and sat in offices and crafted us an ordinance for the City of St. Louis (laughter), which gave and, and corrected this, you know, this anomaly. Then we wandered over to the city counselor's office and sat down with him and explained to him what this was about, and why this ordinance needed to penned, and why he needed to approve it. And he says, "Well, it sound all right to me, good," so he signed off on it. And then we took it to the Board of Aldermen, and they passed it, and that's how land reutilization came into being. And after that, there was no problem. The city could, in fact, transfer title. So it was a major contribution. Story_ID: 358135 Speaker 1: But tell us about the--now, we didn't talk about the African constituencies tour, you know, that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--you, you sent NAACP representatives to Africa, right? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure that's how it ought to be characterized. What happened was that after I became chairman and had a chance to, you know, get an understanding of the, of how things were being done and what we were being done in the association, we all discovered that the thrust of W.E.B. Du Bois for reaching out to the Af- had just been lost in the shuffle. There was no contact between black America and Africa and Africans. And we weren't quite sure what the facts were, what the reasons were, but after talking about it in the executive committee, we did, we decided that one of the things we ought to do is go find out for ourselves what the situation was in Africa and in parts of Africa and what we could do about it. We were--how could we develop a, a liaison, because this was one of Du Bois' tenants, you know, he, he, he had--he was an Africanist, really. Okay, so the board approved and authorized the sending of--and I've forgotten how many people were involved, but there were four teams and about three or four people on each team, so it's about sixteen to twenty delegation divided up into teams. And then we divided Africa up into sections, not the upper part of Africa, which is, which is Arab and up around the Mediterranean, but all of black Africa and the (unclear). And we sent these teams to each of these countries just to, and you know, to ask questions and to find out what their situation was and a fact, you know, and then to, to find out how we can establish working relations and all that. It was a marvelous trip. Each one of them had on the team was a scrivener, a person who kept records and all. And it was made up of distinguished people from various walks of life. Story_ID: 358136 Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that, that went over? Speaker 2: Broadus Butler, does that name ring a bell? Used to be president of Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana]; from the medical field, Dr. Cyril Crocker, who was then head of one of the divisions at the medical school at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]; Cassandra Hastie [Cassandra Hastie Flipper], who was the daughter-in-law of Bill Hastie [William H. Hastie], that kind of people, real, really good people; Maida Kemp [Maida Springer-Kemp], who was high up in the trade union movement in this country, woman. The character of them was almost impeccable but wonderful people. And they left here by plane going to their various--'cause they had a whole itinerary we worked out. And I've forgotten now how long it took them, but they must have been gone at least two months, maybe more, on this trip. It was funded by one anonymous donor and funds from one of the foundations. And after they had made their assignments, we all met then in Nigeria for a debriefing before they came back to the states, and that's when I went over. I went over and met with them in Nigeria and spent I think maybe a couple of days there, you know, coordinating everything. And then we came back to the states and with the notes and the records that each one kept. We then had Denton Watson [Denton L. Watson], who was one of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] staffers in their publicity department to put together the report and recommendations. And I have a copy of it, which I didn't bring with me. But it's a wonderful document and lots of solid information, lots of thoughtful discussion and recommendations, which I think led to our creating on the board the committee on Africa [American Committee on Africa] and reestablished in the Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] tradition of, of this liaison. How it's been going now since then, I don't know, but the structure is certainly there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it-- Speaker 1: Who, who is Nigerian, was it Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasangjo]? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Was it--who is president of Nigeria then when you went over there? Was, was it-- Speaker 2: Was it Nyerere [Julius Nyerere]? Speaker 1: No, Nigeria. You said you went to Nigeria. It would be Obasanjo, or, or-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: --or Mohammed [Murtala Mohammed]? Speaker 2: No, I've forgotten who it was. Speaker 1: And this would be, be in '84 [1984]? Speaker 2: This was '80 [1980]. This was the early '80s [1980s] I think. Speaker 1: Early '80s [1980s], okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember. Story_ID: 358137 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was--and then they met with the top officials in each place they went, as long--and not only that but with others. It was a, it was a very exciting ef- you know, effort on the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] part. And I like to feel it was one of the major contributions in my administration of reaching out to, to the diaspora, as it were, to maintain these ties, 'cause we still don't have, despite that effort in that report, in my judgment, the kind of linkage between African Americans and Africa-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --which--is my, it's essential. We need to, we need to work at this. This is, is a huge continent and the cradle of civilization (laughter), you know. And here we are in this country with this abomination that got us here, but nonetheless, there are thousands of citizens, United States, who have roots in Africa. And somehow or other we ought to be closer. Speaker 2: Is it, was there resistance in the, in the NAACP to doing that, to, to reaching out to Africa? Speaker 1: There wasn't when I was there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --it just hadn't been done. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I have no idea what it is now, but it was certainly none. And interestingly enough, we did not have a single instance where we were not welcome in the whole continent. Wherever we went we were welcome with open arms, and people opened--you know, talked freely. So it, it, it's something that needs to be done and, and nurtured. Story_ID: 358138 Speaker 1: Did we fully cover the Jefferson Bank [Jefferson Bank and Trust Company] case? It seems like we, we, we mentioned it, but I don't know if we fully covered that. Speaker 2: I thought we--we didn't finish it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did, did we--yeah. Speaker 2: Well, maybe I should just talk a little bit more about it. That was a turning point in this city too for job opportunities, but there were some casualties. My husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] was the lead attorney for these defendants and managed eventually to get a federal court order that got most of them out of jail. We had to go the federal court (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Now, now what happened? There was a demonstration at Jefferson Bank-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --by CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], or, or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and yeah, these are mainly CORE people who were involved, not NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] people. But they got arrested and were fined and sent to jail, and Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] stayed almost a year in jail. Speaker 1: That's the current congressman of-- Speaker 2: Current con- well, no, his father. Speaker 1: He's retired, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: His father. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Finally, and the, the litigation was something. Every, even our, our office, which was then 40 Easton Avenue [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive], was the command post. And we didn't, they didn't, didn't close. We were open night and day because some of the--I can say this now I guess--some of the clerks and stenographers down in city hall and the courthouse would come and type for us at night and get our, so we'd have our pleadings ready for the next morning (laughter). It was hilarious. Anyhow, we finally got over to the federal court on writs of habeas corpus. I think it was writs of habeas corpus. And we had a hearing in the U.S. District Court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri] over there, and the district court ordered the release of these people (laughter). That's how we got them out of jail. The case itself wound its way through. And my recollection is that we never really won except for some of the, the demonstrators. But the impact was an economic one. Starting with the banks, they all changed their policy. So if you walk into any bank today in the St. Louis [Missouri] area, you will see all kinds of people working. And that is a direct result of the sacrifices that people made in the Jefferson Bank case to break up this system of excluding us. And I can always--I mean I don't know whether I mentioned this or not: the young man, I went into the bank-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --one of the banks when we were--they'd periodically they'd have celebrations of this. And here was this attractive young African American man with his nice tie on, looking very bank-ish. And I was delighted to see him, and then I said, "Oh, I'm glad to see you." I said, "And I, you know, I assume you're gonna come to the celebration of the Jefferson Bank." And I always remember to this day his comment. He said, "No." He said, "I got this job on my own." Did I tell--I think I've already said this. Speaker 1: You did, but it's a good, good place to reinsert it (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is good, yeah. Speaker 2: "I got this job on my own." And I looked at him and said very quietly, "Some take the heat so others can enjoy the treat." Story_ID: 358139 Speaker 1: What have been your primary activities I guess since the mid-'80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Well, I run a law office [Wilson and Associates, St. Louis, Missouri]. And I have spent a lot of time working for community. I thought I'd better make, make myself some money (laughter) so I would be secure in my old age. So I've been practicing law. And this is a good business, and I've done remarkably well. And it, it's sort of nice to have both combinations, that you make commo- a contribution to the community, and you also sustain yourself. Speaker 1: So are, are you still practicing law? Speaker 2: I will and am as of right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think it's gonna be much longer (laughter) though. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I haven't told anybody here that yet. But, yeah, I'm still--I don't do any court work, but you know, I'm primarily a business lawyer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --handling probate matters. And some of my clients have passed on, and I'm handling their estates. Story_ID: 358140 Speaker 1: Now you've been, you've reaped quite a number of awards, I guess, for past activities and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and current activities I suppose. Speaker 2: They're all over the place. Speaker 1: Right, right. What's been the most rewarding aspect of your, of your activities so far? Speaker 2: Let me tell you a story, which is to me the most rewarding of anything that's ever happened to me, not the, not the awards, not everything. When I was coming in to Lambert Airport [Lambert-St. Louis International Airport, St. Louis, Missouri], and I don't even remember from whence I was coming, but I was returning and had to pick up my luggage in the baggage area. And I was walking toward the baggage area when a young African American man began running toward me saying, "Mrs. Wilson [HistoryMaker Margaret Bush Wilson], Mrs. Wilson, I want to thank you." I didn't know him at all, and I said, "Who is this (laughter)?" And, and I said, "Thank me for what?" And he said, "I'm a mechanic out here at Lambert Airport." I said, "Oh, that's wonderful." He said, "No, you don't understand. I'm a graduate of Ranken Trade School [David Ranken Trade School; Ranken Technical College, St. Louis, Missouri]." And I put down my luggage and hugged him right there at the (laughter)--that's my greatest reward. Speaker 1: That's somebody that did remember or did know. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He's a mechanic at the airport and a graduate of Ranken Trade School. Story_ID: 358141 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you, I, I--see that vase right there? I, I received that about a month ago or so from the national board of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. They were, they met here for the first time in my memory. I don't think they've ever met in St. Louis [Missouri], but they met here, and they gave--and when I accepted, I said to them--and I think this is where I think the focus has to be--I said, "African Americans in the United States are 33 million strong. There are 33 million of us, more or less. That's the size of the country of Canada, and Canada is about thirty--(laughter). So we're really a country inside a country. But, African Americans own less than one half of one percent of the business assets of this country. And that is our Achilles' heel, 'cause our gross national product must be tremendous, you know, what we earn. We don't own, and that's our unfinished agenda. We have got to own a part of the business assets of this country." Speaker 1: Okay. We (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how you do that is, is something that people with good minds and appropriate backgrounds need to sit down and talk about. We need to develop a strategy and get on with it, which is what the NAACP has done for many years. I think it's the unfinished agenda of the NAACP. Story_ID: 358142 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently? Speaker 2: Not really, nope. I, you know, early on, I learned that you can get a lot done if you don't care who gets credit (laughter). So I've never been consumed by this business of who gets credit. I just wanna get it done. And so I've been rather successful. I mean I'm trying of think of something that I undertook that we didn't work. And the only one I can think about is that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] thing I told you about where we had these things ready for firm commitment, and he cut off the funds. But other than that, it's been I think a remarkable swath of achieving things that make a difference, which goes back to one of the first things I said when we started this interview, that my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] used to preach (laughter): make this a better place in which to live. And I've worked at doing that most of my life, and I think I'll keep on doing it as long as I can. Story_ID: 357931 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about Celia, the story of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --Celia, the 19th century slave who had the famous Missouri case [State of Missouri v. Celia, a Slave, 1855]. So-- Speaker 2: Right, in the matter of Celia. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, first of all, let me say that she is my heroine and my inspiration. Whenever I get discouraged, or disheartened, or feel upset, I think about Celia, and then I get my act together. As you said, she was a young slave here in Missouri, female. And I'm not certain of the age now, but this could be verified, but very young age, maybe thirteen, fifteen, something like that. Speaker 1: I think she was eighteen at, at the time this, the case was, was-- Speaker 2: The time-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the dates, the date out there on the picture is 1836 to 1844, so she didn't-- Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: --make twenty. So she was eighteen at the time she, you know. Speaker 2: She was eighteen-- Speaker 1: Yeah, at the-- Speaker 2: --at the time she was-- Speaker 1: She was executed. Speaker 2: --executed. Speaker 1: Right, yes. Speaker 2: So that means if she was eighteen at the time she was executed, so that she was fourteen or fifteen years old when all this started. An old, older, I guess I should--'cause he [Robert Newsom] may not have been that old--man in Callaway County [Missouri] I guess lost his wife, and he was lonely and missing her. And somebody said why don't you get yourself a slave girl? Now this, this is 19th century mores we're dealing with, and this was not unusual. And so he actually bought her as a slave at that tender age and used her for his personal and physical satisfaction sexually. She had, I think she may have had two children by him and was pregnant with the third child when this saga started to unfold. And as I understand it, she, this last, the third pregnancy was very uncomfortable, and she was not feeling well, and she didn't want to bothered with anybody. But he insisted on his so-called privileges with his slave. And he came down to her cabin, and she had had it and wasn't gonna tolerate it another minute. And she picked up a, I think it was some kind of log or something. Speaker 1: It was cord of wood, they ask her-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a long cord of wood. Speaker 2: And I'm sure, hit him with all of her strength and killed him right there in the floor of her cabin. And I, you know, as I think about it, it must have been, it was just awful, just awful. Well, then what to do? Here she is, you know, with this person, and she had this big fireplace, and so she just pushed him into the fireplace. And that's how she solved what was her problem. Well, you, you want me to go into all these details? Speaker 1: Well, no, the significance of this that she was actually brought to--they, they didn't believe she did I believe. And then she was brought to-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: The people, the neighbors didn't believe she had done it for a long time 'cause they didn't believe that a slave girl could do that. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And the case (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But-- Speaker 1: --was finally, they, they-- Speaker 2: But, what she-- Speaker 1: --finally--yeah. Speaker 2: --did was to tell someone, some man that she thought was her friend, and he went and told on her. And then they brought her to trial, convicted her of murder, and sentenced her to hang. And on one day in 1855 I guess it was, they hanged her from the courthouse steps in Callaway County, as I remember it. I think it was Callaway County. Story_ID: 357932 Speaker 1: And I guess what struck me the first time I read it was what a nightmare this life must have been for her [Celia]. And then I said--I, I think I must have read that, that piece in The Midwest Journal about three times, 'cause I--you know, it's, it was just so moving and so distressing. And I finally said to myself nothing that happens to me in life can compare with what this young woman went through, and so she's gonna be my inspiration (laughter), you know. I'm just not gonna let anything bother me because nothing can happen to me that would compare with this. And I just carry this with me the rest of my life. She's--I finally--I was so obsessed for a while with her that I said I gotta find a way to get rid of this obsession. And that's when I ran into Solomon Thurman one day and said got, almost had your--, "Solomon, why don't you paint a picture of Celia for me." And he said, "I'll do it." Solomon Thurman is the artist here. And so he started out and he'd bring me these drawings, and I kept rejecting them, nope, nope. And funny, I said to him, "Solomon, you have to talk with her eyes. Her eyes have to tell the story," (laughter). And then a few days later he brought me he sketch of the picture that's now on the wall in my office. I said that's it. And then he finished it, and we had a big unveiling, and it was just wonderful. So now she hangs on the wall in my office. And I'm, you know, I'm still inspired by this young woman to keep right on. You know, you just can't let anything discourage you because nothing compares to what she went through. Speaker 2: Let, let me ask you this, now, this, this is a, and that is, it was a groundbreaking legal case too in the State of Missouri that she even had a trial. I think it was-- Speaker 1: Oh, that--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, is a, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, is it-- Speaker 2: I think that's why it's very important. Speaker 1: -and, and, and that she had any rights at all-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --which I found interesting. Story_ID: 357933 Speaker 1: So, let, let me ask you this question: when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, I'll let others decide that. I don't, you know--the best thing I've done was to have a wonderful son [Robert E. Wilson III] (laughter) who is my pride and joy. And, and if he could rear successfully an African American male in this society, that's a (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, it certainly is. Speaker 2: And my husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] and I did that. He's a lawyer and not practicing lawyer, but successful in his, his world, and is far away. He, he's down in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and married to a Brazilian woman. So, I get a chance to go visit regularly (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, that's-- Speaker 2: It's a great country. Speaker 1: Okay, so, what constitutes your family here in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Well, very little now, although it once was quite large 'cause my mother [Margaret Casey Bush] had brothers and, one brother and lots of sisters. My family here consists primarily of my brother [James T. Bush, Jr.] and myself. We live in the family homestead that my parents bought in, in the 19- I think 1938. And one of my favorite things to do is read. I love books, so I have a great library at home. And I curl up in my favorite chair and (laughter), and read. And life is kind of wonderful. Story_ID: 357934 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we need to mention before I ask my final question? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think we've done a good job. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. The last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I don't really know the answer to that. I don't think I've ever even thought about it. How would I like to be remembered? Well, I'm not sure this answers the question, but I think this country, the United States, is in many ways still the hope of the world as far as I'm concerned. I was just talking to someone the other day about the fact that there's all that turmoil over there in Iraq, but we've got lots of Arabs in this country, and nobody's, nobody's upset. You know, we're getting along. This is a very interesting, fascinating country. And I just wanted to move so that it lasts a long, long time. And that will depend on the people in this country, majority of them, who understand that in order to be a great people you have to be humane, intelligent, and compassionate. And if we can get enough of Americans to be humane, intelligent, and I'm not talking about they have to be educated; I said--we'll be on our way. And there's a lot more we can still accomplish. Story_ID: 357935 Speaker 1: This is the last question about-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) our [U.S.] Supreme Court justice. Speaker 2: I did not know Clarence Thomas until the summer, I suppose it was the same summer that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was, left office, '74 [1974], is it? I'm not sure about the date, but I think it's that same summer. But I was at a luncheon meeting here in St. Louis [Missouri] for some civil and community group, and seated next to me was the attorney general of Missouri, Danforth [John Danforth]. And while we were in the midst of table conversation, he said to me, "By the way, you would be interested in knowing that I'm bringing a young man out from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] to be on my staff in the Attorney General's Office." He was then attorney general. I said, "Oh." And he said, then he said, "And he's African American." I said, "Oh, very good." And we went on to the--then he came back and he said, "Getting back to that young man I was talking about, do you know any place where he could stay in St. Louis while he's studying for the bar this summer? I'm not sure, sure Jefferson City [Missouri] is very exciting for a young man, you know." And without a moment's hesitation, I said, "Sure." He said, "Where is that?" I said, "In my home," (laughter), and he said, "Oh." Well, it turns out my son [Robert E. Wilson III] was not coming home for the summer. My son was in his, finish, had just finished his first year in Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]--I think it was, yeah--and he was gonna work in Washington [D.C.] in the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] office. He had gotten a job, and he was gonna live--so he wasn't coming home, and I was brokenhearted (laughter). So here comes this question from the attorney. I said, "He could stay in Robert's room, and it's fine, and then I'll have me a young person in the house." And so I was delighted, never seen Clarence in my life, didn't know him, you know, nothing. But the, the attorney general had recommended him. I had confidence that he was of good character and all that, so I said, "Yes." And he said, "Well, where is that?" I said, "In my home." He said, "Really?" I said, "Sure." I said, and I had told him that my own son was not coming home. And so that's how it happened. I had never seen Clarence, didn't know a thing about him. And then I didn't hear any more from Danforth, and I had kind of put it in the back of my head. And one day in May the doorbell rang. And I went to the door, and there at the door was somebody who looked like an African prince. And I said ah, bet this is Clarence Thomas (laughter). So I opened the door and here was this deep basso--you know, he's got a deep basso voice even then. And he said, "My name is Clarence Thomas." I said, "I know, and I've been expecting you. Please come in," (laughter). And that's how it started. Story_ID: 357936 Speaker 1: He, he stayed in Robert's [Robert E. Wilson III] room; and a very disciplined person. Robert had some weights (unclear) weights. They were down the (unclear). One day I heard a huge noise upstairs, and here is Clarence [Clarence Thomas] doing the weights up in the bedroom. I said, "Oh no, Clarence, we can't--you have to go down in the (unclear) to do that," (laughter). But that was the only time. But he, he spent the summer. And I had only one requirement: be home for dinner at six o'clock, for us to have dinner at six o'clock. And my then ailing ex-husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] was also there 'cause he was, had emphysema, and I was kind of looking after him for that. And we used to have dinner every evening at the dining room table. And my husband and Clarence would have these knock-down-drag-out arguments about first one thing and another (laughter), you know. It was great fun. And he stayed all summer, from that time until he got ready to go up to--and when he got ready to leave, he said to me, "How much do I owe you?" I later learned he didn't have a quarter. (Laughter) He couldn't have paid me. I said, "Clarence, you don't owe me a thing. I want you to make me one promise." He said, "What's that?" I said, "If you are ever in a position to help some young persons or persons like I have done for you, I want you to do it." And we shook hands, and he went on his way. And now, you know, he's on the Supreme Court of the United States, incredible, incredible. And about, oh, I could get the date off of the--I got an award from the bar association of St. Louis [Bar Association of Metropolitan St. Louis]. And they had the ceremony out at the art museum [Saint Louis Art Museum, St. Louis, Missouri]. I think it was the art museum. And I went, you know, to get my award. And I kind of glanced, and I said oh, that does look like Clarence Thomas. You know, I just glanced at this guy, was in--and then I went on and then--but it was Clarence Thomas. He came all the way out here for that (laughter) bar association event without telling me, and he was in the audience. (Laughter) I can't--every time I think about it I get flabbergasted. A United States Supreme Court justice comes to my ceremony getting--and it was just wonderful. I, I--(unclear)--the, the, the presiding officer, they were kind of flustered too 'cause they didn't quite know how to, whether he should be on the podium. I said, "No, just let him sit there. When I get ready to, then I'll ask him to come." So I, when I be--as they were giving me award, I said, "I understand that we have a, a distinguished member of the United States Supreme Court present, and I'd like for him to join me on the podium." I said, "Mr. Justice Thomas, where are you?" (Laughter) And he stood up and came up and made a great comment. And then, you know, I, I got my award, and he went on back to Washington [D.C.] (laughter). And we keep in touch. And Clarence been a conservative for a long time, and, and that's fine; I ain't got no problem. But he's a very decent human being, and I'm glad I had a part in helping him to get where he is. Story_ID: 357937 Speaker 1: Well, from the foliage in the back, I know this is a picture of me in my dining room. And it was a celebration of one of my birthdays, 1991. I was born on January the 30th. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a family picture of my sister, my brother [James T. Bush, Jr.], my son, and my mother's dearest friend in our home after her funeral, so that would be in 1974, yeah. Speaker 2: It's a larger picture of my family and our extended family, all of whom had gathered in my home after mother's death in 1974. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And my son are on that picture as well as my sister and cousins, and very dear friends of my mother are seated here who grew up with her as a girl. Speaker 1: This is my sister and myself with the pallbearers, or most of them, who were at my mother's funeral. They were all sons of family friends. Speaker 2: And that's a precious picture of my son and his first born son. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What are their names? Speaker 2: Robert E. Wilson III is the son, and Gabriel Manigoli [ph.] Wilson [Gabriel Wilson] is the grandson. Speaker 1: About what year is that do you think? Speaker 2: I'm not sure--'7 [1997]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that previous picture was 1997? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Her name is Cynthia Morgan Casey, and she was my mother's mother, so my grandmother on my mother's side. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you have any idea when that was taken? Speaker 1: I have not. I do not know. It's been in the family for a long time. Speaker 2: Like turn of the century, or-- Speaker 1: (OFFCAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm sorry. I wasn't rolling, who was that? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you tell us who that is again so we record it? Speaker 2: This, this is my mother, and her name was Margaret Berenice Casey Bush [Margaret Casey Bush]. Berenice is spelled B-E-R-E-N-I-C-E. Speaker 1: And that is my mother holding me. She's Margaret Berenice Bush, and I'm Margaret Berenice Bush [HistoryMaker Margaret Bush Wilson] (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: My mother is in the middle on the first level; both sisters are on both sides of her, and then one sister in the back. I don't know who the gentleman is. But these are my mother's siblings, some of them. There were six girls and one boy, but that's not the boy. I don't know (unclear)--and I think this was taken on a boat excursion. Speaker 2: John W. Casey, my maternal grandfather, my mother's father. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, once again, his first name is John? Speaker 2: John W. Casey. And I don't know what the W. stands for. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That is my devoted son, Robert E. Wilson III. I think that was taken--what's this, 2006? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 2: About two or three years ago, it should be. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of my sister, baby picture, Ermine, E-R-M-I-N-E, Casey Bush [Ermine Bush Byas]. She's now Ermine Byas, B-Y-A-S. She was a darling little baby (laughter). Speaker 2: And that is my father when he was a younger man, James T. Bush, Sr. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That is an early picture of my mother, Margaret Berenice Casey when I think before she married. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Those are my parents, my mother and father, on their fortieth wedding anniversary I think it was, James T. Bush and M. Berenice Casey Bush. Speaker 1: (Unclear) that's 1956 then-- Speaker 2: That'd be about 1956. Speaker 1: That is a picture of the members of a social group with which I belong of young women who started out together, many of us, right after we finished high school, and we are still meeting. And I'm on the end here on the, on the right. Speaker 2: Is that The Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.]? Speaker 1: Not The Girl Friends. It's called, it's called the French name for club, the clique, C-L-I-Q-U-E. And we just had a lovely Christmas party out of the art museum [Saint Louis Art Museum, St. Louis, Missouri] yesterday for lunch. They were still meeting. And that was taken, oh-- Speaker 2: And there you are. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm on the end. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Five, six years ago? Speaker 1: No, more than that. These were, we were young then (laughter), yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 1: She said we're fifty-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, six, four, 1961? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961] or '51 [1951]. Speaker 1: Sixty. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sixty. All right, correct that. Speaker 1: June '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's 1965. Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a family picture of my mother and her, some of her sisters, and the children of the sisters, and my son and my mother's grandson. The ones in the back are all children of those up front. Speaker 2: It's a picture that was taken of me about the time I was elected to the board of the Monsanto Company. And I don't remember exact date. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Approximately? Speaker 2: It would be in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That is a picture of the group of persons who were admitted to the Illinois bar in 1946, and I'm there in the middle with that fancy hat on (laughter). Speaker 1: You are right there. Speaker 2: Right there. And my mother is over there with a cute hat on too. And we went to Springfield, Illinois, where we went to be sworn in...