 Story_ID: 543609 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me? Speaker 2: My name is Royce Barry West [HistoryMaker Royce West], R-O-Y-C-E, B-A-R-R-Y, W-E-S-T. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: Nine, twenty-six, fifty-two [September 26, 1952]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Annapolis, Maryland. Speaker 1: And what it your occupation? Speaker 2: Attorney. Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: The state capital of Texas; Austin, City of Austin. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: The May, May the 11th, 2010. Story_ID: 543610 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you a few questions that I'm sure you can answer very quickly for us. Speaker 2: Let's see. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Let's see given that I'm an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] man, purple and gold. Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat, what's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Everything my wife [Carol Richard West] will not allow me to eat. I'm actually a seafood guy. I see food and I eat it. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite time year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is actually autumn. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite, let's see Jamaica. Speaker 1: And is there something that you consider a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: If it is going to be, it's up to me. Story_ID: 543611 Speaker 1: --Okay let's start with your mother, as far as your family tree. Tell me your mother's name, where she was born and when she was born, if you know? Speaker 2: She always hides her age from everybody, but I think I know though. My mother's name is Gloria Evelyn Morris Ashford [Gloria Morris Ashford]. And she was born in California. And she the year of her birth is probably 1930. Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother. Speaker 2: You know Mom, is a, is a, is a- adopted by my grandparents. My mother and her sister was adopted by grandparents Evelyn, Samuel [Samuel Morris] and Evelyn Morris. My grandfather was the African American chief machinist mate, in the U.S. Navy. Served at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] on some of the ships, and ultimately was allowed to be a chief machinist mate in the U.S. Navy. So, we settled in Annapolis, Maryland, where my mother and my aunt graduated from high school there [Wiley H. Bates High School, Annapolis, Maryland]. And ultimately went to Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]; oh excuse me Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]. And she attended Virginia Union and ultimately fell in love with my father [Willis West, Jr.]. And they ended up getting married. Story_ID: 543612 Speaker 1: Now, tell me what was your relationship like with your mom [Gloria Morris Ashford]? Speaker 2: Well, my relationship with my mother is she's my best friend, okay. And fortunately she lives probably five minutes from me. This Mother's Day, 2010, I had the opportunity, you know, to go over, take her to a movie. That's what she wanted to do, she wanted to go to a movie. So, I took her to a movie, so, we've, got a pretty good relationship. You know, I would say during a week's time, I probably talk to her at least five days. And see her maybe once or twice during that time period. So, we have, we have pretty special relationship. As, as well as my father [Willis West, Jr.] even though we're not the same city. And so, it's a special relationship with mom and dad. Story_ID: 543613 Speaker 1: Did she [West's mother, Gloria Morris Ashford] share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she yes to answer the question. Some of the stories concerning, especially when she was in school, she was in, in high school, Bates High School [Wiley H. Bates High School], big high school in Annapolis, Maryland. And she used to when she like a cheerleader there. And of course I played a little football, when I was in high school [Wilmer-Hutchins High School, Dallas, Texas] and college [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas]. And needless to say, she wanted to tell me about some of the times when she was a cheerleader in some of the games, some of the exciting games, that occurred when she was high school. And, and then she met the love of her life, which, which is my father [Willis West, Jr.]. And some of the things they used to do, which I better not talk about (unclear) right now. But, the reality is that they went on, and, and married. And I'm, I'm one of, of three siblings, associated with that marriage. Story_ID: 543614 Speaker 1: All right, well tell me about your father, first tell me his name and where he was born? Speaker 2: Willis Kevin West [Willis West, Jr.] and he was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma to Willis West [Willis West, Sr.], my grandfather and, and my grandmother [Maude West] excuse me. Needless to say my father ended up leaving home in the third grade. See you got to understand that my grandfather was kind of in the middle of the race riots, in Oklahoma, where you remember the Black Wall Street [Greenwood, Tulsa, Oklahoma]. My grandfather was a business owner there, during that time. In fact he owned a restaurant during that particular time and as, you know, told us a lot of stories about exactly what occurred. But, my, my fat- my grandfather was, is a hard man, was a hard man and my father pretty independent minded also, is pretty hard. And so he left home in the third grade and basically took a train and ultimately ended up in, in the, up on the East Coast. He had taken trains and odd jobs along the way. And he eventually went into the [U.S.] military, was at that point that he met my mother [Gloria Morris Ashford]. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about your relationship with your, your grandfather, or did you just, you said you had some stories that were told about the time during Black Wall Street era (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I, yeah fortunately I, I knew both of my grandfathers. So, let me start with my paternal grandfather, who is Willis West also. My paternal grandfather was born in Oklahoma. I can't tell you the exact city he was born in. But, I, I do recall stories that he told about living in Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: More specifically in San Antonio [Texas] and my Uncle Robert [Robert West (ph.)]. My Great Uncle Robert got into a fight with an Anglo gentleman in San Antonio [Texas], the statute of limitations is already run, so he ended up killing him. And needless to say it was over an incident where he was being disrespected by the Anglo gentleman. And so the family had to leave San Antonio and they relocated to Oklahoma. Once in Oklahoma, the family began buying property and going into business. And ultimately my grandfather ended up buying restaurant or buying or--even starting a restaurant and buying a bunch of property there in Oklahoma. And where he, you know, lived until the day he died. Story_ID: 543615 Speaker 1: My grandfather on my mother's [Gloria Morris Ashford] side on the other hand is from North Carolina. Speaker 2: And tell me his name? Speaker 1: Samuel J. Morris [Samuel Morris], he ended up in the [U.S.] Navy in--of course that was before I was born. He was in involved in World War II [WWII], in fact he was there at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii]. And some of the stories that he'd tell me about that was just fascinating. Speaker 2: Will you share one with us? Speaker 1: Yes, and, and let's talk about the day that Pearl Harbor was bombed. You know, back then only African Americans could pretty much only be mess, mess guys. And so you know he'd be cooking and things of that nature. And he told me he said, "Roycie [HistoryMaker Royce West]," that's what he says to me, "I want to tell you about Pearl Harbor." He said, "The day that occurred I just finished my mess duties. And I came out on the ship deck in order to, you know, smoke my pipe. And you should have seen those airplanes coming down." And he started talking about the Arizona [USS Arizona] (unclear) and I can't recall ship that he was on. But, you know he was witness to the Arizona being bombed and ultimately sinking. And I could feel the, the passion in his voice about the loss of life that occurred on that particular day. Not only in his voice but also in his demeanor as he, as he as telling the story. So, I, I will always remember that. And in addition, Daddy Morris as we called him, was an avid crossword puzzle guy. And so every Sunday in Annapolis [Maryland], I can't think of the name of the local paper there but there'd be puzzle. And if you would win the puzzle, if you won the puzzle it, you'd en- if you solve the puzzle excuse me. You would end up getting a prize. And so every Sunday after church what he would have me do is to go around the community and get as many puzzles as I could. And every puzzle I got he'd give me twenty-five cents. Because he, was he, be, be very meticulous in trying to solve as many of those pu- puzzles as possible. Now, that helped me in terms of recognizing words, 'cause I'd, I'd sit in his lap and just kind of watch him trying solve the pu- puzzles and things like that. And so ultimately he never won, but it also gave me a good appreciation of exactly what was going on in his mind. And some of the thing that really impacted his life, and some of things that he loved doing. Story_ID: 543616 Speaker 1: Did you grandparents own--the Morris grandparents [Evelyn Morris and Samuel Morris], did they own a property that they lived on? Speaker 2: Yes, they, they did, and they, we still do, it's still in the family. It's in Annapolis, Maryland, and it's in an area called Parole [Maryland], Parole is the historic area for African Americans in the Annapolis area. You got to understand, Annapolis is the sailing capital of the world. And so we still own that property there as well Ok- in Oklahoma. We still own the property that my [paternal] grandfather [Willis West, Sr.] and grandmother [Maude West] lived in. Speaker 1: Can you go any further back in your family tree? Speaker 2: In terms of knowing individuals no, but, you know, ob- obviously I can my great-grandmothers I, my grandfather told me about my great-grandmother. But, you know in terms of knowing them personally I didn't know them. Speaker 1: Okay, what did he tell you about your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Well, what he told me about 'em is that they were kind of people who were pretty independent. They talked about slavery. And they talked about some of the trials and tribulations that they encountered. And some of the personal humiliations and degradations that they had to suffer. And, but they were pretty independent and strong minded people, who were religiously based. Speaker 1: Do you remember their names? Speaker 2: You know, no I can't sit up and say off the top of my head that I do but I know that my great-grandmother--no, I can't say off the top of my head that I do. Speaker 1: And what about your, on your father's [Willis West, Jr.] side? Speaker 2: That's on my father's side. Speaker 1: Okay, what about your, on your mother's [Gloria Morris Ashford] side (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I can't recall past my grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay, fine. Story_ID: 543617 Speaker 1: Do you have siblings? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: Can you tell me, give me their names and the progression in which they were born? Speaker 2: Kevin Willis West [Kevin West], he was born, he's a couple years older than I am. He works for Southwest Airlines [Southwest Airlines Co.]. I'm the number two son. I, my, I had a brother by the name of Larry West, and he's deceased, he died back in 1978. And I have a sister by the name of Zina, Zina Obasuyi [Zina Ashford Obasuyi] now. As well as a sister Diane [ph.], and a brother by the name of Cornell [Cornell Mack] and also Cornelius [ph.]. Story_ID: 543618 Speaker 1: Can you recall your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory would be in Annapolis, Maryland and it would be during the wintertime. When I thought the snow was just up to my neck and I recall going through my mother [Gloria Morris Ashford] asking me to go to the store my dad [Willis West, Jr.] asked me to go to the store. And I tracked through what was a tobacco field in order to go to the store. That's when you asked me that, that's the thirst--first thing that comes to mind. And then secondly being on my sled we lived in an area that had a hill. And one of the favorite pastimes of the kids in the community was, obviously sleigh riding. And so we had a, we had a hill called Hicks hill [Hicks Avenue] and many of us would traverse around the corner up the street and in order to go to the top of the hill to ride, ride our sleds. When I think about my early childhood I also think about Parole Elementary [Parole Elementary School; Walter S. Mills Parole Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland]. Where Mr. Mills [Walter S. Mills] was the principal and Mrs. Swan [ph.] in the fifth grade, was my fifth grade teacher. And Mr. Richardson [ph.] was my teacher in the fourth grade. Ms. Swan made an indelible impression on my life. From the standpoint that she taught mathematics and I'm, I was pretty good in mathematics. And it was that year that I left Annapolis and ended up moving to Germany. Because my mother had remarried at that time to my stepfather [Benjamin Ashford (ph.)], and he was in the [U.S.] Army. And it was, it was positioned and serviced in, in Augsburg, Germany. Story_ID: 543619 Speaker 1: I wanna go back so that we stay in elementary school [Parole Elementary School; Walter S. Mills Parole Elementary School] in Annapolis [Maryland] and that era. And I wanna ask you about you gave a good description about the winter time. But what sounds, sights and smells take you back to that time to your childhood (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh and that I guess probably the reason, I, I love seafood is because of all the seafood. And my mother [Gloria Morris Ashford] and dad [Willis West, Jr.] used always go get oysters. And I, I, I don't like oysters today. But, I mean they'd have these oysters and have little hot sauce and, and mix the hot sauce with a little mayonnaise and a little ketchup and they'd just, they'd have a great time. It was the time where my father used to also be a chef at the beach. And he would, and, and I didn't know who all these people were but he would take myself and my brother--oldest brother at the time to the beach and he'd have to spend the whole day at the beach with him. 'Cause he was, he was a cook there. Now, you'd have Jackie Wilson come through there, you'd have James Brown come through there, I didn't know who these people were. But in retrospect I recognize that they were coming down there, you know. After, after I got a little older, but they would come through there and always be the singers and stuff like that. Well, the thing about my childhood I also think about the church, First Baptist Church in Annapolis, Maryland. Reverend Bowman [Leroy Bowman] a tall good looking man, with a striking, striking physique and personality that was second to none. I think about that. I think about going to BTU [Baptist Training Union], my grandmother [Evelyn Morris] used have us at, we'd be at, all of us know this. We would be at church that mo- no, we would be in Sunday school, we'd in church and we'd be in BTU. And so all of us know that. And so, I, I think about that so, and, and, and the church was right down by the harbor. And so you could, you could smell the, the cooking of the seafood and all of that there. Speaker 1: Okay, so what sounds do you, do you remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh I mean Jackie Wilson-- Speaker 1: Oh the, the music-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) James Brown the music, that I'd hear they--you know, the R and B. (Singing) "You better stop girl" ['Doggin' Around'], yeah, yeah know all those types of songs, yeah. Story_ID: 543620 Speaker 1: You talked a little about, about your elementary school. What was the name of the elementary school that you attended? Speaker 2: Parole Elementary [Parole Elementary School; Walter S. Mills Parole Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Parole? Speaker 2: Parole, right. Speaker 1: And tell me why Ms. Swanson [ph.] or a little bit more about Ms. Swanson and Mr. Richardson [ph.]? Speaker 2: It's actually Ms., Ms. Swan [ph.]. Speaker 1: Ms. Swan I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And Mr. Richardson was my fourth grade teacher and he taught English and for some reason I will always remember him. And I can't think with any particularity, what if anything he did that was significant in my life. But, I remember him as a teacher. Ms. Swan was my math teacher. And I can remember the patience that she had with each and every one of the students. In terms of making certain that we understood exactly what the lesson was about. And that, that we understood it before we moved on. Speaker 1: And so was, was there a teacher who, influenced you any way, or encouraged you? Speaker 2: Well, you know in, in elementary I'd say those two teachers. But, and, in junior high school [Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas] it would have been Mrs., Mrs. White [Gloria White], all right. And I, I guess we, we'll talk about that when we get to my junior high years. Story_ID: 543621 Speaker 1: What other activities were you involved in, in your elementary school years, sports, music anything of that nature? Speaker 2: Well, I jo- 4-H Club, I think we had, we had that there, but mu- that, that was pretty much it. During my elementary years up to at least the fifth grade [at Parole Elementary School; Walter S. Mills Parole Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland]. And you've got to understand that in the fifth grade I ended up moving to Germany and I was still in el- elementary school there in Germany [Augsburg American Elementary School, Augsburg, Germany]. And that's where I got in more and more activities. Story_ID: 543622 Speaker 1: Tell me about the, the neighborhood that you lived in? I want you to take me around the community and, and tell me about the friends, about the store owners. And maybe even the occupations of some of the others' parents? Speaker 2: Well you know, very good question, because when you said that the very first thing I thought about, I've always worked all of my life, even back then. When I was in the fourth and fifth grade I was pretty industrious. And so, and I can't think of the lady's name but, it she was one of the elders in the community. And so she always wanted someone to go and pick up wood for her, for her fireplace. So, I'd always do it, okay, and she'd pay me ten cents or whatever the case may be. So, I do that and then of course I had my [maternal] granddad [Samuel Morris] I used do, you know, go out and get those crossword puzzles for. And I would go up to the store the local store was called Finkelstein [Finkelstein's Store, Annapolis, Maryland]. You know, Annapolis [Maryland] is a, the, dominant population I think group there is going to be a, it's a Jewish community. And so the store in the community was Finkelstein. And when you asked that question Finkelstein came to mind. And so I'd take my little money and I'd go up Finkelstein and I'd get me some Sugar Daddies, you don't know anything about that. And get me a little ice cream and things like that. We used to have a lot of cherry trees and so we'd, we'd get as sick as a dog, getting, hitting those cherry trees and getting all the cherries off of 'em. And eating 'em until we were just turn all shades of colors, because we'd had so many of 'em. So, I, I--that. Being able to go around the corner to some of my friends' homes and I can't think of Howard's [ph.] last name but I had a friend by the name of Howard. Can't it's been years ago so I can't think of his last name. I'd go over there and we'd just kind of sit around just kind of do boorish things, things like that. There was a, a beautiful young lady by the name of Joyce De Val [ph.]. Joyce was one of the students in the school. And I thought she was one of the most beautiful women in the world until I met Jewel Chambers [ph.] and, and so on and so forth. And all of us ended up being great friends. Many of us went to, went to church together [at First Baptist Church, Annapolis, Maryland] and so, you know it was a small community, it was, it was pretty much a, a middle class community back then there, because the teachers and Mr. Mills [Walter S. Mills] the principal of the, of the elementary school [Parole Elementary School; Walter S. Mills Parole Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland] lived right there in the community. Ms. Swan [ph.] still has a home there and, she's since deceased. Lived there, so a lot of the teachers and a lot of the middle class people at the community in, in that city lived in that community. Speaker 1: Do you know any of the professions of some of your classmates or friends lived that lived in that community? Speaker 2: You mean their current professions? Speaker 1: Then. Speaker 2: Well, I mean I was a kid so I mean some of the professions of the people lived there we have ministers, we had teachers, we had doctors, you name it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let see and I think even some lawyers lived in that community. Speaker 1: Was it a predominantly a two parent household in that community, at that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. That's when the family was truly integrated; you had the father and mother there. Story_ID: 543623 Speaker 1: Now, tell me what, what type of child were you? Were you rambunctious, mischievous, well mannered? Speaker 2: All of the above, it kind of depended upon the day. Like I said I pretty industrious, I mean looking back I always wanted to work and try to earn, try to earn my own keep, okay. My mother's [Gloria Morris Ashford] used to tell me I was mannish, she used to tell me that I just wouldn't behave. She'd tell me that I was a genius, my dad [Willis West, Jr.] would tell me that I didn't know how to--my, my father was carpenter. And so, you know, and I'm left handed, so he always told me I had two left hands, 'cause I couldn't nail, I couldn't nail a nail in the board straight, you know. But, I, I've been always been a person that dream, the almanac was one of my favorite books. And so, and I got that from my grandfather [Samuel Morris], because sitting there with him, when he was trying to solve the puzzles, he'd sometimes he'd end up going to the almanac believe it or not, but he'd always be in that dictionary. So, I can, I can recall sitting there in his lap, he'd be drinking coffee every now and then he'd let me have some coffee. And so, I can recall those days. Story_ID: 543624 Speaker 1: So, what type of student were you? Speaker 2: I was a A, B student. Speaker 1: Okay. And you said you had dreams and aspirations what were your dreams and aspirations of? Speaker 2: I, I can't sit up and say I had dreams and aspirations at that point in time. I, I guess those dreams and aspirations didn't start coming into full focus until around my junior high school years [at Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas]. But, I can recall during those years, sitting down watching television with the family, black and white TV, and 'Rawhide,' 'Gunsmoke,' 'Bat Masterson,' and my favorite was 'Perry Mason' back then. And, and Perry Mason was the only lawyer that I knew and little did I know that watching 'Perry Mason' and some of the things that he was doing was planting a seed in my mind that ultimately would lead me to be, wanting to become an attorney. Story_ID: 543625 Speaker 1: And so, you moved in what grade? Speaker 2: I was in the fifth grade, it was about midway in the fifth grade [at Parole Elementary School; Walter S. Millis Parole Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland] and we moved to Germany, moved to Augsburg, Germany. And stayed there for about two years; well, about a year and a half. Speaker 1: And tell me why you moved to, to Germany? Speaker 2: My stepfather [Benjamin Ashford (ph.)] was in the service, and had gotten stationed, stationed in Augsburg, Germany. Speaker 1: So, when did your mother [Gloria Morris Ashford] and father [Willis West, Jr.], did they get divorced? Speaker 2: They got divorced right. And I can't recall, I must have been in the fourth grade when they got divorced. Speaker 1: All right. So, tell me about the transition to Germany and going to school there? Speaker 2: (Speaking German) Sprechen sie Deutsch? Speaker 1: No, I'm-- Speaker 2: (Speaking German) Nein. Sprechen sie Deutsch klein du bisschen? You're right, okay, right. (Speaking German) Eins, zwei, drei, vier, funf, sechs, sieben, acht, neun. You know, it's amazing for some reason I remember that. And, I, I'm not fluent in German at all but I do remember that. Because when we moved to Germany, again I was in the fifth grade and I had to, it was, it was a complete culture shock. Because I, I came from an African American community. But, when I got to Germany it was a situation where it was prominently Anglo. And then on top of that we didn't live on the base, in [U.S.] military housing, when we first got there. We had to live on what they call the economy, and so we lived with a German family. And so, here, here I am a kid in the fifth grade moving to another country traveling to that country via a ship from New York [New York]. Never having been out, realistically been outside of Maryland. Here I am. I'm leaving Annapolis [Maryland], I'm, I'm headed to New York. I'm looking out of a window at the Empire State Building [New York, New York]. In a couple days after being there, I'm gonna be placed on a ship and that ship is gonna sail from New York--my, my family my mother and my brother [Kevin West] at the time. We're gonna sail from New York to Germany. Okay, passing the English straits and all that other stuff, I was sea sick for a couple of days. But, we stayed on that ship though for probably seven or eight days, and ultimately ending up in Germany. And then I'm flying from I can't recall where the port was that we landed from whatever that port was to Augsburg, Germany. And then living on the economy with a German family. And ultimately going to a, a elementary school there in Germany [Augsburg American Elementary School, Augsburg, Germany]. Speaker 1: So, this was about 1962? Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], '63 [1963]. Story_ID: 543626 Speaker 1: Now, once you get to Germany and you lived with the family tell me what it was like living with this German family? Speaker 2: Well, I mean obviously, here I am, I'm like a frog out of water. The fact is that they had these big old pillows, that, the man's name was Bach [ph.], we lived with Mr. Bach, and I can't think of his wife's name at the time. But, this situation was that the first thing I can remember these big old pillows, Denise [Denise Gines]. And they, they'd have blankets as we would know 'em and of course it got cold there in Augsburg [Germany]. And they had these big old pillows that served as blankets. You would sleep under the pillows, that's what I remember. I remember on the bratwurst sausage, and some of the foods--I remember a, a good friend, it was guy that lived upstairs from us, it was an apartment building, his name was Manfred [ph.]. I, I remember Manfred said, "Do you want to play foosball?" I'm thinking football, but he was talking soccer, okay. And so, I, I made friends there, on living with the German family, with other German kids. And we'd play in the community. And, and they would do like this me (gesture) and I'd do like that to them. But, we, we became friends and I played just as kids play. Speaker 1: Tell me your stepfather's name? Speaker 2: Benjamin G. Ashford [Benjamin Ashford (ph.)]. Speaker 1: So, how long did you live with the, the German family before you, your family had their own place? Speaker 2: You know, I, I it wasn't that long. It's wasn't that long, it you know, maybe three or four months, somewhere off in there. Or maybe up to six months? But we ended up living on the, you know, [U.S. military] base, and got our own apartment. Story_ID: 543627 Speaker 1: And during the whole time I obviously I was in school and the great thing about being there is there is that it exposed me to other cultures, number one and other individuals. The other deal is that I was able to start getting involved in some act- activities. We had the Augsburg Youth Association, AYA [ph.]. And so we had ice skating and we had football, baseball and all those other things and that when I started getting involved in athletics when I was in Germany. And so I got a chance to be the quarterback of the football team and all of that. And even including my brother [Kevin West] who's a little bit older than me had the opportunity to play with his team also. Speaker 2: What was the na- was the school on the [U.S. military] base or was it outside of the? Speaker 1: No, school was on the base, it was on, it was on the base, yes. Speaker 2: Do you, do you remember the name of the school? Speaker 1: Augsburg Elementary [Augsburg American Elementary School, Augsburg, Germany]. Speaker 2: And do you remember who the principal was? Speaker 1: No, I, I really don't. Speaker 2: Where there teachers that you remember? Speaker 1: Not, not like Mrs. Swan [ph.] and Mr. Richardson [ph.]. I, I can't say that I do. And the religious affiliation wasn't that that I was used to in Annapolis [Maryland]. Before you see that it was kind of nondenominational. And, you know, I was used to frankly used to having an African American as a, as a pastor. And the pastor there was Anglo and, and I couldn't never really kind of connect on that basis. My fondest memories in Germany would have been, you know, would be playing football in the AYA and getting involved in student activities. And you've got to remember that I was there when John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], President Kennedy was assassinated. I, I recall the night. It was night when it occurred. I was listening to a replay of the Army and Navy game [United States Military Academy v. United States Naval Academy], right and all of a sudden, there was a, an interruption of the program. And so, they interrupted the program and you know, we ended up hearing exactly what occurred during that time. Story_ID: 543628 Speaker 1: What we heard is that the president of the United States had been assassinated in Dallas, Texas. And I never thought that I'd end up living in Dallas, Texas. It was amazing my father [Willis West, Jr.], stepfather [Benjamin Ashford (ph.)] and all of the other [U.S.] military people there were put on red alert. And it's a, again you ask me, some of my memories. A friend of mine who is Puerto Rican, Ricky [ph.], and a couple of other guys we were kids, we had just ordered a pizza, from the PX [post exchange]. And so we walked from the apartments over to the PX and we saw these army tanks and everything military carriers being deployed throughout the entire military base. And it was a sight that I'd never seen before. Everyone went on red alert over there. And needless to say didn't know what exactly was going on in the world as it related to the assassination of President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. Speaker 2: Okay. That was a, a sad time. Speaker 1: Yes, it was. Speaker 2: Even for someone to be eleven or twelve years old. Speaker 1: Right, I guess I was about eleven. Speaker 2: Eleven. Speaker 1: Yeah, about eleven years old then. Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1963. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 543629 Speaker 1: So, how long did your family stay in Germany? Speaker 2: We stayed there for about a year and half. And it was at that point that my stepfather [Benjamin Ashford (ph.)] left the [U.S.] military. And he was from Dallas [Texas] and so he want, obviously he wanted to relocate in Dallas. And we, re- reloc- re- relocated in Dallas. And that was towards the end of my sixth grade year [at Augsburg American Elementary School, Augsburg, Germany], when we re- relocated in Dallas, in 1964. Speaker 1: So, tell me about Dallas, and moving to Dallas, and getting into school there? So, are you going to junior high school now? Speaker 2: I'm, no, I'm still, I'm still-- Speaker 1: Still in elementary school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elementary school, Phyllis Wheatley Elementary School [Dallas, Texas], Mr. Mitchell [ph.] was the principal there. And it was, kind of another cultural shock. Because what had happened in just to show you how powerful television was, the way we had our hair cut was not consistent with the way the people in the community we lived in had their hair cut. You know, we had them (gesture) little long things coming out right there. And we talked differently. We were from the Northeast and needless to say, were coming to Texas. And there's a different kind of dialect when you, in Texas than there is in other places, y'all. And so, sixth grade, we, we, we come to Dallas, we live with our grandparents, my father's parents initially, stepfather's parents initially. And it's predominantly African American middle class community. Being the kid I was at that time I wanted to find a job. And so I, there was a corner grocery store that was like two structures away from the house that we lived in. And so I was able to get a job there on corner, being a stock boy and a grocery boy and that's it. And, and I worked there from probably about a year. I made ten dollars a week, big money back then, yeah. And, and got involved with some of things that were going on in school. And some of the friends that I met then I still know today. Speaker 1: And who are some of those friends. Speaker 2: I look at Raymond Edmund [ph.]. Raymond Edmund was in the same grade with me. And we developed a friendship starting back then, has lasted, last pretty much a lifetime. I can't think of Gwen's [ph.] last name then, but Gwen was--all of us used play ball together and all that stuff, go swimming together at the school. And, and Gwen, her son is now a photographer. And he, he takes some of my pictures and things like that. Just to name a couple of people. Story_ID: 543630 Speaker 1: Now what were some of the activities that you got involved in? In your, now you, this is your last year of elementary school [Phyllis Wheatley Elementary School, Dallas, Texas]? Speaker 2: My last year of elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay, so was there anybody influential or did you just move on to what junior high school? Speaker 2: Well, let's see, at, at, at the elementary school, the principal Mr. Mitchell [ph.] was very influential, not only on me, but everybody. Because he ran a very tight ship and again just like Mrs. Swan [ph.] a, other than he was not my primary educator. He was very demanding and wanted to make sure that the students that graduated from that elementary school, had the necessary foundation in order to succeed. And so I, I leave there and it was a school, now called Madison High School [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas]. Denise [Denis Gines], there were the Trojans, they had, I mean, they had some of the, they had what I thought at that time, was the best football team. And one of the largest bands and some the best looking cheerleaders that I could ever think of. So, everybody wanted to be a Madison Trojan. You remember those books, those book covers and stuff you'd have on the books? You know, we would take those book covers take a Trojan helmet and put on there. Because we wanted to be a Madison Trojan, well, unfortunately, or fortunately as the case may be, we ended moving from my grandmother's house to Frazier Courts [Dallas, Texas] which was a government subsidized development, 4916 Hatcher Place [sic. Hatcher Street]. I will never, ever forget that place. And as a result of moving from what we call South Dallas to East Dallas [Dallas, Texas], that threw me into a whole new school zone. And that school zone for junior high purposes Pearl C. Anderson [Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas]. And it was at Pearl C. Anderson that, the Pearl C. Anderson Steers, okay, and there were more students there than I ever had seen in my life. And we had to, we had to walk from East Dallas to Southeast Dallas [Dallas, Texas]. We had to walk from the, from, from the projects all the way over to school every day, okay. And so, well that's what we did and I got, I was able to get involved in football there. And as well as, because of my grades I was placed in an accelerated program with several other individuals. And, you know, just became a student there. Story_ID: 543631 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the community in which you moved into? Going into the projects [Frazier Courts, Dallas, Texas] and the people who lived there? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, and, and, and, and again some people that lived in the project with me, that grew up with me. And we are still friends as of today. As an example James Reynolds [ph.], James Reynolds, his family they, he, he had a bunch of brothers and we'd play football against one another there 'cause would be some of the best games. I, he now is a successful business owner in Dallas [Texas], where he has several barbeque stores as well as concessions at DFW Airport [Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Texas], as an example. Joe Bagby, who's a radio broadcaster back then. I never will forget this, we, were playing football and Joe came over there: "Here's radio broadcaster Joe Bagby," and so Joe basically said, "Whichever team wins this game I'm gonna give each one of you twenty-five cents," maybe a dime, whatever the case maybe, but I remember that. And it provided the necessary incentive, if you will, for our team to win that, that game. And I--Joe's now, deceased, but I used always remind him of that. Albert Black [Albert C. Black, Jr.]; Albert Black's family, Albert's a few years younger than I am. Again being as industrious as I've always been, I was the paper boy. I had about 120 papers I had to throw every day, and Albert was one of my customers, his family was one of my customers. Albert Black now is an individual that his company has been a con- had a consistence pres- a, a consistent presence on the Black Enterprise top 100 businesses in the country and I could go on and on and on. Charles Welsh [ph.] who's now a, a doctor--and so, there were a lot of, Evelyn Hicks [ph.], Jackie Hicks [ph.]. Jackie is like a, an administrator with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. So there were a lot of people that came through during that point in time. That are very successful and, and we still have contact with one another. Speaker 1: How was the family structure different from the community in which you lived, when you lived with your grandparents to this community? Speaker 2: Well, there, there were, there were single head of households there. But, you know, the thing, here's the deal, we lived there, we didn't know we were poor. No excuse me, should I say (pronunciation) poor, okay. I mean the reality is I can recall playing basketball in a trash can, with a trash can. And it wasn't up on a goal it was down on the ground, okay, but, it was fun okay. And the, the family structure was one where you had moms and dads living together, but you also had some single head of households. And we--some of our friends that were being raised by their grandparents, at the time. But, you know we didn't know any different in retrospect, that's what was going on. And how do I know that, because often time when I would go and collect you could pretty much see the family structure, okay. And some people moved out of the projects there, this really made me mad, ma- it still makes me mad today. Some people moved out of the projects owing me money, I know who you are (gesture). I still have my paper boy book, too. There's one family out there that owes me, owed me twelve dollars when you left. I know who you are and my people, we're coming to get you. Story_ID: 543632 Speaker 1: Tell me about the junior high school you went to, what was the name of it? Speaker 2: Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School [Dallas, Texas]. And the home of the mighty, mighty steers. Let just kind of tell you about junior high school and then, specifically about some of the teachers that influenced me. Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School was a new junior high school, that had just been built, probably open a couple of years by the time I went there. But, unfortunately it was built next to a meatpacking plant. So, you can only imagine the odors that, the aroma that we had to smell on a daily basis especially during the time period when it was kind of warm outside and it was now air condition, the only thing you could do is open up the windows. Or during lunchtime when that plant would be in operation. The principal there was a man by the name of Billy Dade, B.E. Dade [Billy Earl Dade]. Again just like Mr. Mitchell [ph.] and others he was very insistent that students performed and that the teachers did what they needed to do in order to make certain the curriculum that had been developed was in fact provided to the students. There was a man there by the name Joseph J. Honore [sic. Joseph L. Honore], who was pretty much responsible for the, you know, the advance students and all that other stuff. And I was happened to be part of that class. And so, he would make certain that we had a very challenging curriculum. So, some of the teachers wouldn't provide homework assignments on the weekend. But, Mr. Honore would, and I never will forget and this I'm in seventh, eighth and ninth grade. In the ninth grade, Mr. Honore wanted us to take English and then, there was some other course Latin. So, I was already taking English from the man, and how demanding he was. I didn't want to take English and Latin because he was going to mess up, you know, my time and I was a football player there, and thought, and I thought I was pretty good. And wanted to be a what? Football player. And so, I said, "I'm gonna figure out a way to get out of this Latin class." I had to take some sort of language, foreign language but, I said I'm gonna figure out a way to get out of it. And so, I did, I ended up getting, and going to French, Mrs. Small [ph.]. (Speaking French) Parlez-vous francais? Ma je m'appelle Royce West, de toi, comme j'appelle tu? Ma je suis Jean Claude Thomas [ph.] et Royce et mon ami, Paul [ph.]. I don't know why I still remember that, but, I do. And so, as I got ready leave the Latin class, Mr. Honore said, "Boy, you're making the worse mistake in your life, this is gonna come back and haunt you, okay." Let me fast forward now, I'll come back to junior high school I go to law school [University of Houston Law Center, Houston, Texas], all right, open up a law book, guess what was the first thing I saw, Latin. And I saw Mr. Honore face, "Boy, I told you," okay. And so, those teachers cared about you back then. Mr. Honore, Mrs. Small they were very influential in my life, but the most influential teacher that I had in junior high school was a lady by the name of Gloria White. And, and I'll fast forward and then I'll come back. She was so influential that when I came back to Dallas [Texas] from law school I ended up joining the same church [Good Street Baptist Church, Dallas, Texas] and ultimately ended up buying a house in the same community, that she lived in. Now, who's Gloria White, Gloria White was my government teacher, guess where we are today, in the state capital [Austin, Texas], right. She was so beautiful. Hey guys, you know exactly what I'm talking about. Every word that came out of her mouth, I was just one of these numbers right here (gesture), on the edge of my seat. Listening to her and trying to do everything I could in order to make certain that she recognized me. I was in love with Gloria White. And the reality is as a result of me taking her classes, not only in the seventh and eighth grade. But also being a, a fraternity brother of hers. I'm because Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, okay. She's Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], right. She left an indelible impression on my life that has lasted until to this very day. The fact the matter is, when I was sworn in as a state senator here in Texas, she was right here, her and husband. Story_ID: 543633 Speaker 1: So you're doing very well as far as your classes, so you were a very good student. What was your favorite subject? Speaker 2: Government, Gloria White. There was no pregnant pause between that question and that answer, government. I mean Gloria White was, was a very influential and that was probably my, not probably was my favorite subject. And you know, my coach during that time was a guy by the name of Rob, Robert Thomas, we call him Rabbit Thomas. He wouldn't allow us to call him Rabbit, because if we called Rabbit--he caught us calling him Rabbit, he would always give us the board. That's when the board of education was in effect, you know, what I'm talking about. Pearl C. Anderson [Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas] though, was one of those schools where we are academically superior to all of the other middle schools, junior high schools. We're academically superior in athle- athletically superior, we won everything, from football, to basketball, to baseball, to track, we were at the top of our game, and we had students that we second to none. Students who gra- actually graduated from Pearl C. Anderson went on to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas], some of the top ranked schools, in this country. So, that the type of education that we were provided at Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School. Story_ID: 543634 Speaker 1: What did you think that you would become at that time, had you given it any thought? Speaker 2: Very good question. I'm gonna tell you about a story. Mr. Edwards, Tommy Edwards [ph.] it's, it's amazing how I can now recall all of this. Mr. Tommy Edwards was the metal shop teacher, now I think we're about the eighth grade, at that time, seventh eighth grade. Someone had stolen someone's apple, so he shut down the metal shop class. And basically said, "Denise [Denise Gines], I'm gonna teach you all something about law and order," something like that. But, what he did, he decided to have a jury trial, 'cause this guy who's apple had been stolen was accusing someone else. And so, what he did he said, "I'm gonna put you guys over here as a jury. I'm a put you over here as the defendant. Royce [HistoryMaker Royce West] you will defend him, okay." And then had another guy who was presenting the evidence. We never resolved the issue, but he planted a seed. And mind you I told that in elementary school [Parole Elementary School; Walter S. Mills Parole Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland] my favorite character was Perry Mason. So, in junior high school [Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas] Mr. Edwards further, I guess you could say, fertilized that seed in my mind. And, and it was just, it was just the thought in the back, in the recesses of my mind. I wanted to be a football player, okay. That's what I wanted to be. But, it was at that time that he, he began to fertilize that seed. And even though I still wanted to be a football player, it was there. In the back, in the recesses of my mind. Story_ID: 543635 Speaker 1: Are you reading, what books are you reading now, you, you said that you liked to read, back in elementary school [Parole Elementary School; Walter S. Mills Parole Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland]. Even though your favorite book was the almanac, but what are you reading now? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, right now, what I'm doing a bunch on is, issues concerning public finance, issues concerning state policy that had been. But, in terms of in things that I enjoy reading, you know, I, I, I'll pick up probably the last book that I seriously sat down and read was Barack Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]-- Speaker 1: No, I'm not, not recently I'm, I'm talking about when you were in junior high school [Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas], sorry? Speaker 2: Well, in junior high school, let's see-- Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of reading, 'cause didn't seem to have a lot of time, playing football (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, well, you know, I'm trying to think, I don't know that I could sit up and say that my focus was on, no I, no, no I, I can't say that my focus was a lot on reading during that point in time. Other than what I had to read. Story_ID: 543636 Speaker 1: Now, you told me that when you were Germany that your religious experience was very, very diff- different. When you came back to Dallas [Texas], did that change? Speaker 2: Yes, it did. Speaker 1: Tell me about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was right around junior high school [Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas], too. We attended a church, New Hope Baptist Church [Dallas, Texas], and right down the street was a church by the name of Good Street Baptist Church [Dallas, Texas]. Now, why do I pick out both of those church, but here's the story. New Hope was the church of my grandparents and so obviously that's where we went, some of the, some of the young people there, then are now, we're now grandparents and we still know one and another. But, down the street was Good Street Baptist Church and about the ninth grade I was dating a young lady by the name of Patricia Davis [ph.]. Denise [Denise Gines], I gave her promise ring, okay. And so, what would happen is that on Sunday mornings instead of staying at New Hope I'd go down to Good Street, 'cause that's where Patricia Davis was going to church. Ceasar Clark [Ceasar Arther Walter Clark], who's now deceased, was the pastor of that church. And I ended up becoming--how do you say, affected by him, and his religious teachings. And you know, some of the things that he would talk about, some of the scripture that he would, he would preach about, I began to really listen to during that point and time. And I'm, I'm a Proverbs guy, I'm, you know, get wisdom knowledge and understanding. And I like getting, you know, you get that and, and you're, you're gonna be in standing. You know, "Son remember the teaching of your father" and so and so forth. So, I'm a kind of, of a Proverbs guy. And it's through Ceasar Clark, that I begin to develop a consciousness as it relates to my religious beliefs. And so, Good Street ended up being a church right down the street. Fast forward come back to where we are, years later, I told you about Gloria White. Well, guess where Gloria White was a member of? Good Street. And so, when I came back from college [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas] and I beginning looking for a church, needless to say I started at New Hope, but I, I, just didn't--New Hope didn't suit me well. And I ended up becoming a member of Good Street and that was back in like 1980. And I've been a member of that church ever since. Story_ID: 543637 Speaker 1: We go on to high school. 'Cause Pearl C. Anderson [Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas] is a junior high school? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: What high school did you attend? Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about what high school I wanted to attend. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Okay, I wanted to just like I told you about the Madison Trojans [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas], but there, there was the Lincoln Tigers [Lincoln High School, Dallas, Texas], okay. And that's where everybody wanted to go from Pearl C. Anderson. We wanted to be Lincoln Tigers. Well, the family moved again. The family moved this time to a place called Highland Hills [Dallas, Texas]. Highland Hills was a, is a area of the city that was right across the street from Bishop College [Dallas, Texas], okay. And the school district was the Wilmer-Hutchins Independent School District. So, I'm in the ninth grade spring, spring year of the ninth grade, second semester and, and we're moving there. And so, I ended up going to Wilmer-Hutchins High School [Dallas, Texas]. Now, just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I sorry what high school? Speaker 2: Wilmer-Hutchins High School. And you know what, one of the first times I did, I found me a job, okay. I started working at 7-Eleven. And it was my sophomore year I started working at 7-Eleven. Well, which was a great experience, because the 7-Eleven was right next to Bishop College. And so, everybody obviously thought I was a college student, because I was working at 7-Eleven. And so, all of those college students would come through there and ask me what courses I was taking, and all that type of stuff, it was pretty good stuff. Story_ID: 543638 Speaker 1: I got to meet a lot of great people that attended and graduated from Bishop College [Dallas, Texas]. Probably the most profound person that I met who's now deceased is Pastor Bailey, H.K. Bailey [sic. E.K. Bailey], he's now deceased. But, I, I met him during that particular time period. Speaker 2: Can you tell me who he was? Speaker 1: Pastor Bailey was a, is, was minister at Concord Baptist Church in Dallas [Texas]. And he took that particular church from a small number of individuals to now one of the most prolific churches in the Dallas area. And not only did he do that. Pastor Bailey died several years ago, he believed in a planning, for succession, succ- succession planning in terms of the ministry. So, what he ended up doing was working with the church leaders and coming up with a succession plan for him. And helping to pick the person that would succeed him to make certain that his passing even though very, very heartfelt for everyone in the community. His passing would be seamless in, in terms of the leadership of the church. And that's what he did. And with a lot of different activities in the community that he was responsible for. And so, he was one of the individuals that I met during that point in time. Speaker 2: And what did you know about Bishop College, when you moved to that area? Speaker 1: I didn't know a thing about it, and the fact is that, you know, the great thing about it is this--we saw a college across the street, okay. We'd go there I thought I could play football and basketball at that time. Well, I could, if I have to say so myself. But, what would end up happening is it that we would go over there. Now, mind you now, I'm working at the 7-Eleven, and so everybody's coming to the 7-Eleven. And see it was during that time period too, that Bishop College is a black college [HBCU], right? And so, segregation was still hot and heavy during that point in time. And so, the different summer programs that students would be involved in we, we now, call those, enhancement programs. Programs like that, that students take courses during the summer they would be at Bishop College. Well, when all of the bands from the various co- high schools wanted to have summer competition or summer camp they'd come to Bishop College. When all of the cheerleaders would have those cheerleading camps, they'd come where? To Bishop College. Which meant all of them had to come through what? The 7-Eleven, okay. And so, I'm there at the 7-Eleven, so I got a chance to meet a lot of interesting people. The three years that I worked there at 7-Eleven. Got a chance to participate at, at, at lot of the activities on the college campus. 'Cause they thought I was college student. And they used to come to 7-Eleven. And so, we'd go over there and, and some of the academic activities, not a lot of them, now mind you. But, surely the, the band, the cheerleaders, the football and basketball activities we'd stay on that campus. But, what that did Denise [Denise Gines], it planted another seed. That I wanted to do what? I wanted to go to Bishop College, I wanted to go to college. And I wanted to go to Bishop College, so that seed was also planted during that time period. Story_ID: 543639 Speaker 1: Just want to talk a little bit about the community Highland Hills [Dallas, Texas]. Tell me a little bit about what that community was like? Speaker 2: It was a middle class community. I mean the professors, college president, all of them lived in that community. Speaker 1: Do you know who the college president was at Bishop [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Milton K. Curry [Milton K. Curry, Jr.], Mr. Curry. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: There's, there's, some, some, some comedian here, or he thinks he's funny, that Curry guy? That I-- Speaker 1: D.C. [Don "D.C." Curry]. Speaker 2: Yeah, D.C., he thinks he's funny, okay. No D.C. and I are friends. I, that's the Curry family I'm talking about. Speaker 1: In the community, your parents bought, this is mother [Gloria Morris Ashford] and your stepfather [Benjamin Ashford (ph.)]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --they buy a home, is that right or, or are they renting? Speaker 2: No, bought a home. Story_ID: 543640 Speaker 1: So, tell me more about your high school days, at--what high school did you go to (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wilmer-Hutchins, Wilmer-Hutchins [Wilmer-Hutchins High School, Dallas, Texas]. That was the time that I had really, personally experienced discrimination. For many of us athletes ended up going down to Wilmer-Hutchins and it was a predominately white school. We had a white school and we had a black school. John F. Kennedy [John F. Kennedy High School; Kennedy-Curry Middle School, Dallas, Texas] was the black school, Wilmer was the white school. And Theodore Grimes [ph.], a friend of mine, sounded the clarion call for all of us to, "Go to Wilmer-Hutchins, we're gonna play football there." And there's a bunch of us went down there. And I'm, I'm new to the community so I just followed everybody else down there. And so, we go down there and ultimately some of us ended up going back to John F. Kennedy, well my mother [Gloria Morris Ashford] wouldn't allow us to go back. She said, "You started, you gonna stay down there." So, we stayed down at Wilmer-Hutchins and it was the first time that Wilmer-Hutchins had had so many African Americans to just wholesale come there in order participate in their athletic program. And needless to say, there was a lot of tension because of things that were occurring just in the community [Highland Hills, Dallas, Texas], in society. And so, for that vantage point we had a lot of difficulties with some of the people down there. Speaker 1: We're tal- this is about 1967? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. What were some of the difficulties, you're saying difficulties, but is there an example, or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I mean as an example, I mean, you know the N word was used kind of frequently, some of the teachers didn't take the time that a Mrs. Swan [ph.], as an example, would take with you. To make sure you understood and appreciated the concepts that you had to grasp for math, or math related courses, or some of the related courses. Some of the guys on the football team felt threatened. And as a result of that they, you know, there was a lot fights that occurred and I was in a few of them. Basketball teams same way, you know, you had, more African Americans now trying out for the basketball teams and even though in many instances some of the players that I was associated with, were better than the Anglo players. They would end up sitting on the bench, not getting the opportunity that they deserved. I can recall in my pla- in, in terms of basketball career, I was the leading scorer in my sophomore year and never got the most valuable player award. And in my senior year they discontinued it, okay. I can recall in my senior year getting my coach, my football coach getting questionnaires from different colleges about me. And didn't find out about 'em until after I graduated from high school. That, those types of things. Speaker 1: Did your grades suffer at all because of, of this? Speaker 2: I was probably a B and C student, at that time, because again I'm, I'm looking to be a--I'm, I'm wanting to be a professional football player at that time. Story_ID: 543641 Speaker 1: So you had a desire to go to college and to play football? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: The teachers were not very encouraging at your new high school? Speaker 2: Well, well at the beginning they weren't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't sit up and say that were throughout my whole academic career. And I, I mean at, at Wilmer-Hutchins [Wilmer-Hutchins High School, Dallas, Texas] from the tenth through the twelfth grade. Yet because it got progressively better in terms of the teachers, the longer I stayed down there. Speaker 1: Oh well, tell me what happened to make it better and who was there to encourage you? And put you on the right path to apply for college? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I tell you what when you, when you first mentioned that the first person I could, come up with by the lady by the name of Doris Price [ph.]. She was a librarian, African American female. Myself and a friend of mine who's, who's now a minister, first met her as we went into the library, looking for girls, okay. And she gave us a, a few choice words that made us smile and still, I still recognize her as a very good friend today. And then there was Walter B. Houston [ph.]. Walter B. was the coach at the, at J., J. F. Kennedy [John F. Kennedy High School; Kennedy-Curry Middle School, Dallas, Texas]. And during our ninth year, between the ninth and tenth grade year, during spring training, I guess that's what it would be. Walter would get all of the students who wanted to be football players, right. And say, "Okay come on, we're, we're gonna, all of y'all gone run these, run a course," which was basically long distance running. So every evening for about four days a week, four maybe five days a week, all of us would have our sixth period class, this is at John F. Kennedy. We'd just run until, you know, we were just throwing up and all that other stuff, that was Walter. But, Walter ultimately came down to Wilmer-Hutchins. And so, you know, he still had his board of education. And so he kind of kept a straight, but between Walter and Mrs. Price we could sound off different things that were happening to us. And they would kind of tell us whether or not we were just full of it, or whether or not it was in fact discrimination. And as a result of that there several teachers, Anglo teachers Mrs. Rose [ph.], Mr. Turner [ph.] and I can't think of my English teacher's name, but I, I'd remember her face. They were real good teachers. And they wanted to make certain also that we got the necessary foundation to enable us to be successful in college. And they, they were able to do that. And so, you know, we were, I was gratified by what they, what foundation they provided me, to enable me to successfully, you know graduate from college. Speaker 1: So, had, did you, you had an older brother [Kevin West], did he go to college? Speaker 2: He went to college for a couple of years, yes. I'm, but, I'm the first one in my family to graduate from college. Story_ID: 543642 Speaker 1: So, who put you on the path of actually getting applications in and, and where did you apply? Speaker 2: Very good questions again, you know I didn't tell you about Shirley Fisher. Because Shirley Fisher was a math teacher [at Wilmer-Hutchins High School, Dallas, Texas], okay. I cut from like Mrs. Swan [ph.], and Shirley Fisher and Charles Fisher are friends of mine as of today. No one in my family really what to do in terms of filling out applications for college and things of that nature. Needless to say, we didn't really have the money. My mother [Gloria Morris Ashford] and stepfather [Benjamin Ashford (ph.)] had divorced by that time. So, we didn't really have the money for me to have a, in order to go to school. So, Mrs. Fisher helped me to navigate those waters. And frankly signed, co-signed for me a loan in order to go to school. And then she told Mr. Fisher about it, okay. Now, I'm not her blood, okay. But, this lady co-signed a loan for me to go school, Mr. and Mrs. Fisher. And I mean every time--she's real big in AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] in fact I thinks she was one of the regional officers for AKA. And I've, I've had numerous opportunity to attend different ceremonies that have bestowed awards on her. And I always tell that story, because here's a teacher that I actually cared about a student. And but, for them signing for me to go to college I wouldn't be sitting here with you today telling you that story. Speaker 1: Where did you apply? Speaker 2: I applied to University of Texas, University of Texas at Arlington [Arlington, Texas], on and on and on. I can't recall the number of schools, but I was accepted--now mind you I was tell you that the coach never told me about the letters that I was receiving from SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] and places like that. I had a scholarship offer to play basketball in Dodge City, Kansas. But it, you know, in Dodge City, Kansas is a great place for people who want to live in Dodge City, Kansas. 'Cause it's way out, and so I didn't accept that. And so, ultimately I ended up getting a--end up, ended up going to Paris Junior College [Paris, Texas] starting off, in northeast Texas. And stayed there for about six months, but again, you gotta understand this is, this is during kind of of the back end of the Civil Rights Movement too, okay. Speaker 1: So, we're, we're in 19--about 1970? Speaker 2: We're about 1970. Story_ID: 543643 Speaker 1: That summer prior to my senior year [at Wilmer-Hutchins High School, Dallas, Texas], you know, I'm, I'm working at, for a company and I, my Afro is working pretty good about that time. And I'm seriously reading, you know, 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley], [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, and all of them. And so, I'm not taking too much mess from anybody. And I had a little, I had a little attitude, had a mustache and things of that nature that people wanted you to shave. I had my Afro and people want you to cut your Afro. Well, I'm not doing all of that, okay. So, I go to Paris Junior College [Paris, Texas] and at that point I'm playing basketball. Also, there's a Methodist student union, which is basically a black organization, the student--black student organization. And I'm the president of it, okay. And it was all about, you know, just students coming together and in some instances talking about religious issues. Well, to make a long story short, people thought that was a, you know, a black militant organization, all right. So, I ended up having to leave, not because they forced me to leave, don't get me wrong, 'cause Paris is, is a good school. But, I ended up leaving and taking a scholarship, a football scholarship at, at Texas, at University of Texas at Arlington [Arlington, Texas]. So, I stop playing basketball, this was like the fall of 1970. And the spring of '71 [1971], I ended playing football, started playing football in the UT Arlington. Speaker 2: So, tell me about the, well tell me a little bit about, about Paris? It's a small junior college where? Speaker 1: In Paris, Texas. Speaker 2: Paris, Texas. Speaker 1: Right, located close to Detroit, Texas, okay. It was pretty rural community the main business there was can, is, is Campbell Soup [Campbell Soup Company]. So, that's the main kind of the main business there but. Needless to say it was, it was kind of a rural setting as opposed to urban setting. Speaker 2: And so, you transition from basketball to football and going to University Texas at Arlington, tell me about that? Speaker 1: Well, you know, and before I leave Paris Junior College, years later I'm, I was contacted by them and they bestowed a, award on me, an honor on me. That I, I'm am proud of today, they, they named me a distinguished alumnus of that school. And, and my picture hangs in there, in the hall where all the other alumnus hangs, so I'm, I'm, I'm real proud of that. Story_ID: 543644 Speaker 1: I go to UT Arlington [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas] and again you know, I'm, I'm a football player. All right I wanted to, I wanted to kind of go back to playing football. And so I played, you know, I tried out for the team and I was successful and became the starting wide receiver for the football team. Speaker 2: So, tell me about your years there? Speaker 1: Well, my years there were, were ones of I guess you'd say great exposure and awakening. For you see when I went to the school they mascot was Johnny Rebel [Johnny Reb] and it was just as I was coming that I--black student organizations and other came together in order to get that particular mascot changed to Mavericks as opposed to Johnny Rebel. There were a handful of African American students. And we pretty much knew one another on the campus. Most of us were athletes. Played football there and my freshman and year I lead team scoring. And my sophomore year I, had a so so year but it was after my sophomore year, that I really began to kind of thinking about the direction that I was going in my life. I got my first F ever on my transcript, I can't even recall what course it was but I know I got an F. My mama [Gloria Morris Ashford] knew I got F, too. And I started really just kind of thinking about the opportunity that I had, and what I've been blessed with. And I knew that I had to, I had to miss, make the best out of that situation. Otherwise I would live to regret it. And so, I begin focusing in on my academic work. And so my priorities ended up changing, where it was football extracurricular activity and then class. If, I decided to go to class. It changed right around my sophomore year and it changed in like the spring of my sophomore year. Because it was at that time that I was reintroduced to government, okay. And a friend of mine who is now a judge in Fort Worth [Texas], ended up--he was the president of the student body. So, he appointed me as a delegate from the house, from the school of liberal arts. So, I became a delegate to student government. So, I guess, I started getting involved in government, student government on the campus. My priorities ended up being class, extracurricular activities and then football. Well, well that didn't, that was kind of at loggerheads with the coach. So, I went on to complete my sophomore year and went through spring training, in my sophomore year. And then when we got ready to report back in my junior year. I, I told the coach that, you know, I wasn't going to play football. And I was still involved in student government at the time though. He basically said, "You'll never be nothing." I said, "Right coach, I'll never be nothing." He said, "Get your smart blankety blank outta here," (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Who was your coach? Speaker 1: I'm not going to mention his name, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, he told me I'd never be nothing, I never will forget that, I said, "You're right, I'll, I'll never be nothing." "Get your smart blankety blank outta here." Story_ID: 543645 Speaker 1: Fast forward I, I started doing research in my junior year with Professor B.T. Williams [B.T. Williams, Sr.], because I was in, I was, I changed my major from history to sociology. And I ended up being his research assistant. So, I started doing research in sociology and specifically in the area of criminal justice. And then my senior year I continued to work for him and during my senior year I decided that I wanted to run at the encouragement of others for president of the student body UT Arlington [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas]. And so I ran for president and became the first African American president of that university. And we put together a coalition of people: black, Anglo, Hispanic, foreign, and that coalition lasted about three or four years. And, at what the point is, that we were able through that coalition to elect people as president for three or four years even after I was president of the study body. Speaker 2: What were some of the things that you accomplished as student body president? Speaker 1: Glad you asked that questions. Yeah, one of the things--again, I'm kind of industrious, okay. And from that vantage point I was trying--for student government was funded by student fees. We got (unclear) share of the student fees that are charged. But, it wasn't enough to do what I wanted to do. So, I was trying to figure out some other revenue sources that I could develop that would go specifically to student government. Well, the campus was kind of a, a campus we didn't have a lot of student housing, but there were a lot of apartments in the city. And so what happened, what had happen is that the students would be referred to by apartment selector services, would be referred to apartments and the selector service would get a piece of the action. I said, "Now wait a minute, these are my students," you know, my students. "We have, we got, got this thing on lock down," so to speak because frankly all of the freshman had to go through what? Orientation, and I had be there for orientation. And so, you know, I had a captive audience, so I decided to set up a student selector service, okay. And instead of charging I don't, I'll just, I'll say a hundred dollars, like the selector services you still, I charge fifty dollars, okay. It was pretty successful, it was so successful that they--we were being very competitive with the private sector. They then turned the, the private sector turned around and asked for an attorney general's opinion, to keep us from doing it, okay. And the, and the attorney general said that the state couldn't be in competition with private sector. And so, our, our, our revenue source ended up drying, drying up. But, I wasn't the president at the time. But, so we had a revenue source that ended up supplementing the money that we got from our student activity fees. Which allowed us to do somethings above and beyond, what we would ordinarily had been able to do. So, that was, that was something I remember. The second thing I remember is that in, there had been a lot of complaining by students that a street pretty much divided the campus. And so when students had to go from one side to the other, you know, they were ducking and dodging cars and they wanted to have something done about it. And so, you know, being the activist I was, okay. I said, "Well okay, let's do something about it." So, we put together a little session I said, "Tell you what we're gonna do. We're gonna stage a protest, okay," 'cause that's what people were doing about that time. I said, "To make certain that we do it right, I need to make sure we have a number students that will drive their cars north, south, or either east or west whatever the case may be. But, what I want you all to do, we're gonna drive the cars. Get to this particular location about 7:15 in the morning just when traffic is at fever pitch. Because there was a main artery in the city and your cars--you're gonna break down, and we're going to block traffic." Well that's what we did, okay. And needless to say, a lot people got pissed off, excuse me, a lot of people were disturbed about what we did. But, as a result of that particular move the president, who's a friend of mine today, called me over to his office. Now, let me put a pin in that for a second--I'm 6'4", the president of the university is 6'8". Normally when I walk around the corner and run into someone, they're normally shorter than I am. And President Wendell Nedderman [Wendell H. Nedderman] he's 6'8". I walked around the corner and ran into his chest and I had to look up to him. And I still look up to him today, 'cause he's a good man. But, he called me over to his office, "Royce [HistoryMaker Royce West]." In the voice of Wendell Nedderman, "We need to do something about that, you know could have been killed," of course I'm standing my ground. "We need to do something this--Mr. President, this has been an issue that has been eluding resolution," or some words to that effect, "ever since I was a freshman," something like that. So, as a result of those act- those activities we were ultimately able to get a bridge that spanned the two streets, that span, that spanned the street so students can walk over, as opposed to having to walk across those streets. Story_ID: 543646 Speaker 1: And I'm left handed--this is the last thing. I'm left handed, and are you left handed or right handed? Speaker 2: Right handed. Speaker 1: Okay, part of my platform when I ran for president of the student body [at the University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas] was, "Left on," okay. I was for left handers' rights, and I'm still for left handers' rights, okay. And left handed students know exactly what I'm talking about. And so, during some of the president debates and things like that I would talk about that issue. I said, you know, "Why is it that everything is for right handers?" I say when, "When, when we're in class having to take notes, we, our arms have to be stretched out in the, in the air in order to take notes. We shouldn't have to do that." I say, "When we have to write in books or notebooks the right, books are for, the notebooks are for right handed people. We should make certain that we deal with left handers' rights." And so, that was an important part of my platform and I, as a part of the facilities plans that were being considered for buildings that would ultimately come online, we were able to get some accommodations for the left handed people. So, so some of those types of deals, yeah. Story_ID: 543647 Speaker 1: Now, because you no longer played football how were you paying for school [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas]? Speaker 2: I was paying for school through work study and also through being a research assistant [for B.T. Williams, Sr.], okay. And, and, and working. I mean I, I again--General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] at the time had a, a part time program, which they called ninety-nine [ph.], where you could work on like Fridays, okay. And so I worked on Fridays and made pretty good money, just working that one day. And during the summertime I would work at General Motors and some other places. Where I would earn some sufficient money in order to, you know, help take care of things that I needed. Story_ID: 543648 Speaker 1: Were there any other professors [at the University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas] that were particularly in-, influential or encouraging? Speaker 2: Rebe Curry [ph.]. Rebe Curry was an African American, African American history professor. Bill Johnson [ph.] was the financial aid administrator and so Rebe and Bill and B.T. Williams [B.T. Williams, Sr.], Dave Bromley [David G. Bromley], Bill Stacey [William A. Stacey] a lot of, lot of people like that were always mentors or mine. One guy by the name of Gilbert Smith and I never will forget this. Gilbert was born--I still think he's lying about it, but anyway, he was born in a trailers--a trailer court, okay. And so, he, he was my criminal justice teacher. I, and, and it was one of 'em deals where, it was one of those times I just didn't have my assignments. So, yeah, I'm, I'm a play the race card at the time, you know, play the poor boy card. I got up to, I go up to Gilbert's office and I start saying you know, you know I'm, I'm, you know, "I didn't have the money to get the book." You know, something, some, some story where I'm playing the race deal, poor me and all that stuff. Gilbert started laughing he said, "Look here don't come in here with this," I can't say it on--(air quotes) B.S., he said, "Let me tell you a story." He said, "I was born in some trailer court," or something like that, "you don't know poverty, you don't know being (pronunciation) poor, not poor, (pronunciation) poor." So, he went on and told me this story. He still have a, a great relationship today. And you know, and, and part as a, as a result of that particular meeting between the two of me, the two of us. I, I took as many courses as possible from Gilbert Smith, in terms of in college, and undergrad and also in graduate school [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas]. So, he was very, very influential also. Speaker 1: And I'm not quite sure we got the, the president's name? Speaker 2: Wendell Nedderman [Wendell H. Nedderman]. Speaker 1: Nedderman. Speaker 2: Nedderman, yeah. Story_ID: 543649 Speaker 1: So, what happens next? Speaker 2: You know, I'm president of the student body [at the University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas], I, I have to attend meetings here in Austin [Texas] with the president at the board of regents. To listen to what's going on and in some cases, give a report from the student body. So, we, we were driving back forth, Wendell Nedderman [Wendell H. Nedderman] and myself are driving back and forth. So, as, as a result of driving back and forth, you're talking to one another. So, we got to know one another better. In addition, we had a Texas Student Association. We had the student body presidents from the various universities. So, I got to know a lot of the student body presidents, and some of those student body presidents are now former office holders, office holders here in the state, and have worked even on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], so I still have those types of relationships. I decided that in my senior year to go ahead pursue a master's degree because even toward the end of my senior year, I really sure of myself in terms of whether or not I had the aptitude, to become a lawyer. Because I'm thinking about now that seed that, that had been planted. And had been watered had been fertilized by Tommy Edwards [ph.]. I'm starting to think about whether or not I want to be a lawyer, and whether I could get into law school, because I didn't personally know a lawyer that I could talk to. And so, I said, well, I'm a do a couple of things. I'm, I'm gonna finish up my term as president of student body but, I'm also gonna apply for law school. And so, I finish up my term as president and, and I'm between my senior year and first year of graduate school [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas] as a sociologist. And so, it takes me two years to do my class work in order to get my master's degree, but, I still had to do a thesis, which is basically a book. And David Bromley [David G. Bromley], Professor David--professor was down at Virginia, University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], was my professor. My--guided my master's, my, my dissertation, my master's, my thesis rather. The fact is, is that at that point in time I decided I wanted to go to law school. And so I applied, I applied to several different law schools. And the University of Houston [University of Houston Law Center, Houston, Texas] gave me a chance. 'Cause I didn't have the best LSAT scores at all. But, the University of Houston gave me a chance and I was able to get into that particular school and ultimately graduated from it. Speaker 1: What year did you get your master's? Speaker 2: I actually got my law degree and my master's in 1979. Story_ID: 543650 Speaker 1: You were unsure about going to law school. UH [University of Houston Law Center, Houston, Texas] let you go, you know, come to, to that law school, what did you find when you got there, as far as taking the classes? And did you, were you then encouraged that you could complete this? Speaker 2: I was scared as all get out. I because it was one of those deals were I'm in my first semester, and again remember I told you, I opened up that book and I saw Joseph Honore's [Joseph L. Honore] face, 'cause I had that Latin in there. He said, "Boy I told ya," you know. And so, I was scared as all get out, 'cause I didn't know, what I needed to do in order to be successful, okay. And I hadn't had a chance--I didn't know anyone, so here I am in law school and I'm just trying to figure out, you know. How did I take notes, what notes do I use in order to study from? 'Cause you take one test Denise [Denise Gines], and if you pass or fail that tests that ends up being your grade, okay. And so, I'm scared out of my gourd. I'm, I'm there in Houston [Texas], I'm, I'm studying, I'm by myself. And, and so it was just one of the those--it was one of those times in your life where you just had to have faith in God and then in yourself, in terms of your ability to, to, to accomplish that particular goal. And, and, and fortunately I was able to get out that first semester alive. And, and then I kind of knew what the standard was going to be. And what I needed to do in order to make certain that I was prepared to take the test and pass the courses. Speaker 1: Well, give me a little insight on some the courses that, that you took that you enjoyed, and some of the professors that you were under? Speaker 2: Okay, well you know, I, I tell you the professor that I still have a great deal of respect for him and, and we're friends is a guy by the name of Elwyn Lee [Elwyn C. Lee]. Dr. Lee's spouse is some lady by the name of Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, okay. And both of them were really just coming back from their respective, from--I think both of 'em when to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or some Ivy League school. But, he had end up becoming a professor. And he was teaching Title VII [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII], which was EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] in those days. And you know, obviously I took the class and, and I made an A in the class and we got to know each other. I was able to kind of go to him, and say, "Okay what do you think about that?" And the reality is even today, I mean, I'm fifty-seven years old, I can still go to him and ask, you know, questions and get input from him. So, he, he was probably the most influential professor that I had during that particular time period. In addition I was able to begin a, get an internship in the Harris County, or the Harris County District Attorney's Office, which was in Houston, Texas. A gentleman by the name of Lupe Salinas was the intern director, intern clerks director. And Lupe hired me on June the 1st, 1977, never will forget it. And so, I was able to get a job there. And work full time and the D.A.'s office allowed me to take off, if I had a class during the day time. They would allow me to take off and go to class and then come back, okay. And, I was able to go to class during the day and also during the evening. And, and, and in addition to that I was able to get experience of watching lawyers in trial and also many instances have handling what they called a preliminary hearings, and taking cases before the grand jury. Story_ID: 543651 Speaker 1: Anything else in particular that you want to talk about, about law school [University of Houston Law Center, Houston, Texas]? Speaker 2: You know, we had a during law school we also had a, a--we played football and stuff like that. And so we had there was a lawyers league. And, and again I told you I worked for the Harris County District Attorney's Office, and that lawyers league, would have competitions. So, I played with the district attorney's office. And there were several guys there that had contacts with like the Houston Oilers [Tennessee Titans] and things like that. And that's Houston Oilers had a, Bum Phillips as the coach and (unclear) and everybody could try out for the team. The spring of 1979, I had an option to try out for that team, or to study for the bar, okay. And needless to say, it was during that time period were I had to make a, I had make a choice. So, obviously I decided to study for that bar. So, when, when you think about it I, you always say, "What if," you know. And I, I, I always say, "What if" 'cause I thought I was a halfway decent player. And that would have been able to, you, you, that would it was a collision course at, at decision time, between a little boy who had a dream of becoming a professional player. That was something way back in junior high school [Pearl C. Anderson Junior High School, Dallas, Texas] and now that I get opportunity to maybe try out for a football team or do I go ahead and study for the bar because I'm taking the bar in July. And training camp would have been in July, which one do you do? So, obviously I decided to study for the bar. And forgo trying out for a football team. And it's so ironic you know, you, you, I told you about Reverend Bowman [Leroy Bowman] way back in Annapolis, Maryland. During that time Denise [Denise Gines] you had to make a 75 [percent] on the bar exam, and I was scared. I can't I never done it before and you know all of the stuff about inherent biases of test as it relates to African Americans and things of that nature. Well, you know, the first day of tests were multiple choice and the second day of tests was basically writing, okay. And so, the multiple choice were, was not, a right answer, wrong answer; it was the best answer. And then again you had to do essays on the second day. Well, the second day at noon we're doing our essays on different questions that are asked. So, it's lunch time I had an apple, a tuna fish sandwich and a Coke [Coca-Cola], okay. It's twelve o'clock, we're gonna be tested on criminal procedure when we go back in. So I get my criminal procedure book. I open up the criminal procedure book and I begin reading it, you know, just reading it eating my tuna fish sandwich drinking my Coke, and eating my apple. And I begin reading, when is a person entitled to bail, for bail, okay. So, I read it, lo and behold I go back in the test, open up the test, criminal procedure, guess what the question was? "When is a person entitled to bail?" Don't tell me there's no god, okay. Fast forward I'm, I'm waiting for my bar results all the days in the world, you know, this is July when I take it, take the exam, July 25th and 26th, never will forget it. My bar results came back on of all the days in the world October 31st, 1979, Halloween, okay. Now, check this out, what you be able to do as a student waiting for your results, you call down to the bar here in Austin [Texas] and ask whether your name was on the list. And if they say yes, your name's on the list, that means that you passed the bar. And there's about five of us that are third year law students waiting for exams that were working with the district attorney's office, so we're all gathered around this table, with this telephone, giving it to one another. I can't recall whether or not I was the first second or third but ultimately what I ended up doing is making a call, and I'm picking up the telephone asking whether my name was on the list (unclear), "[HistoryMaker] Royce West?" I said, "Yes?" "Your name is on the list," okay. Now, I had to make a 75, I made a 78 on the exam, okay. Don't tell me there is no god. Story_ID: 543652 Speaker 1: So, you find out that you pass? Speaker 2: Well, I found out that my name was on the list, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: And so, again I'm saying, well wait a minute, hold up. [HistoryMaker] Royce West's name is on the list, maybe there's more than one Ro- Royce West, okay. And so, the bar results were coming out that day. And, and so, I decided to call back and say, "Was Royce Barry West on the list?" They, they, they (simultaneous)-- (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Hold it, hold it. Speaker 1: (Pause) So, you know, I had to make a decision as to whether or not there was more than one Royce West on the, as an applicant to become a lawyer. And so, I called back and say, "Royce Barry West is on there, on the list?" And they kind of chuckled and said, "Yes, you're on there." But, again the fact is that I had to make 75 [percent], and I made 78. And so, just think about that what's the odds of being able to sit down at lunch, eat a tuna fish sandwich, an apple and Coke [Coca-Cola] and open up a book and read the exact same material that was on the test? I'm telling ya, there was a blessing within itself. Story_ID: 543653 Speaker 1: So, what happens next after you find out that yes you have indeed passed the test [bar examination]? Speaker 2: I have to make a decision at the point as to whether or not to stay in Houston [Texas] at the Harris County D.A.'s Office [Harris County District Attorney's Office] or come back home. And mind you that while in college [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas], I told you I've--I did a lot of work and I did, didn't mention this. I used to work on the radio as a, a part time newscaster on the weekend with Tom Joyner. "KKDA-AM [KKDA Radio, Grand Prairie, Texas], this is [HistoryMaker] Royce West with your local news, what's happening (unclear) us." And so, I had to make a decision whether or not to move back to Dallas [Texas] or stay in Houston. And so, I decided to move back home to Dallas. And I accepted a job in the Dallas County District Attorney's Office where, I was there for about four or five years and ended up becoming a chief felony prosecutor in the office. The first African American to be the chief felony prosecutor. Speaker 1: Okay. The let, let's just go back just a touch, so you can tell me about working with Tom Joyner? Was he a, a good friend of yours, or? Speaker 2: Well, he's, he's a good friend as of today, I'm his lawyer, okay. And so, we've been knowing each other for what's that? Thirty plus years. And we've watched each other's kids grow up. And the whole nine yards. So, we've been friends for a long time. But, who would ever thought that, that relationship back then would. I went to law school [University of Houston Law Center, Houston, Texas] obviously then I came back from law school. He, he went and did his thing and once I became a, got into private practice we got back together and ultimately we've been together now for about ten, fifteen years as a, as partners. Story_ID: 543654 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you become the state's first African American chief felony prosecutor, what does that mean? Speaker 2: Well, I mean I was the first African American chief felony prosecutor in Dallas County [Dallas County District Attorney's Office]. What that meant is that no African American had, had rose to those ranks in the district attorney's office in the history of Dallas [Texas]. You got to understand that I was in the D.A.'s office with Henry Wade and I know you're familiar with Roe versus Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973], that's the same, Henry Wade, okay. And Henry Wade was the guy that prosecuted Jack Ruby for murder, for the murdering of Lee Harvey Oswald, same guy. And so, that's the office that I was in. I'm, I'm in an office now that was notorious or had a, a reputation of not allowing African Americans to serve on the jury. I'm in, I'm in an office were there's over, at that time over a hundred prosecutors and there're probably two that are African American, no Hispanics at all. So, that's the type of situation I'm coming in but, we call it home. And so, I'm involved, I mean I get my coming up to that particular office. I try cases and I never will forget one of the cases that I tried there was an incident Denise [Denise Gines], where I was in county court, which is like misdemeanor, you have felony court, and, and county court, county court lower grade offenses. Well, this African American gentleman had committed domestic violence against his wife. It was an all-white jury, the attorney on the other side representing the African American gentleman, his name was Beaufort Cates [ph.], typical southern name. He had a, a investigator by the name of Trigger [ph.], okay. Make I'm, I'm this I'm not making this up, this is real stuff, okay. And so, what had ended up happening is that the jury found the gu- found the guy guilty. But, there was a juror that basically said, when, when, when she went back there and said, "You know, this N is guilty, let's vote guilty and get the hell out of here," okay. And so, after the trial (background noise), after the trial the attorney came to me and said, "You know, I, I don't want you to think I'm trying to make this up, but one of the jurors back there used the N word toward my client." Story_ID: 543655 Speaker 1: The defense attorney [Beaufort Cates (ph.)] came up to me and said that one of the jurors used the N word back during the deliberation. And he wanted to know whether I would join him in a motion for a new trial. Well, it's first time as a prosecutor I ever had number one someone indicate something like that had happened and I didn't know whether not it was appropriate to join in a motion for a new trial. And so, what I did Denise [Denise Gines], I went around to some of the judges. I read the law first of all and it was, was the, the law basically was, was there, the introduction of new evidence. Did the jury take in to consider- consideration evidence that was no in the record, okay that, that was the standard. And I went to one judge and I said, "Judge, here's the situation," and the judge turned to me and said, "Well Royce [HistoryMaker Royce West], what is he?" I said, "He's an African American man." And you know, he turned red and of course I was, kind of taken off by--taken aback about by how he responded to me. Make, make a long story short, we go in to get ready to argue the motion for the new trial and of course by that time a lot of people around the courthouse had heard about it. And so, some of my fellow prosecutors were sitting, in the audience while I was arguing the merits of the deal. And, and to make a long story short, I decided to join in for the man to get a new trial as a result of the, injection of racism into the record, okay. And needless to say, you know, it was the right thing to do. It was one of the points that I'm most proud of as a prosecutor, former prosecutor [at the Dallas County District Attorney's Office]. Story_ID: 543656 Speaker 1: I became the, like I said, I became a chief felony prosecutor [at the Dallas County District Attorney's Office] and it wasn't met without some, I guess you'd say jealously or people being disturbed about an African American becoming a chief felony prosecutor. I'm getting ready to try a case and this guy and it's a rape case, it's, I'm, I'm very focused on what we're doing because the jury's getting ready to come in and all that. So, this attorney comes in and he had another case or something and I wouldn't give him what he wanted and he ended up calling me the N word, right, okay. And mind you I'm 6'4", and I was pretty tight back then, 'cause I still had that football physique--I still have that football physique, but I really had that football physique, then. And, you know, and you got to understand part of my background I'm from the projects, okay. And so, when he said that and jur- judge is on the bench, judge is on the bench. When he said that, I came from behind that table and I mean, I must, I mean laid him out, I floored him, okay. And he went down, and you know, you know the rule once you get 'em down, you don't let 'em up. And was about to stomp the guy I really was. And so, the other prosecutor held me off of him, okay. And he ran out, and ran behind, then I caught myself, okay. But, and then I had go up and tell Mr. Wade [Henry Wade] what had occurred and he's in his office and I say, "Mr. Wade I just had to, I just had to hit a defense attorney." He takes his glasses off, "You didn't hurt him, did you?" I said, "I probably hurt his feelings," he said, "All right, just go on," okay. And it never hit the newspaper. But, it was, it was heard around that courthouse. And had, had I not done that at that point and time, then the respect level would have been just literally zero. Just so happened the guy who did that was a, wasn't well regarded anyway. He was that type of person. And many people said it couldn't have happen to a better guy than him. Story_ID: 543657 Speaker 1: I had to try a couple of cases. One case I had to try was where an African American minister murdered his girlfriend on a church parking lot, okay. And so, it was, he was well, well respected. His family had been around Dallas [Texas] for probably the turn of the century. And I had to try the case. And so needless to say, there was a, great deal of consternation in the ministerial community concerning this particular case. But, I made certain that African American members, ministers knew that I wasn't trying African American ministers, I was trying this individual for basically murder and misusing the pulpit. And so, I ended up trying the case, but it was first time as a, a young lawyer that I decided to use what they call demonstrative evidence. And what that is basically is this--it's some evidence that would assist the jury in some sort of fact that they need to resolve. So, what I did is this, I decided that the jury needed to understand and appreciate the size of the woman in relation to that of the defendant and so I decided to get me a mannequin and you know it's Halloween mask. I got a picture of her, had some of these people that make Halloween mask to make a, a replica of her face. I put in on the mannequin. I got a wig that approximated the color of her hair, put it on the mannequin. We took the mannequin and made certain that we had different type of cushioning and stuff that approximated the size of the lady, okay. And you talking about really life, it's just like you and I you and I sitting here, looking at one or another. She looked real, all right. And so, I bring that mannequin into the court room put it right beside him, take the sheet of her and leave it right there. And I'm telling you, you could see him, just kind of melt in the courtroom in terms, of his mental state. Make a long story short, instead of continuing the trial they decided to plead the case, okay. And they ended up pleading to about forty or sixty years, which was in my estimation well, well deserved. Fast forward years later, he ends up getting out, he's at a store and he's filling up his gas tank and some kids up and stabbed him to death, yeah. So, that, that was (unclear), and then, then I could go on with some other stories about having to try people that were associated with the mob and things like that. So, you know, there it's some, it's some good stories there, but I ultimately decided to leave the district attorney's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office] in February of, I think it was like 1984, and go into private practice. Story_ID: 543658 Speaker 1: What's the name of your law firm? Speaker 2: Well, the name of my firm now is West and Associates [West and Associates LLP, Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 1: At this time in 1984? Speaker 2: Well, it was actually when I left, it was, you know, I went solo practice and the name of it was Royce West and Associates, then. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was Robinson, West and Gooden [Robinson, West and Gooden, PC, Dallas, Texas] fit in? Speaker 2: What ended up happenings was is that there was a suite of lawyers. And each of us had our own little entity. And first there was guy by the name of Lorenzo Brown. And then I came over and then Malcolm Robinson came over. We all, we initially firm, formed the firm of Brown, Robinson and West. That lasted a few years and then Lorenzo decided to go in a, one direction and we went in another direction. So, ended up beginning as Robinson and West. And then Julia Gooden [Julia L.S. Gooden] came along who had been working for me. And we made her partners and end up being Robinson, West and Gooden. Speaker 1: And what, what year was this? Speaker 2: It was all during the mid- the latter part of the '80s [1980s], the early part of the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: So, in private practice any interesting stories? Speaker 2: Oh I've got a million of them. You know, giving that I was a criminal lawyer when I first left the district attorney's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office], that's what I did, basically, is criminal law. And probably the, the most high profile criminal case I had was representing Michael Irvin. The former Dallas Cowboy [Dallas Cowboys] football player when he was having his issues, with the criminal justice system. So, that's probably the most high profile case that I've dealt with as a criminal lawyer. Story_ID: 543659 Speaker 1: Well tell me a little about going out on your own and, and starting a private practice? Speaker 2: Very good question, you know, when I left the district attorney's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office], I had a couple offers to go with some law firms, but I, I just that's not what I wanted to do. And you know, I've demonstrated to you, I, point after point through my entire life I was always kind of, of been industrious and, and so I wanted my own business. But, I didn't have a lot of money, so I went to my granddaddy my, my paternal Granddaddy West [Samuel West]. I said, "Granddaddy West, I need to borrow about five thousand dollars." He said, "For, what for?" I said, "Well I, I want to start my own business." He said, "Well, I'm gonna loan you the money, but just remember one thing." And I think this is something whoever is listening to this, especially if they're young people. That I borrowed money from my family, he said, "Son, when you borrow money from your family, just understand you better paying 'em back because a lot of time they are the bank of last resort," okay. I never will forget that, 'cause he loaned me five thousand dollars, and I told him, I'm gonna give back to him within a year. I gave it back to him within six months. So, he loaned me the money to get started. I hired a secretary and, and frankly haven't look back since. Story_ID: 543660 Speaker 1: So, were there any other issues that a, a young attorney newly in private practice would come up against that you would offer some advice to? Speaker 2: Pay your taxes (laughter), pay your taxes. I don't care whether it's young lawyer or young businessperson, the reality is if you're in business for yourself you've always go to pay your taxes. You know, a lot of young lawyers and businesspeople they get in business and they you know they get that first thousand dollars or something like that. And they believe the whole thousand dollars belong to you. Not the case. You know, a significant portion of that these days belongs to the federal government. And you've got to make certain that you do those estimated tax deposits, to insure that you're, you're not penalized and, and interest accrues as it relates to balances that you didn't pay. And so, I learned that early on, and no one had to teach me that lesson, because my CPA [certified public accountant] told me that lesson. And so, you got to make certain that you take care of that. Story_ID: 543661 Speaker 1: So how long did you stay in private practice? Speaker 2: I'm still in private practice. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Right, I, you know, I've been in private practice since 1984, March 1st, 1984. So, whatever that is, what's that almost--it's a lot of years, I'll put it like that, okay. Speaker 1: So, what happens next? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, what happens next in terms of my life, you know, I'm, I, I get married. I run for district attorney, okay. Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's do one first and then the other. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You got, you get married first or you run for district attorney? Speaker 2: I get, I get married. I get married first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: And who do you marry? Speaker 2: At that time I get married and then I ultimately get divorced. I, I, I have three sons at that time. And then I get married to my wife who I've been married to for about twenty years Carol Richard West. Carol Richard West and then we've been married since like, oh, oh, since 1987, I think I'm right about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so we have our kids are in fact--they're in college now, two sons here. And so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you have three sons first with your first wife [Ruby West]? Speaker 2: I actually have seven kids all together, six boys and one girl. Speaker 1: Okay, let's take time to tell me who they are and if you could just go in order? Speaker 2: Sure Stephond Deshay West [Stephond West], Stephond is thirty-eight years old, and he is the chief paralegal in my law office [West and Associates LLP, Dallas, Texas], that handles real estate. And then my only daughter, my baby girl Tara West-Franklin, now. She's thirty-seven and in real estate and married to a great guy [Derrick Franklin] who works for a company in Australia. And then there's Royce Jr. [Royce West, Jr.] who's a lawyer, he's a lawyer in the office. And then there's Remarcus [Remarcus West], who works for Southwest Airlines [Southwest Airlines Co.]. There's Rolando [Rolando West] who's in school at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]. There's Roddrick [Roddrick West], who's in school at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]. And there's Brandon [Brandon West], who's in school at Austin Community College [Austin, Texas]. Those, those--six boys and one girl. Story_ID: 543662 Speaker 1: You decide to run for district attorney? Speaker 2: I decide to run for district attorney. And-- Speaker 1: In what year is this? Speaker 2: This is 1986, 1986 because Henry Wade at this point is retiring. So, I decided to run for district attorney, I, I won the Democratic nomination, for district attorney on the first ballot, burning against two other individuals. Speaker 1: Do you remember who they were? Speaker 2: I remember Peter Lesser and Jim Allison [sic. John Allison]. I may have the first name Jim, I may have Jim's first name wrong but his last name is Allison. And this is in 1986. I, I win the Democratic nomination, but I, I lost the general election, I think I had about 45 percent of the votes somewhere off in there. So, it was, it was relatively close, given that I'm the first African American to run for that office. And you know, the district attorney's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office], district attorney's office is one of the most powerful offices in the county let along the state, okay. And then I lose the race and I just kind of concentrate on, on my private practice [West and Associates LLP, Dallas, Texas], building my private practice. I begin to look into other areas, other than just criminal law at that time in terms of practice. Speaker 1: And so where do you, what did you branch out to? Speaker 2: Well, taxes, public finance, ultimately school law and entertainment law. Story_ID: 543663 Speaker 1: When's the next time you decide that you want to be in public office? Speaker 2: Well, interesting enough I, I'm in--my wife [Carol Richard West] is from New Orleans [Louisiana], she talk like dat, you talk like you know, people down there talk like dat. And I'm, I'm standing--[HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson, Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson, was the senator in this district before me becoming the senator. And she's now in [U.S.] Congress. Be, before I became a senator, excuse me. And you know, she's talking about, you know, drawing a congressional seat and running for Congress. And so, I'm thinking about the possibility of running for the state senate [Texas Senate]. And the thought actually crystallized in my mind when I was standing on banquette--the porch of my in-laws' house in New Orleans. And look across the street and there's a sign on a tree and it says, "Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] for state senate." Marc at that time was the mayor of New Orleans, I said, "Yeah, that's what I'm gonna do." Because that will help me to continue what at that time was kind of a mission for me, of, of public service. As it relates to doing some things in the community. So, I decided to run and I ran against two great guys, one by the name of Jerald Larry [Jerald H. Larry], who was a sitting state representative. And Mr. Jesse Oliver, who was a former judge and also a state representative. We did not have a contentious election, I was able to win on the first ballot and in part I won on the first ballot because I had previously ran for district attorney. And had a lot of name identification as a result of that. I became state senator and was sworn into office as state senator in January of 1993. Speaker 1: And what district was this? Speaker 2: District 23 [Texas Senate District 23], which is out of Dallas, Texas. Speaker 1: And you won with 50 percent of the vote? Speaker 2: I think I had about 57 percent. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was your platform? Speaker 2: My platform then as it is now, is to deal with issuing concerning juveniles, elderly, education and economic development. Story_ID: 543664 Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about things that you accomplished while you were in state senate [Texas Senate]? Speaker 2: Well, yeah as a member of the state senate, I, I've been able to, I've been fortunate to be able to build coalitions based on interest not based on the color of one's skin. And now here's the deal, when I first came down there, I'm a trial lawyer, okay. So, I come down there with, I've got a little swagger, being, you know, being home of the Dallas Cowboys, you know, we back then we were, we had a little swagger, we still have a little swagger, okay. But, I came down here with a little a swagger saying, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm like Frederick Douglass, I can get on the floor and we can debate each other, and I'm not gonna split any verbs, unless necessary. But, guess what? There's thirty-one of us in the senate and all of us have what? Egos. And so, I come down a guy says, "Hey, have you ever been in the house [Texas House of Representatives]?" I say, "No I've never been in the house." He turns around, Carl Parker [Carl A. Parker], he says, "You haven't been house broken." And I said, "No, I haven't been house broken," everybody started laughing. Well, fast forward I'm doing everything I need to do in order to make certain that I follow the rules of parliament and procedures. Getting my bills through the senate, getting 'em over to the house begin working in the house, trying to get my bills passed. Well, here's the deal. In the house, they have two calendars, one general state, one major state and the difference between the two, one of the differences, one the main difference that if your bill is not taken up on a legislative, if your bill is on the general state calendar and your bill is not taken up on that day. Guess what happens to your bill? It dies, all right. I didn't know that, okay. Otherwise I would have made certain bills are, best possible, on the major state calendar which, you know, they can take about almost (unclear) subsequent day. Well, all of my legislation Denise [Denise Gines], during the first legislative session was on the general state calendar. Well, I'm over there working, working and working. They didn't take my bills up, and all of them died, okay. And I felt like the world had just imploded, that's what it means to be house broken, okay. Okay. I was broken in that first session. But, you know, and I could've done a couple of things. I could have said that the reason that, that happened to me, was 'cause I'm African American. I'm incompetent and don't know what I'm doing or it was a lesson learned. I decided to make certain it was the latter as opposed to the former, it was a lesson learned. And so when I, when I realized that all of my legislation had been (pronunciation) killed, you know the word killed. That's not proper English, but all of you understand what killed means. When I realized that all of my legislation had died, I said well now, I need to figure out some vehicles in order to get them passed. And so, that left, then I recognized that there's a process where you can amend legislation. And so, what I did is took a lot of those bills and amended it onto other legislation that was traveling through the legislative process. So, you know that one of my first lessons in exposure to the legislative process here in Texas. The reality is that there's thirty-one state senators and 150 house members and each one of us have an ego. And that the best way in order to get things done is to work together. Story_ID: 543665 Speaker 1: In the senate [Texas Senate], you talk about youth and juveniles and, and the elderly. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What, what were some of the initiatives that came out (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, over the years probably in, in area the of juveniles as just an example I, I was able to kind of, of put together some programs that allowed funding for programs throughout the State of Texas. Called community youth development programs, that what we tried to do, as, as opposed to intervene we try to prevent juvenile crime. And we've been real successful, and, and at least a couple of areas in, in, in my senatorial district [Texas Senate District 23] where we have programs. We have a 98 percent graduation rate. And those students are not in, 98 percent of them have never been referred to the juvenile justice system. We've able to create what we call the center for juvenile crime prevention [Texas Juvenile Crime Prevention Center] at, at Prairie View A&M University [Prairie View, Texas]. And get Prairie View, a historically black college [HBCU], significant funding for that institute in order to build a building there. And help them to develop the first Ph.D. program in the history of the university, which this university is over 100 years old. And we're now in the process of training young minds on, under graduate and graduate level where they can come out a doctorate degree in that particular area. And that's the only such program in the country that focuses on juvenile related, juvenile prevention related issues. We've done some other things with Prairie View, but I (unclear) go on with that. But one of the, one of my mentors in terms of politics and as well as law is judge by the name of L.A. Bedford [Louis A. Bedford Jr.], who's well respected in the Dallas [Texas] area. One of the first African Amer- the first African American judge in the City of Dallas' history. Tried cases with Thurgood Marshall, he's of that vintage. And when I ask him to support me for state senate he said, "You know Royce [HistoryMaker Royce West], I will support you as long as you don't forget historically black colleges." And I never will, during my tenure as a state senator or as a public servant. So, that's in the area of juvenile justice, and-- Story_ID: 543666 Speaker 1: In the area of the elderly, let me kind of put in this context. One of the programs of law the elder- the elderly people have other than prescription drugs and things like that. (Gesture) Thank you [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama for passing healthcare reform [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010]. But, one of the biggest issues is, and I'm pretty certain that you know someone that has, had, has, has a grandparent that's had to raise their grandchildren. And a lot of that goes on in this country and those kids end up being ward of the state. And the state has to make a decision as to whether or not to put in that child in or those children in foster care. Or try an alternative for them. And so, during the mid-'90s [1990s] we were able to sensitize the legislation and get funding in order to provide a stipend for grandparents who are willing to raise their grandchildren. Those kids that have been placed with the state and the only alternative other than putting them with a relative would have been able to put 'em in foster care. Now, I don't need to tell you about there's some great, foster care experiences, but there's a lot of horror stories in terms of foster care. And we recognized that if a child is placed in foster care they're less likely to adjust than someone that's with their own family. And so, over the years we've been able to create a sensitivity in the State of Texas as it relates to providing funding for alternative placement outside of foster care. And that particular goal has in fact been realized during our last, during our eightieth legislative session. And I, you know, I could go on and on about different other initiatives we created University of North Texas at Dallas [Dallas, Texas] and as well as the first public law school [University of North Texas at Dallas College of Law, Dallas, Texas] in the state's history, since 1968. Story_ID: 543667 Speaker 1: --You've been in the state senate [Texas Senate] for a number of years? Speaker 2: Since 1993, right. Speaker 1: And so, the population has changed, what, what has that meant for you? Speaker 2: Well, what it's meant is that the demographics of the State of Texas have changed. I mean between the years 2000 to 2008 we've had about a 3 million, 3 million increase, 3 million individual increase in population in the State of Texas. And over 2 million of that has been from Hispanic, the Hispanic population. Texas is a majority minority state which means that the dominant ethnic group is that of Latinos. And when I begin to look at my senatorial district [Texas Senate District 23]. My senatorial district is probably 50, 50 now. And so from that 50, 50 in terms of 50 percent, close to 50 percent Latino, and the other 50 percent being Anglo and African American. And so, what that, what does, it calls, it calls upon me to be more and more sensitive, not I've, I hadn't always been sensitive to Latino related issues. Because I represent a sizable portion of that community. Story_ID: 543668 Speaker 1: If you would, just talk about the sponsorship of the Emmett C. Conrad Leadership Program [sic. Dr. Emmett J. Conrad Leadership Program]. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, Emmett, Emmett J. Conrad internship program. Is, is one of those things that as an elected official Denise [Denise Gines], the reality is if, if I can't leverage this office for the best interest of my constituents, there's something wrong, I don't need to be here. I tell my staff that there's only one star in the senator office and that's the constituent. And once we forget that I no longer need to be the state senator. And, when they start complaining about that they don't have enough time to do things. I say don't sweat it you got all night, don't worry about it, you have all night. And so, one of the things that I, I can recall it was like March of 1993, and it's about two o'clock in the morning. And I'm thinking about, you know, the, the--I'm a new, I'm a new senator and thinking about things I need to do. So, one of the things I need to do is provide employment opportunities for students, college students in my senatorial district [Texas Senate District 23]. And so, what we did is we put together the Dr. Emmett J. Conrad program, which are, the program is for students that have completed their first year of college. And what we attempt to do is to take those students that might very well be majoring in medicine, as an example. We try to give them some intern experience with a hospital, with a doctor, a paid internship. So, they can make a decision of whether or not they truly want to be a doctor or, or a nurse, or whatever the case maybe. And so, we've been doing that for now for the past seventeen years, seventeen years--wow. And probably we've had over two thousand students to go through that particular program. Speaker 1: Can you tell me who Dr. Emmett J. Conrad was? Speaker 2: Dr. Conrad was the first, he's number one he was a physician in Dallas [Texas]. But, he was the first African American to be on the Dallas Independent School District board of trustees. The first African American to be the medical director for St. Paul's Hospital [St. Paul University Hospital] in Dallas. The first African American to be on a state board of education. Story_ID: 543669 Speaker 1: And then you have a program that you supported called One Community-One Child? And tell me about why Julia C. Frazier Elementary School [Dallas, Texas] was chosen for that project? Speaker 2: Well, it, it was chosen because Julia C. Frazier, you remember I talked to you about living in Frazier Courts [Dallas, Texas]. Julia C. Frazier was the elementary school in Frazier Courts. Even though I didn't attend it, I wanted to make certain that, you know, I didn't forget from whence I come. Speaker 1: Okay, and that program does what? Speaker 2: Well, what it ended up doing, it was a, it was a pilot project to test the following hy- hypothesis. The school was having issues with, with student performance. It was also having issues with parent participation. And what we attempted to do, and what we did is to put in place a structure, whereby we would ask employers to allow the parents of students that were attending that particular school. To allow those parents to take off at least twice a semester as long as they could demonstrate that they were doing things related to the school. And once we did that you, you increase the rapport between the students, I mean between the teachers and also the parents. And we know that if you have parental involvement in schools you're more apt to have a higher success by the students. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or I should say greater success by the students, excuse me. Story_ID: 543670 Speaker 1: You listed some of the initiatives a little earlier but one of them had to do with the gangs. And you were appointed chairman of the Senate Interim Committee on Gangs and Juvenile Justice? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, earlier in my career and, and this was some of the work that we've done as it relates to the youth. And in part the reasons why we set up these community programs came as a result of my chairing, of our juvenile hang--our gang committee. But, also when I was doing that, was at the same time and, was at the same time that James Byrd [James Byrd, Jr.] was a, was drugged to death here in the State of Texas. African American gentleman picked up by some Anglo guys in Jasper, Texas. Chained to the back of their pick up and drugged to death. And, and they basically the only thing that was left of him was his torso, that's it. Speaker 1: This was in 1997? Speaker 2: I, I, I try to forget the year. But, it was during that same time that we were looking at gangs, not only juvenile gangs but gangs in general. And I, I wish I had the pictures I'd show them to you today. The individuals that were ultimately convicted and held responsible for those, that, that brutal murder, were, were me- members of a gang. And they hated black people so, so bad that they put tattoos on their bodies and one was of a, one guy had a tattoo of a black man hanging from a tree. On his body, on his body. And so, we did a lot of work in terms of gangs to try to do everything we could in order to provide resources to help kids get out of gangs, and keep 'em out of gangs. So I did a lot of work in that particular area too. Story_ID: 543671 Speaker 1: Do you remember who was the governor was during this time, in 1997? Speaker 2: It was Bush, former President Bush [President George Walker Bush]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you worked under a number of governors is that right? Speaker 2: I've wo- yeah, yes I have, I worked under Ann Richards, not a number of them but, actually one, two three, Ann Richards, George Bush and Rick Perry. Speaker 1: Okay, and Bob Bullock when was he? Speaker 2: Bob Bullock was the lieutenant governor here in the state. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I'm gonna tell you about a Bullock story that, I gotta tell you this Bullock story. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: When I first became the state senator, you know, Bob Bullock and people can kind of visualize this. This guy was about 110 pounds soaking wet. And maybe about 5'3", 5'4", had been the comptroller, had been married three or four times. Had alcohol problems, had gone through, you know, alcohol treatment programs, et cetera, et cetera. But, was one of the most respected office holders in the, in the history of this state. In fact, we named a museum after him. Our, our history, out history museum is named after him, it's the Bob Bullock History Museum [Bob Bullock Texas State History Museum, Austin, Texas]. When I first became a state senator, he called me down, he said, "Senator," (unclear) I wasn't senator yet, "Royce [HistoryMaker Royce West], congratulations. What committees would you like to serve on?" And, I'm thinking, you remember that Eddie Murphy movie, one, 'Coming to Washington' [sic. 'The Distinguished Gentleman'] or he was a politician coming to Washington [D.C.]? Well, anyway no, all right, the, the thing is this, is that he called me down and asked me what committees I wanted to serve on. Now, we're sitting across the table from one another. Now, mind you he's 5'3" and I'm 6'4", he's 110, I'm 200 and something pounds. And so, I want to serve on education, I want to serve on state affairs, economic development and finance, okay. All of those are plum committees, he leaned across the table like this and said and, I, I can't repeat the words on camera, but he learned across the table and gave me some choice words and started yelling at the top of his voice. I, I just met this guy, okay. And I had to hold on to everything on the inside of me from, you know, from jumping across that table. The last man to talk to me like that was my father [Willis West, Jr.], okay. And so, he said, "Get up, get out of here." So, I got up, stood up, hit the table and got out of there, you know. Two or three weeks later he called me, he calls me and he says, "I'm gonna put you on finance, education, health and human services and criminal justice." And then he hung up the phone, okay. Here's the deal, he knew better than I did at that point in time. Number one what my district [Texas Senate District 23] needed, what Texas needed and what I needed to do in order to become a better state senator to serve the people of the State of Texas. He's now deceased and you know, the realty is those types of lessons, you ultimately appreciate, you know, as you begin to mature into a role that you find yourself in. And, and I've, I've appreciated that particular lesson ever since. He had taught me that lesson, that's why I wanted to make sure that I recounted it today. Story_ID: 543672 Speaker 1: Would you like to talk about anything that you're doing now? That, something that you have on your plate that you know, that you're gonna work on, that you can share and anything in your private practice that you might want to share? Speaker 2: Yeah, just a, just a couple of things, let me talk about as, as a senator. I, I believe that one of the things that I've gotta do, is make certain, my--right now I'm on finance, education, higher education, health and human services. And I'm chairman of the government relations. But, my passion is education. But, all of us always talk about it, but we don't do a damn, we don't do anything about it. And so, I don't want to be one of those people that just talk about things, I, I want to be able to get things done. And be able to point with particularly the things that I've done, so people can hold me accountable. Now, I don't mind being held accountable. I know that it's important for citizens in Dallas [Texas] and believe it or not, Dallas is seventh, I mean eighth and ninth largest city in this country. And heretofore didn't have a public university within the city. You think about this Dallas, Texas, no public university. And so, I started a mission and to bring public, a public university to Dallas. We now have the University of North Texas at Dallas [Dallas, Texas]. But, it's far from over with. We've conceptualized it, we got the law passed and we're building our second building, we have three thousand students, right now. But, it's not over with, you know, by the time that, that university will realize its full vision, I won't, I won't be here, I'll be dead. And I, I shouldn't be here, but that university ultimately is gonna be twenty to thirty thousand students. As a lawyer I had to make a decision Denise [Denise Gines] as to whether or not I was doing this university because of some ego trip that I have, yeah. And so, yeah and you go through that stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so, one Wednesday evening during session when the bill was passed by the house [Texas House of Representatives] approving the University of North Texas at Dallas in statute. I was going home a friend of my mind by the name of Leonard Long [ph.] was being honored with the Distinguished Service Award and I was going to introduce him. And so, I got on the airplane from here in Austin [Texas], going back to Dallas. I begin to pray and mind you the house just passed the bill creating the university. I begin to pray and the prayer ended up being, "God thank you for allowing me to assist you in answering prayers of generations yet unborn." I mean that's pretty powerful right there, you know. And so, I, then I knew it wasn't about me, it was about God using me to do his will here on earth, as he would have it done in heaven. And so, once, once I recognized that, that has allowed me to do things that I think are necessary to enable our Heavenly Father to do his will for generations yet unborn, be, be it that of university or a law school which we were able to get passed in the last legislative session. That public law school in Dallas [University of North Texas at Dallas College of Law, Dallas, Texas], will allow students who can't afford to go private school to get a public law school education, at a, a quality public law school education at a much reduced rate than that of a private law school. Speaker 1: That's great. Story_ID: 543673 Speaker 1: Now, you have been given many distinguished awards, is there a, and, and we couldn't list all of them 'cause there's so many (laughter). But, is there anything in particular that you're most proud of? Speaker 2: I'm, I'm gonna tell a story and, and I think this will kind of put it into the context that it needs to be placed in, in terms of all of the awards and accolades. I was named one of the twenty-five most powerful men in Texas politics, okay. When the announcement came out, my wife Carol [Carol Richard West]--I get it, in, in the magazine, and I take it go home to Carol I say, "Carol, Carol, look here I'm one of the twenty-five, I've been named one of the twenty-five most powerful men in Texas politics." She said, "Yeah now go take the trash out," okay. (Laughter) It kind of puts it all in perspective. I appreciate the accolades and the awards, you know. You know, hen- I, when I die, I want to be known as a person that kept his word. I want to be known as a good father, a good husband, a son, a good brother and a good public servant. That's gonna be reward enough for me and if, and if I get, get all of that right. I think I'm gonna get, get through--the ultimate reward, in heaven. Story_ID: 543674 Speaker 1: Well that was gonna be my next question, so since you answered that one. Let me ask you is there anything that you have not done that want to do? Speaker 2: Is there anything I have not done, that I want to do? I want to see my grandkids grow up, okay. The things is that I, I've got a, I've got to see better balance in my life. I'm a lucky man, okay. If God decided to take me away today the only thing I would regret is not see my grandkids grow up, okay. You're looking a man that's fifty-seven years old, that was a little boy from Annapolis, Maryland that ultimately had a dream of becoming a professional athlete that was influenced by a television (air quotes) program 'Perry Mason.' That, its influence was so significant that it help me to shape what I ultimately want to be, to be a lawyer. And I've been able to achieve those, that goal. I've got a great wife [Carol Richard West], I've got great kids, you know. And, and I mean it's just it's up and down just like everything else. But, I've been very fortunate to be able to do the things, I've, I've done thus far in my life. I can't tell you what's around the other corner. I, I, you know, but hopefully I'm going to be prepared for whatever it is. If it's, is it, if it's continuous public service here as a state senator [in the Texas Senate] or in, in Washington [D.C.], or as a statewide elected official I don't know. And it may not even be continuous public service. That, that's something that I really have no control over, I've just got to continue seek guidance to do what's right. Story_ID: 543675 Speaker 1: If you had to send a message to the future generations, or send a message to someone who will be entering law school down the line, what would you say? Speaker 2: I'd tell 'em it's not about them, you know. And if, if they're going to law school in order to make money they're, they're doing it for the wrong thing, wrong reason. That's--it's all about service to others and as long as you keep service to others at the forefront of what you're doing you're, you're gonna be able to make a decent living. But, the reality is that you're going to get much more than silver and gold. You're going to get self-actualization out of what you're doing. Because probably one of the most powerful experiences that you can have as a lawyer is to make certain that you're doing what's in the best interest of your client. And getting your client the result that they justly deserve. And you're, and then being able to use the, the skill set that you acquire in law school to do, do, do good. A lot of the people down here in the legislature are lawyers. Our, being a lawyer allows the ability to be able to do good by others. Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to speak about? Speaker 2: I, I just want to say that again at age fifty-seven I live in a country that is great. We have witnessed the election of an African American as president of the United States of America [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. And a lot of people talk about whether or not the dream that was always theoretically discussed, was it was ever possible. I would tell young people who may very well listen or see this particular tape that I want you to dream your wildest dreams and whatever the dream is I want you to work towards making certain that you realize those dreams. If, an African American president, if an African American became, can become president of the United States there's no reason why that you can't become whatever you want to be. Speaker 1: Well, I want to thank you for taking your precious time to share your story for the--The HistoryMakers, I'm sure it's gonna be an inspiration to many. So, thank you very much for your time. Speaker 2: Thank you very much Denise [Denise Gines]...