 Story_ID: 57368 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when I was a member of the 101st Airborne Division [of the United States Army]. I was a paratrooper; jumped out of airplanes from 1957 to 1959. Served under General [William] Westmoreland. Speaker 2: This is my first jump. What you see is me with the parachute and a superimposed picture of the chutes coming out, the beginning and then the end product. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me when I was a member of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. Let me rephrase that. This is a picture of me when I served as a Cook County Recorder of Deeds. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in 1992 when I was elected to the office of Cook Country Recorder of Deeds, which is the second largest Recorder of Deeds office in the nation. Speaker 1: I was playing softball when I was a member of the Illinois General Assembly and this was taken in 1992, in Springfield, Illinois. Speaker 2: This is me outside of the Capitol in Springfield. Of course, Springfield is our State Capitol and I was strolling the capitol grounds in 1989. Speaker 1: That was when I was playing professional baseball in the Cub organization. I was assigned to--that is not me there. At the right hand corner that's me. Yeah, that's me. That's a picture of me playing baseball in a Northern League, which was a part of the Chicago Cubs Organization. That's Wenatchee, Washington. Speaker 2: I was the recipient of the Kate Marymount (ph.) Award; that's the Most Dedicated Teacher of the Year Award in 1969, when I taught school at the Schiller Elementary School as a part of the Chicago Board of Education System. Speaker 1: This is a collection of sixth grade classes at the Schiller Elementary School where I taught for a period of 26 years. It's a school I graduated from. It's located in the Cabrini-Green Housing Project. Speaker 2: Commencement address speaker for the DeVry Institute of Technology here in Chicago [Illinois] back in 1991. Speaker 1: You've been all over government and public service. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I love it. Speaker 1: That's me when I was--this is me playing basketball at Waller High School, which is now Lincoln Park Academy. I was an All-City baseball and basketball player there from 1948 until 1952. Speaker 2: Looks like that's me kneeling to the left of a baseball bat. Actually it's a softball bat and I played softball for a team called the Huns in the area, which is now Cabrini-Green. At that time, it was a community that was void of housing projects, but the way to enjoy ourselves was to play softball. Speaker 1: (off camera voice): Mr. White, that would be what year? Speaker 2: That should be 1947. Speaker 1: Now where are you in the picture? Speaker 2: I think I'm to the left here. That looks like me right there. I think that's me right there. Speaker 1: Twenty six years. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me playing baseball, Triple A baseball.-- This is a picture of me in 1985, better yet, 1965 playing baseball for the Salt Lake City [Utah] Bees, which was a part of the Chicago Cubs Triple A system. I played centerfield. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with my Chicago Cubs uniform, where I'm holding the bat, being serious about my ability to play the game and play the game well. There's another picture over there. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me out in centerfield, when I played for the Salt Lake City Bees. In the back is the Wasatch Mountains, Wasatch Mountain Range, which is outside of Salt Lake City. Played centerfield for that team from 1964 to 1966. Speaker 1: This is a picture of two of the members of the Jess White Tumbling Team and [former Chicago Bulls point guard] Norm Van Lier and some of the representatives from Verizon Wireless. We were at the United Center [Chicago, Illinois]. They gave us some tickets to take the kids to see the basketball game and that took place about two weeks ago. I would say, March of 2001. Speaker 2: I went back to teach at the Schiller Elementary School and what you see is my Close Order Drill Team. It's one of the finest marching music you'll find anywhere. We would--are very proud of the fact that we were able to put this young people in a (unclear), now they know their left from their right and they know how to follow instructions extremely well. I'm over to the far right. Speaker 1: (pause) Speaker 2: That's a picture with the Principal, the man to the left is Mr. John Kinnea (ph.) and right in the middle is my former wife Sylvia White and to the right is your's truly and we're standing outside of the Frederick Von Schiller Elementary School. School I graduated from and I went back to teach there for 26 years. Speaker 1: It was there, is there where you started the Jesse White Tumbling-- Speaker 2: I started the Jesse White Tumbling Team before I started there. I started the Jesse White Tumbling Team in '59 [1959]. I started there in '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: (off-camera voice): Disregard the previous picture. We're using this one instead. Speaker 2: This is a picture of [Chicago Bears defensive end] Richard Dent and yours truly. We're at one of the bookstores where he received an award for his involvement in helping to generate some dollars to the Literacy Program to help others to become better educated, better informed. I'm trying to think of the name of the bookstore. They're two big bookstores. Speaker 1: Barnes and Noble? Speaker 2: Barnes and Noble, that's it. Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Jesse White Tumbling Team. We're performing at the United Center for one of the Chicago Bulls basketball games. We perform about eight times a year for that wonderful franchise. Yet, we perform for all the NBA teams with the exception of the [Los Angeles] Lakers. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me sharing some information with some of my constituents when I was elected as State Representative of the 13th District, which has a population of more than 100,000 people, but an 83% black population. There's an 83% white population, 12% black, and five percent others. I was elected and re-elected to that office for 16 years. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my former wife Sylvia White supporting me in my effort to become the, as you were, the State Representative from the 13th District. Speaker 2: Do you see a little kid looking up, this kid out here that's sticking in the back; you see that little kid looking up, I think that picture's worth 1,000 words. That little kid right there looking up, he's wow (laughter). Speaker 1: I really--they're very impressive; they are. Speaker 2: This is a picture of the Jesse White Tumbling Team performing for the Jackie Robinson West Baseball Program. This was shot 1985. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when I was 19 years of age, had just come back from my first year in college. Speaker 2: Oh really? You went to college again where? Speaker 1: At Alabama State University, which is now--College then, it's Alabama State University now. I lived in the same dormitory with former [Chicago] Mayor Eugene Sawyer and Wellington Wilson, the President of Kennedy-King College [City Colleges of Chicago] was my roommate and teammate. Then Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was my minister and [Rev.] Ralph Abernathy was my fraternity brother and Rosa Parks was the lady who refused to move to the back of the bus who started the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: In 1985, the Jesse White Tumbling Team shot a commercial on the Equitable Plaza promoting Coca-Cola. What you see is the beginning of the commercial. Story_ID: 57369 Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you to state your name and spell it for us. We're going to just slate this and include your middle name also. I want you to give your birthdate and today's date and your profession. Speaker 2: My name is Jesse White, J-E-S-S-E, middle name is Clark, C-L-A-R-K White, W-H-I-T-E; born 6/23/34; Secretary of State for the State of Illinois; born in Alton, Illinois; raised in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Today's date, did you give today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April 2, 2001. Speaker 1: And your profession? Speaker 2: I'm the Secretary of State for the State of Illinois. Speaker 1: I would say you're a politician, too. Speaker 2: I would surmise. Speaker 1: Then the other thing, I just want to say that we're at the Offices of the Historymakers at 1900 South Michigan [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 57370 Speaker 1: Now we're just going to have a conversation. We'll start today, we'll finish up tomorrow. I want to start out by asking you about your father Jesse, Sr; you're exactly- you're Jesse Clark White, Sr [sic, Jr.], huh? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk about him and where he was from and what you know about his background. Speaker 2: My father was born in Caruthersville, Missouri and he lived a lot in Tennessee. Humble, Tennessee to be specific. He later migrated to Alton, Illinois and while he was there, he worked in the produce industry. Then later on, he met my mother, Julie [Mae] White who had three kids [Edward Shaw, Charles Shaw, and Doris Fry] and a husband had passed away and the two of them became closely allied. He later married her and I was the first offspring as a result of that marriage. Then came three more individuals after me [Dorothy White, Cora White, and George Elliott White]. Then in 1943, we moved to Chicago [Illinois]. I was seven years of age at the time. We moved to the Near North Side of the City of Chicago, where he later began work with the American Aircraft Industry, helping make airplanes. Then later on he became involved with making pottery; face bowls, sinks, bathtubs. Then-- Speaker 1: I want to go back and have you tell me what you know about him growing up or his side of the family. Speaker 2: I didn't know a lot about my father, because, as I said before, he and my mother had married after my mother had three children. But I know that he was a caring and loving person. He played a lot of softball after work. He taught us how to play and all of us wanted to emulate my father. We wanted to be a baseball player. Then later on, I was successful to becoming a professional baseball player, as a result of his encouragement. Much of what I am today, I owe to him and I'm proud of the fact that I have a father of his stature. Story_ID: 57371 Speaker 1: Now what about your mother's side of the family? Or anything, your mother, can you describe her and what type of person she was or where she was from originally? Speaker 2: My mother [Julia Mae White] was born in Earle, Arkansas and she moved to Alton, Illinois. She met a fellow by the name of Edward Shaw and she married him and she had three children [Edward Shaw, Charles Shaw, and Doris Fry]. Then Mr. Shaw later died of Typhoid Fever and then a few years later she met my father [Jesse C. White, Sr.] and the two of them got married. And as I indicated before, I was the first of that union. Speaker 1: So did the three other--was it a family of six then? Speaker 2: It was a family of seven. Speaker 1: Seven, okay. Speaker 2: Four boys and three girls and I was right in the middle. I was number four from the bottom and four from the top. As it is today, all four--my father is deceased, along with my three brothers and I'm the only surviving male and I also have three sisters who are also survivors. Story_ID: 57372 Speaker 1: Now how--can you describe growing up in Alton [Illinois]; what that life was like? Speaker 2: I lived in an area called Dogtown that was down in the poor section of Alton and right by the railroad tracks. We were right by the Mississippi River. We did a lot of fishing. We got along well with one another and the people next door looked out for the person next to them. It was a family type community. Then my grandmother and grandfather moved to Chicago [Illinois] and my mother and father thought that Chicago would have been a better place to live, because of the opportunities that presented itself. So we packed up and we moved to Chicago, 536 West Division Street, which is right on the corner of Larrabee and Division, right across the street from where Cabrini-Green [housing project] is today. But during those days, Cabrini-Green was non-existent. We had a lot of cold water flats, four story walk up buildings, wood board burning stoves, coal burning stoves, ice boxes where you'd have to catch the man on the street with the ice and we'd bring the ice upstairs and put it in the icebox. Same thing with the coal and with the wood, you bought it off the street. Speaker 1: Do you remember what you first, your impressions of Chicago were when you first arrived, because you were seven at the time. Speaker 2: When I first arrived in Chicago, I was amazed at the size of the city. We went downtown and we spent time like most people from a small town, looked up at the skyline, just to marvel in its beauty. Then they had the L [elevated transit] and we were--I was always afraid of the L. Then later on came the subway and we'd walk over those grates and hear that noise underneath. But the bottom line was, whenever I road on the L, I was always fighting because I thought I was going to fall off the tracks because there was nothing there to support it. But I was raised up in a neighborhood, which was primarily an Italian community, but there were a mixture of people of other ethnic backgrounds. We got along well. We did not have the same attitude that existed day, where people dislike individuals, because race or creed or color. It didn't exist openly at that time. People supported one another. I went on to the Schiller Elementary School, which was a few blocks away. That too, was an integrated school. We got along well. Then I went on to Waller High School, which was referred to as "the most cosmopolitan high school in the city" and then I was on the basketball team and I was one of the black ball player on the team. They later promoted me to become the captain of the team. Story_ID: 57373 Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit though, when--can you--people, when they think of the black community in Chicago [Illinois], they think mainly of the West Side and South Side. And yet, there was this enclave around what is now Cabrini-Green [housing projects]. I want you to talk about sort of, that enclave of what it was like, because a lot of talent came out of there. Speaker 2: Yes, on the Near North Side, we have people, as I indicated, from all ethnic backgrounds and of course, we played together, worked together, got along with one another, supported each other. Most of the people who lived over there came from Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee. Of course, when they came there, they came bringing some of their ways of expressing themselves; more or less, Southern type ways of expressing themselves, along with the Southern cooking and all. That was positive and we got, as I said before, we got along well and I will always cherish the fact that I was raised up in an integrated environment and then later on, when I went up to college, I attended a segregated institution and a segregated society. So when I look back at my rearing and realize the fact that my elementary school [Schiller Elementary School] was integrated, my high school [Waller High School] was integrated, but my college [Alabama State University] was segregated, so I had a chance to experience the best of both worlds and primarily the worst of my young adult life in college. Story_ID: 57374 Speaker 1: So I wanted you to share five memories with us. Speaker 2: Well we were on Public Aid when we came to Chicago [Illinois]. We ate beans seven days a week. We had beans and rice; navy beans, kidney beans, butter beans and chili. My mother [Julia Mae White] was able to do something wonderful and beautiful with beans, some ground beef, and rice, as well as macaroni and cheese. I realized as a youngster that I wanted to do something more with myself than just remain a Public Aid recipient. So I went off to college [now Alabama State University] and became educated. But when I look back at the times when I was living at home with mother as a kid, I would always look forward to getting my brother's old shoes or his old sweater or his old shirt, his old socks, because during those days, we were just out of the [Great] Depression and things were tough. It was difficult to get a job and so a lot of things were passed among family members. That was the only way which I was able to survive as a child. I'd go to school with a big coat or with big pants and with a good piece of cardboard in the shoes that had worn out. Today, you see the young people with the big coats, that's by way because of style. The reason I was wearing a larger coat or pants or a sweater was out of necessity. Speaker 1: Any other memories you'd like to share of friends or family? Speaker 2: We, my sisters and brothers and all got along very well. My two brothers would always get themselves into trouble at school or in the community and mischievous type things. My mother and father [Jesse C. White, Sr] would take it very hard. I said to myself, I don't want to do anything that would cause my mother or father to feel uncomfortable because of my kind of (horsesing?). One time they came to school because I had done something wrong and so my father had an attitude that I'll appeal to the mind and if it fails I'll work on the behind. So when he whipped that time, it left an everlasting impression. So I've always walked the straight and narrow and I've always tried to hold myself up high and always, always conduct myself in a matter which they would be proud. Then my--we always had been involved with sports, my two brothers. Played a lot of softball and football. My brother George [Elliott White] who is no longer here was a pharmacist at the Lakeside VA [Veterans Affairs] Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], later died of aneurism. He wasn't feeling well, so we took him to the hospital and they found that he was suffering from an aneurism, passed away. That inspired me to get involved later on with the organ donor program. Story_ID: 57375 Speaker 1: Now what was the young Jessie White like? Speaker 2: I was loaded with energy. I always wanted to please people. I didn't like to talk very much; I always wanted my actions to speak for itself. I ran track. I took part in track and field. I was a long jumper. I did high jumping. At one point I used to do the 100 yard dash about two tenths of a second off the world's record. That was the level of my speed. Then in basketball, I could jump very high. I averaged about 27, 25 points a game in high school. I scored 69 points in a high school game and for a couple years I was an All-City performer [Chicago, Illinois]. Then I went off to Alabama State College [now Alabama State University]. Again, I wanted to be a baseball player; ended up being an All-Conference basketball and baseball player who scored record in basketball, 27 points a game. Then four days before-- I signed a contract in my senior year to play baseball, and four days before going to spring training, I was drafted [in the United States Army] and ended up going to basic training and later joined the 101st Airborne Division through jump school and later became a paratrooper. Story_ID: 57376 Speaker 1: There's an extended family out in the vineyard. I used to go to the Lower North Center [Chicago, Illinois] to play basketball and I met a fellow by the name of "Iron Man" McKinness. He taught me a lot about basketball. I later met a fellow by the name of Fred Ross. Fred Ross taught me a lot about softball and basketball. Then Mr. Alonzo Crim, he taught me a about character. Later, a fellow by the name of Warren Chapman, helped me to earn a scholarship to Alabama State College [now Alabama State University] and we had [HM] Mr. Claude Walton from the Chicago Park District, he helped me with my softball, baseball, and basketball. Vince Shoenfeld, a German fellow taught me how to tumble. When you think about how you arrived at where you are today, you cannot say you did it by yourself. When you think about all the doors that were open to you, all the people who patter you on the back, gave you some encouraging words and helped you to plot a path to success. You have to look back and say, "I'm a blessed man." So those things that were done for me, I have to do for someone else. It's called give back, strong believer of it. Speaker 2: Now what do you think, look at these people, all the people that you listed, what do you think they saw in you? Speaker 1: They saw a person who wanted to soar. They saw a person who had a lot of strength, physical strength, a lot of determination. They knew that after they left, a dime on the table and they walked away, they know the dime would remain there. They knew that if they would leave me in a house, that nothing would be taken and everything would be left in the same place it was when they left. They realized that I wanted to be someone. They knew that I wanted to be more than what I am at that time. They just wrapped their arms around me and said, "This guy's a lemon. One day you will help run this great country of ours. We want you to put something between your ears everyday other than scalp. We're talking about knowledge. No on can take it from you. We also want you to understand too, that there's this big, wide, wonderful world out there and you should never dislike anyone because of race, creed, or color. Sure you may have wanted to be something else, but what you are today is, what you are and the same thing holds true with others. You should not discriminate against anyone because of race, creed, or color. That's the ugliest card in the deck and no one should ever play it." So I learned that lesson well. Story_ID: 57377 Speaker 1: Now you graduated from high school in what year? Speaker 2: In 1952, from Waller High School, which is now Lincoln Park Academy. Speaker 1: Was it immediately assumed--I know you said you wanted to make something of yourself, that you were going to go on to school and I'm wondering how you chose Alabama [Alabama State University]. Speaker 2: Well I wanted to play basketball because and I also wanted to play baseball, but my father said--I had a contract to play baseball with the St. Louis Browns organization or the Pittsburgh Pirates organization. I said that I wanted to take the bonus and play baseball. He says, "No, I want you to go off to college." Well Ripon College was interested in me; that's in Wisconsin, Beloitte, Wisconsin [sic, Ripon, Wisconsin], but then they realized they didn't have a sequence in math, so they couldn't accept me. Northwestern University [Chicago, Illinois] wanted me too, but again, didn't have a sequence in math. Tennessee State [Nashville, Tennessee] said they'd like to have me, but then when they realized my height, then they said, "No, we don't want anyone that short." Then a friend of mine by the name of Orthel (ph.) Anthony who was on the basketball team at Alabama State told the coach about me and said, I have this guy, hot shot basketball player from Chicago who I would like for you give a scholarship to. So they asked me to send down some of my clippings and I did. They invited me down and I was standing in the line to be registered. The young people in the line were talking. They said, "Well we've got this big time basketball player from Chicago coming down." One guy said, "He's about six, six" and another guy say, "He's about six nine." Well I'm five eight and a half and so Mr. Taylor the Registrar said, they were talking, he said, "Well I think his name is Jesse White." Well, a few moments later, Mr. Tailor said, "I want Jesse White to come forward." I said, "Well this is he," so I started to move forward. They said, "That guy, he's too short to play basketball for Alabama State." Well as it turned out, the first game I made a believer out of them. So even now, I enjoy a good reputation and good name recognition for what I was able to do on the basketball court. Story_ID: 57378 Speaker 1: So how was that? You said, "I went to segregated high school" and that's sort of a glib way of saying there had to be something very different about that experience. Speaker 2: Well the first day I was in Montgomery [Alabama], I got on the bus to go downtown. Well I sat behind the bus driver and there were some people in the back of the bus who kept beckoning to me, come back. Well I said, I didn't know anyone down there, but Orthel (ph.) [Anthony] who had moved in and know me and they made so much of a fuss that the bus driver turned around and looked at me. He said, "What are you doing sitting here?" I said, "I just paid my bus fare, well can I just sit where I want to sit? There are plenty of empty seats here." He said, "Here in Alabama, can't you see those signs." Well one sign had an arrow pointing forward where I was said "whites" and they had one that said "colored." So I said, "Your job is to drive the bus and you welcome anyone on the bus who happens to be able to pay their fare. I paid my fare and have an empty seat; so what's the problem." He says, "I want you to get off the bus. If you don't get off the bus, I'm going to throw you off the bus." I said, "No you're not going to throw me off the bus." He said, "Well, yes I am." So I stood up and then he realized I wasn't about to back down, so he says, "You just wait a moment." So he drove the bus. He went down the hill past a hospital and off the right was a Texaco station and right across the street was a squad car. He stopped the bus at the light and he was getting off the bus to hail the squad car to come over and do whatever he had to do to me. Well someone went through the red light and the squad car took off after the car that had gone through the red light. Well he proceeded the other five blocks downtown. When I got off, people grabbed me and said, "That was remarkable, that was great on your part, but where are you from." I said, "I'm from Chicago." He said, "Well down here, they'll throw away the key on you. You have to obey the signs that are on the bus." So the next time I got on the bus, I got all the way to the rear, as far as to the rear of the bus as I possibly could, because they'll fight the daylights out of me. Didn't know that there were, having come from an integrated environment, never experienced this kind of nonsense and now all of a sudden, they have a place for me to sit; they have a place for me to drink water; they have a place for me to stand and really segregation I found down there, sitting around, sitting down on the bus, sitting down on a train, sitting down in a restaurant, sitting down in a school; it's all really centered around sitting down. As it turned out, I left there without any bitterness in my heart for my fellow man and woman. It was a part of a life that I had experienced, but it didn't leave any scars on my back or any bitterness in my heart from my fellow man and woman. Story_ID: 57379 Speaker 1: Now Alabama State [Alabama State University], was it highly ranked when you played basketball there? Did you play basketball-- Speaker 2: Yes, I played baseball and basketball-- Speaker 1: I mean baseball-- Speaker 2: Basketball there, I taught gymnastics there as well. Speaker 1: So were they--are they an HBCU [Historically Black College and University]? Speaker 2: Well it was called the S-I-A-C, Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association. You had Tuskegee Institute, Xavier University, Alabama A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical], Morehouse [College], Clark [Clark Atlanta University], Morris Brown [College], Fort Valley State [University], South Carolina State [University], Talladega [College], Lane College, those institutions of learning; Stillman College in Alabama. So it was a good league. I know this year, Michigan State [University] played Alabama State [University] in the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] tournament and they were beaten about 69 to 35, so they didn't do very well. But they made it to the big show and I'm proud of that. Story_ID: 57380 Speaker 1: So what was your whole maturation process that occurred during your college years [at Alabama State University]? Speaker 2: I just had a wonderful experience in the South. I was amazed when I got off the train and I saw the red clay. I said, "Where is this?" Everything that I had seen was black dirt, what have you. I was impressed by the size of the school. I was disappointed in the way the people spoke down there because they spoke with a Southern accent and I couldn't quite--after a while I got a handle on that. But I found it to be very nice. I didn't like the idea of the gossiping. They always had rumors. They always gossiped about little things and they made little things into big things. But all in all, I had probably one of the finest experiences that a person could ever ask for in like and I'll always enjoy and I can always appreciate the fact that I attended that institution of learning and had a chance to go to the South to really see what it was like, the good and the bad. Went back well about seven weeks ago for Founders Day and I was the Founders Day speaker and that was held in high esteem. It was like homecoming week for me. It's a wonderful experience. Speaker 1: Now you majored in what? Speaker 2: Physical education and minored in social studies. Speaker 1: So your goal at this point is it to play professional sports? Speaker 2: To play professional sports. See there was this carrot that was hanging over the door in high school, a carrot that was hanging over the door in college that said, if you want to attend this institution of learning so you can play baseball and basketball, you have to come to school every day and you have to maintain at least a C average. So I went to school, but I didn't really have any intention of becoming anything other than a professional athlete. Because I forced to attend school, I learned a lot through osmosis. You're in an educational environment; if you're there, you're going to pick up some things. Same thing held true in college, I wasn't that concerned about going to school, other than I wanted to play and I wanted to hone my skills, so I could become a professional athlete. Then again, I fell in love with the fact that I was here at this wonderful institution of learning playing basketball, baseball, and I was meeting these beautiful young ladies and life was good. My first year there, I had a few dollars in my pocket. So I didn't like grits and I didn't like eggs, but after my money ran out, I acquired a love for grits and a love for eggs. So even today, I like those two items. Story_ID: 57381 Speaker 1: Now are you, it's '58 [1958] the year you're graduating [from Alabama State University]? Speaker 2: '57 [1957], '57; see I graduated, I finished school at '56 [1956], but I finished too late to take part in the graduation ceremony. I wanted to become a teacher and later on in my life I realized that that's what I wanted to be, like in my junior, senior years. But in my first two years, I was just kind of like going through the motions. After I had finished, practiced teaching, that was in the fall. In the fall of '56 [1956] and in March of '57 [1957] I was scheduled to go to spring training for the [Chicago] Cubs. Instead, I was four days before spring training, I was drafted [in the United States Army], went to basic training. While I was at basic training, my former graduation ceremony took place. This was in May. I asked my commanding officer if I could leave the basic training to go down to Alabama State College [now Alabama State University] to take part in the graduation ceremony and he said yes. I took a bus from St. Louis--a train from St. Louis to Montgomery. They had plotted me a way back. They said, "You'll catch an aircraft out of Maxwell Air Force Base in Montgomery [Alabama] and fly to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio and then from there, to Scott Air Force Base in Illinois. Then from there, a bus into Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. After I received my diploma, I went out to the Air Force Base, got on the plane and about 20 minutes into flight, a storm developed and it was so severe, by the time we got to the Tennessee line, that--before we got to the Tennessee line, they had pulled the doors off; they had given me a parachute and I asked the crew chief 20 different times, "How do you get out of this airplane. He said, you roll out or you go out feet first or you do a somersault out." He gave me all kinds--I asked him if he'd ever jumped out of an airplane and he said, "No, never." Then I realized how serious it was when I saw the two pilots put their chutes on, I realized we were in trouble. Then they decided they were going to go west towards Memphis, Tennessee and to climb. As they started to climb and go westward, the sky opened up and the sun started to shine and then went around the storm. They landed at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. Then when I got off the plane shaking, one of the sergeants said, "Private White, your flight is ready for Scott Air Force Base in Illinois." I said, "Where's the bus station." So I caught the bus, got back late, was AWOL. I explained it to the captain and he gave me some preferential treatment. Story_ID: 57382 Speaker 1: Then about a week later [after traveling from basic training to Alabama State University to receive his diploma], I saw these gentlemen on base with these spit shine boots, tailor made pants, nice, sharp caps on and I said, "Who are those guys?" He said, "Well those are paratroopers." I said, "Well they're part of the United States Army?" He said, "Well yeah." So I said, I went over and I started talking with the fellow. I said, "My name is Jesse White, I'm want to be a part of this unit, what do I do?" He said, "We're going to have a physical fitness test and if you pass the physical fitness test, then you will be dispatched to Fort Campbell, Kentucky for Jump School." I took the physical fitness test. There were about 500 people wanting to become a part. I think they only took about 12 or 13 because you couldn't pass the physical fitness test. After I passed, I said that, "When do I leave?" He said, "What other qualification do you have?" I said, "Well I have a contract with the [Chicago] Cubs." He said, "You do, where?" I said, "I happen to have it right here." He said, "Oh, Lieutenant Flynn would like to have you. They have a baseball team." I said, "You can play baseball here." He said, "Yeah." So when I got to Fort Campbell, Kentucky, I met Lieutenant Flynn. They said, I had to go through Jump School. So I went through Jump School. We'd run five miles a day followed by 45 minutes of physical training. Didn't know at the time that the human body could withstand that kind of punishment. Then I found out there's a lot more within us than we give ourselves credit for having. I tell young people that when things become difficult, when things become tough, all you have to do is dig within, they'll be amazed at what they'll be able to come up with. So I jumped out of airplanes for the two years I was in the military, the followed that up with some freefalls and some skydiving. I jumped out of almost every imaginable aircraft. Story_ID: 57383 Speaker 1: After I got out of the military [United States Army], I began my baseball career [for the Chicago Cubs]. Then during the off season, I taught school during the day, worked for the Park District [of Chicago, Illinois] at night, was asked to put on a gym show at the Rockwell Gardens Housing Project on the West Side. One gym show in December, 1959 became the Jesse White Tumbling Team. At present, I have 116 young people on the team; 280 in training; 970 shows this year. We've taken young people six times--well actually three times to Tokyo, Japan, 16 times to Canada, Hong Kong, Bermuda. We're going to Jamaica in about a month and a half and I'm proud of the fact that we've have 15 young people that travel with the Ringling Brother's circus called the Chicago Kids. We have four who are traveling now with the Harlem Globetrotters. One of the mascots for the Chicago Bulls is one of my tumblers. He's called the "Da Bull." We've been involved with the making of three movies and 11 commercials and part of the fact too, that we've had over 5,100 young people to come through the program within the 42 year period of time and only 93 have gotten themselves in trouble with the law. It's been (unclear) combat juvenile delinquency. We spend about $4,000 a year on each kid, yet the Board of Education spends about between 5,000 and 6,000 to educate its students. In state government, we spend between 13,000 and $50,000 a year to incarcerate an individual. Then when you realize the fact that 83 percent of the people in prisons, that they have not graduated from high school, now you know who the people are who create problems for we in society. So that's why it's important for us to invest now with our young people. So all that I am today and all that I hope to be in life, I owe to someone. It's called give back. Speaker 2: Now, I want to go back. How did the inspiration for doing this, how did that come about? Speaker 1: It was just an outgrowth of my requirement as a park physical instructor. They asked me to do the show and there were about 350-400 people there who saw the show. They thought it was wonderful and beautiful. We did all kinds of things in the show, but tumbling was the highlight that was the finale. People were talking about how wonderful these kids had performed. They had never seen things like that before. From the one show came, 970 this year. Story_ID: 57384 Speaker 1: When I played baseball, during the regular baseball season, until September; taught school October, November, December, January, February and half of March, first week in March [at Schiller Elementary School]. Then I played--during those months I taught school during the day and I worked for the Park District at night. From the middle of September to the middle of March, taught school during the day and work for the Park District at night. So I had three jobs. Speaker 2: You had three jobs, okay. Story_ID: 57385 Speaker 1: How did you get involved politically? Speaker 2: 1974 while I was teaching school [at Schiller Elementary School], I was asked by George Dunne if I would consider running for the office of [Illinois] State Representative. I said, "No, no, no; hell no, I don't want to get involved." I passed out literature and I knocked on doors, but I had never really thought about becoming a candidate for any public office. I ran to replace a fellow by the name of Robert L. Thompson, who was a black State Representative from that area and he was the first one. It's highly unprecedented for you to have a black representing a district [13th District] that was 83% white, 12% black, five percent others. So he wanted to retire to Cassopolis, Michigan and they wanted me to replace him. I ran and won and then I ran, held that office for 16 years. Story_ID: 57386 Speaker 1: So the Jesse White Tumblers has been in existence for 15 years or 14 [before he ran for Illinois State Representative]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time I--something like that. No one can put the dots together and he started the Jesse White Tumbling Team for political reasons. No, I started long before and I used to support the program for about 16,000, $19,000 a year. Of course, we were not a 501c3, but then we did a commercial for Coca-Cola in 1985, I talked with Chuck Morrison, President of Coco-Cola USA and asked him if he would consider sponsoring, being one of the sponsors for the team. He said, "Yes." Then we got our 501c3 classification. Then the next thing we knew, McDonalds had asked and they asked Coco-Cola, "Is it okay for us to be a partnership with McDonalds." They said, "Yes, it's one of our best customers." That was the beginning of the sponsorship for the Jesse White Tumbling Team. So I got it off my back, the financial responsibility of the program. Speaker 1: No, I understand. Story_ID: 57387 Speaker 1: In my senior year at Alabama State College, which is now Alabama State University, I signed a contract to play baseball for the [Chicago] Cubs. I'm expected to go to spring training in March of 1957, but four days before going to spring training, I was drafted into the military [United States Army]. Instead of going to spring training, I ended up going to basic training. I joined the 101st Airborne Division, became a paratrooper and served for two years. Then after I was formally discharged from the United States Army, I began my baseball career. During the off season I taught school during the day, worked for the Chicago Park District [Chicago, Illinois] at night and I was asked to put on a gym show. And from the one gym show in December, 1959 came the Jesse White Tumbling Team. Going back to my days in baseball, my first assignment was Carlsbad, New Mexico. Well let me back up. Let me start with Chicago. I was, after I got out of the military, I was then about a week in Chicago, then I headed off the spring training in Mesa, Arizona. This was in 1959, after I had been formally discharged from the military. It was, snow was about waist deep in Chicago and I had a coat that was kind of heavy and it was probably ten degrees below zero here in Chicago. When I arrived in Phoenix, Arizona, it was about 85 degrees, the sun was shining, and didn't have the need for the overcoat. Through spring training, I was still assigned to go to Carlsbad, New Mexico, which was D Ball. It was probably one of the newest classifications, but it gave me an opportunity to move up to the system by having to go into the military two years--into baseball two years late, it threw me behind a little bit. I eventually worked my way up from D Ball, all the way to Triple A, which was the next step to the majors. I played about four years in Triple A baseball. After I decided to quit in 1967-- Speaker 2: Before you quit, can I ask you, what was that whole experience like? Because you had always, sports was your thing, you said. Speaker 1: Sure, well I was in a town called Carlsbad, New Mexico, home of the Carlsbad Caverns where the people were very nice. A kind of laid back town and in the league there were three teams in Texas and four teams in New Mexico. The teams in New Mexico, we did not live in a segregated environment, but whenever we went to Texas, there was a segregated environment there, where you would live in homes of some of the black families or they would put you in a black motel. I found that to be quite demeaning, considering the fact that I just left the military, where everything was totally integrated. There was one time when we were in this town called Odessa, Texas. Bobbie "Blue" Bland's band had come in and all those rooms in the hotel had been reserved for him. So then they ended up putting us in with a family. Then when it was time for us to eat, they told us to go to the hotel where the white ball players were staying and a fellow said that the manager of the hotel said that we'd have to eat in the kitchen. I said, "So if we eat in the kitchen, then you don't charge the same thing you're charging someone else who's sitting outside eating." I said, "Thanks, but no thanks." Story_ID: 57388 Speaker 1: So let's continue. You were talking about--you said "Thanks but no, thanks" [to a segregated hotel in Texas] Speaker 2: Oh yes, when we [the black players on White's baseball team] were asked to eat in the kitchen of this hotel and so we went up the street and we picked up some food at one of the restaurants. We could not eat inside but we took the food and we ate outside. Then there were time when I would play and talk about Plainview, Texas where they call me every name under the sun and all it did was inspire me to what to do better. There were times when I'd go five for five or four for four and I'd hit a single and then I'd steal second, third and home and they sent me to the part where I just had to excel and one day as I was leaving and had a baseball bat in my hand and I was going to the parking lot and I was accosted by some individuals and I just pulled the baseball bat back and they scurried along the way and then the last time I played in that town they gave me a standing ovation because they realized that they had been unfair to me and that I had risen far above their expectations and the other thing that I found to be--that happened to me while I was playing in that town. I was a center fielder but the third baseman was ill and they knew I played infield and outfield so the manager asked me to come to third base that day to play and they put another fellow on to the field because they had more outfielders than they had qualified infielders. So I had my hands on my knees and I was just sitting down waiting for the pitcher to pitcher to pitch the ball and one of the fellows said--the manager said, "Whitey wake up" because I had my head down and I was, you know, he thought that I was dosing or something and then one of the guys from the stands says, "Whitey, where did you get the sun tan?" You know, that kind of heckling along with the N word and the Black word that was when you reigned supreme throughout that particular town but as it turned out the people really showed me what they were about at the end. The last game I was there they gave me a standing ovation and I felt pretty good about it. And they had really cleaned themselves up, so to speak, at my side. Story_ID: 57389 Speaker 1: And then there were other places where we would go, for example, we went to El Paso, Texas--I was then promoted to--I played for San Antonio [Texas] and El Paso was one of the towns on the league and I went to one of the theaters and I was turned away and this was like in April, no in May but then in July I went back to that town because I knew that the Civil Right Act had been passed and "Oh, how you doing, sir? Glad to have you" and it was a beautiful thing. Later on I went on to Dallas [Texas] to play and the manager of this or the owner of this restaurant was standing outside and he said, "Come on in fellows, come on in." We said, "Okay, fine." So we were looking for a place to eat so we went into this restaurant. There were four of us and we sat down the fellow was so congenial. I mean he was just above himself. I've never experienced that kind of hospitality before and so I asked the fellow, I said, "Sir, are you always this kind and so congenial towards your customers?" He said, "Well yes usually I'm not quite as much but I'm just really glad to have some Black customers." I said, "You are?" I said, "Tell me about that." He said, "For years we had always been involved in the segregated society down here in Texas but we would not allow any Black people to come to the restaurant. Blacks picketed my restaurant for about a year and no one ever came after the Civil Rights Act was passed and so you're my first Black customers and I'm ecstatic about it. I'm just glad to have you here" and I thought that that was ironic that this fellow would feel this way after for years denying individuals an opportunity to use the restaurant. Again, I was San Antonio, that was a town that I played for in 1963, pardon me, 1962 and Paul Casanova was a Black person from Cuba, a catcher. Black as the ace of spades. We went into this restaurant and while we were there we realized the fact that 10 minutes had passed, no water, no menu, no service. And so I stopped the young man who happened to be Mexican and I said, "Sir, I said we would like to have some service" and he said, "I'm sorry, we don't serve Blacks here." And I said in my broken Spanish, I said, "Paul, vamanos, andele, no service." So I got up and he got up and I headed toward the door and I was saying something to him and realized he wasn't there and I looked back and he was sitting with a menu in his hand. So I went back to sit with him and the guy said, "We will serve him but not you." And I really got upset about that; not that he knew that I was upset but here I am an American, who had jumped out of airplanes, who had served his country, who is a citizen and a tax payer in this great country of ours but yet you take a Cuban, who is not a citizen and serve him and not serve me and I thought that was a violation of all laws of human decency. Story_ID: 57390 Speaker 1: Then I was up in Duluth, Minnesota; the ball game had been cancelled because of inclement weather. I had just purchased a suit in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and I just went and put on my suit and maybe go to the theatre but before I go to the theatre let me just go downstairs and eat. So I went downstairs; the restaurant was not in the hotel, it was about a half block up the street and I sat down at this horse shoe counter and I was eating and this fellow came in--these two fellows came in had two beautiful ladies with them and one fellow was about six-seven, six-six/six-seven and looked like he weighed about 280 pounds. The other fellow was about six, two and I think he weighed about 225 pounds and while I was sitting and eating I kind of like looked up and the smaller of the two braced himself as if to come over, come around the counter to say something to me or do something to me and so the taller fellow said, "Take it easy, take it easy, Frank." And he said, "I just want to talk with this guy." He said, "I know what you want to do. Forget about it. Come on, let's sit down and eat." So I started eating again. I kind of like looked up and this guy jumped up again and the fellow said, "No, no you wait right here." Well, I had had enough so I paid my check and left the tip and left the check right there on the counter and I walked out because outside the door were four ball players from my team and so I'm talking with them and I see from the reflection in the door this fellow was walking behind me. So as it turned out while I'm talking with them this fellow came over and hit me on the back of the shoulder. I turned around and I said, "What can I do for you?" And he just looked at me. I said, "Sir, you don't know me and I don't know you. I said I'm with the St. Cloud Baseball Team. Haven't done anything to you; you haven't done anything to me. Why don't you back inside and enjoy your meal with that beautiful young lady you have with you?" He just looked. I said, "Maybe you don't understand what I said sir. You don't know me and I don't know you. You haven't done anything to me and I haven't done anything to you," and I said "So I don't understand the problem. You have a beautiful young lady inside waiting for you; why don't you go inside and enjoy you supper with her?" He kind of shrugged his shoulders and I said whew, the guy is gone so I kind of turned to talk to some of my ballplayers and the fellow through me to the pavement and I was pretty agile then so I got up and I punched him a few times in the face and I grabbed him by the hair and I was bouncing his head against the pavement and blood started to flow between the blonde hairs in his head and then the big guy came out of the restaurant to see what had happened and I said I know he's going to tear me apart but I said I've got to get this guy because I didn't do anything to him. I was a gentleman in every way. He should not have attacked me; threw me down and tore the knees out of my suit. I paid about $300.00 in the '60's [1960s]. To pay $300.00 for a suit, that's an expensive garment. Well as it turned out he said don't bang his head against the pavement, he wasn't insured. I was glad for him to say that to me and I left the gentleman alone. As I was backing off and the police had arrived, they said, "We're going to lock you up." I said, "I didn't do anything to this gentleman in terms of being the aggressor." So my ball player friend said, "No, no, no, no, he was minding his own business. This fellow threw him down." Well then the police realized what had happened. So the fellow said, "I'd like to talk with this gentleman." I said, "We had a conversation a moment ago and it didn't go very far." He says, "No, no, no, it's not like that." I said, "Well why did you attack me?" I said, "I didn't do anything to you." He said, "You were sitting there with a nice suit on, nice tie, and I'm a white man and you look like you had more going for you than I had going for me and I became envious of that. I became jealous of you because of that." I said, "So as a result of that, you thought it was proper for you to attack me." He says, "I made a big mistake, I'm sorry and I want you to accept my apology." Story_ID: 57391 Speaker 1: So I shook the fellow's hand and I went back upstairs and my knees were bleeding and I went upstairs and took a shower. As I was coming out of the shower, I heard the fire engine roll past the hotel. Then someone started knocking on the door. He said "Jess, Jess, you won't believe this. You know the fellow who you just had a fight with?" I said, "Yes. This guy's hand is almost off. It's just hanging by a few tentacles." I said, "What happened?" He said, "He was so upset that he put his fist through the Greyhound Bus (unclear) window. I said, "You've got to be kidding." He says, "No." I went down to the bus station which was a block and a half away and sure enough, blood was all over the place. They carried this fellow away, but it was just an ugly, it was a gruesome scene to see all the blood on the pavement. But it was really a result of a man being angry because of the color of my skin and how I conducted myself. That's one of the reasons I tell young people, "You cannot ever play the race card. That's the ugliest card in the deck. No one should ever dislike anyone because of how they came into this world. We should realize the fact that none of us had anything to do with the process." So that's one of the things that I preach to the kids I work with. That's one of the things I talk about with my friends. Story_ID: 57392 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, (break) or is this a maturity thing? Speaker 2: This is a maturity thing. I think when I was younger, it was a different ballgame. Speaker 1: Now were there any instances with the [baseball] players? How many blacks were on the team? I know-- Speaker 2: Most of the time when I played, we had either two or three. We've never had--I never played with more than four blacks on a team. Speaker 1: So what were the dynamics--amongst the team players, was there people who didn't even want to be anywhere near you? Speaker 2: There were some. Most of the people on the team were either from South Carolina or North Carolina, Georgia, Mississippi. But when it comes to playing the game, we were like a team, but then after the game was over, they kind of got together. They went their separate ways. That's one reason why I was so successful when I was a member of the Illinois General Assembly. I fraternized a lot with the members of the House. So when it came to me passing my piece of legislation, they looked upon me as one of their own. But if I had just done like some of black legislatures would do, just go off in the corner and stay together with their peers. I don't think I would have been as successful as I had been. Speaker 1: Now I want--so you were in, with, in the--but you were with the team for four years. Speaker 2: I was, I played for a grand total of seven years. Speaker 1: Okay, where is the other three? Speaker 2: Well for the first one, I started out at Carlsbad, New Mexico in 1959. In 1960, I started out in a higher classification and that was at Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Then in Lancaster I got hurt and they sent me to St. Cloud, Minnesota. Then the next year I started out at San Antonio [Texas]--no, no, I started out at Wenatchee, Washington and then from Wenatchee, I went to San Antonio. Speaker 1: Okay, that's what 1962? Speaker 2: '63 [1963]. Then the next year, I was promoted up to Triple A, that was Salt Lake City [Utah]. I played two years at Salt Lake City. Then I played at Tacoma and then Dallas [Texas]. Speaker 1: So that's your seven years there. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, at that point, what happens? Speaker 2: Well let me get you from the bus league to where we would fly. So when I got to Salt Lake City [Utah], we were flying airplanes, as compared to riding on the buses. Out of spring training, we would fly from Phoenix [Arizona] over to Los Angeles [California] and Los Angeles to Honolulu, Hawaii. That was always our first trip. We played in good weather and scenery, and the people were very nice. I enjoyed being Triple A. That's almost like being a major league baseball player. You're just a heartbeat away and they give you more meal money and they put you up in better hotels. They fly you, as compared to the bus league, so to speak. I enjoyed the life. I went through there for seven years. Grand total of seven years, but four years Triple A and Double A. Speaker 1: Now what did you think overall of the Cubs organization? Speaker 2: I thought it was a good organization, however there were a few people that I dealt with that weren't exactly fair with me, but other than that, I think they were a great organization. Speaker 1: [HM] Ernie Banks was there then. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ernie Banks, Gene Baker, good friends of mine. Story_ID: 57393 Speaker 1: Now okay, so 1967, what is this? What happens in 1967? Speaker 2: 1967, I was at Dallas [Texas] and then after that season, I decided to not go back. I came back to Chicago [Illinois], taught school during the day, worked for the Park District at night and I was living a wonderful life. I had two jobs. Then in 1974, that was also still working with the tumbling team. In 1974, I was asked to consider running for public office. Speaker 1: By George Dunne. But I wanted--so that's what--1959 the Jesse White Tumblers get established. But you're off for these seven years, what happens during that time? Speaker 2: (background talking) Speaker 1: The kids were just kind of like--while I was away, I kept in contact with the kids. When I arrived back in Chicago, I picked up where I left off with the kids. Every time I'd go off and play ball, I'd come back and we would get these kids back started again. So I kept in contact with them. Then after I finished my baseball career, then we became re-established on a full-time basis. Speaker 2: When you finished your baseball career, that was sort of a readjustment period. Speaker 1: It was. See, during the off season, not really because during the off season I was still teaching school during the day and I'm still working for the Park District at night, so it just brought me right back. Then I would leave in the middle of March go into spring training, so I would play baseball all the way to the fall, which was like September the 15th. Then the 16th I was teaching school. Speaker 2: So you said like March--wasn't it March through September. Speaker 1: March the 15th through September the 15th, something like that. That was the baseball season. Speaker 2: So it's not like you were away from Chicago. Speaker 1: I was away from Chicago-- Speaker 2: For that period, but you were always coming back. Speaker 1: That's right and they knew I was coming back. Speaker 2: This whole thing, so you have this experience, because this is what your dream had been really-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in many ways. Story_ID: 57394 Speaker 1: You are, this is a time [after quitting baseball in 1968] to sort of re-establish or readjusting your life in many ways. Speaker 2: That's right, this is going to be the stability part of my life when now I was going to teach school and work for the Park District [of Chicago]. I didn't have a timeframe as to how long I was going to do it. But as I indicated before, in 1973 I was asked to consider running for the office of [Illinois] State Representative. I said, "No, no, no, not me" and kind of looked upon politics then as a dirty game, so to speak because all my life I had been involved with things that were wonderful and beautiful and pure. I was working with kids and now all of a sudden, I'm going to get my name messed up, so to speak because I'm going to be in the political arena. But then I went skiing one day up at Schuss Mountain (unclear) in Michigan and there was a hill that I was not able to conquer and this particular weekend, I was able to go up and down it about 35 times successfully without falling. Then I said, well if I can handle this hill, I could handle the political arena. I can conduct myself in a manner which I've always conducted myself, and not compromise my beliefs of fairness and honesty. So I couldn't wait to get back to Chicago. I picked up the phone and I called President [of the Cook County Board of Commissioners George W.] Dunne and I told him I'd like to really consider running for the office of [Illinois] State Representative. I ran and won and I served for 16 years. Speaker 1: So have you been tapped by the organization in many ways? Speaker 2: That was the first time. Speaker 1: You've been identified as-- Speaker 2: There was a fellow by the name of Robert L. Thompson who was a black State Representative. He wanted to retire to Cassopolis, Michigan and they were looking for another black to replace him. This was at a time when we have cumulative voting where you had three State Representatives per district and one State Senator per district. We had what is called cumulative if you like someone, best of all, you could give him what is called a "bully vote;" that's three votes. If you'd like two persons; you'd give each one, one and a half vote. So that was the system that I was elected into. It's defunct right now because something that they bought it out of existence. Story_ID: 57395 Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of people talk about the cumulative voting. How was your experience there? This was a different--you've been mainly, I would say, a community person, but athlete, and this was different if you were (simultaneous) Speaker 2: It was and I'll tell you why it was different. I had always let my field activities, my activities on the field do my speaking. Now, I have to stand on me feet and represent myself in a manner which I can be proud. Well I realized then, even though I had taken public speaking in high school, that I had been away from it for so long, where you just kind of had conversations among each other. You very seldom had to get up before a large audience and express yourself. I found that to be a little unsettling. My legs would shake and my voice would quiver and I would sweat. It just, it was uncomfortable for me. So the first time out, they could see my sincerity and that was the thing that carried the day, even though I was a little nervous. Then after a while, the nervousness went away, but then there was another thing that set in and that is, internal nervousness and stress, because I would see these gentlemen who were out campaigning against me or who were campaigning for the same office. I would do two events and I was tired. I was worn to a frazzle. These fellows would do, eight, nine events and look as fresh as the day is long. So I had said that I had jumped out of airplanes before, so I felt that I should reach back and rely on some of my military experience to carry the day. When I reached back and I found out that it's a lot more within you than you give yourself credit for having. So now I average between eight to thirteen events a day. I go to bed at two o'clock and I get up at six o'clock every morning and I feed off of duty. If there's a job to be done, I want to be the person to do it. If it involves washing dishes, emptying the garbage or treating the floor, or sweeping the floor, I could figure out a way to enjoy it. So that's how my life has always--that's how my live is right now. I just enjoy being a doer. I want to always be on time. I want to discharge my duties to the best of my ability and I love people, all people. I have gotten along well with people of diverse ethnic backgrounds. Story_ID: 57396 Speaker 1: Now we're doing this project as you know, a subproject called Pioneers in the Struggle and it's really sort of tracing the history of African American serving in the Illinois General Assembly, starting with John W. E. Thomas. I'm wondering if you can--you served from like 1974 until 1990. Speaker 2: '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: So can you--that was a time were there were starting to be more increasing independence on the part--was Catfish, there was Catfish--did you see my Catfish room? Speaker 2: Catfish for sure was there. Yeah that was Emil Jones, Jim Taylor [James C. Taylor], Taylor Pouncey. They would sit underneath the balcony and read the newspapers. I sat down in an area that's called the "Mafioso Strip." This is what the Italian fellows would we call it. [Lawrence] Larry DiPrima, Michael McDooley (ph.), Frank Ageelio (ph.), and Jesse White. That was four Italian guys. Then sitting right in front of us was Harold Washington and Lewis Caldwell. Those were good times. We got along well. There was a lot of love among the members of the House. Republicans and democrats got along very well. There was a lot of love there. Today, there's a lot of bickering and fighting. They don't eat together, they don't hardly speak to each other, but back in those days, we treated each other like we were brothers, like family. Story_ID: 57397 Speaker 1: Well why do you think that that body [Illinois General Assembly] is so important to the--because a lot of people, you're in state--you've continually--you've been state--why is that body important. Because a lot of times people, in Chicago [Illinois], they only think of city government and the alderman. Speaker 2: Well that body is important because they write the laws for the State of Illinois. For example, right turn on red after stop, that's also the funding source for a lot of agencies. The Department of Children and Family Services, Mental Health, Public Health, Education System, School System all depend upon the dollars necessary to educate our young people. So it's a funding source, but also, it can affect your life in every way. Story_ID: 57398 Speaker 1: What of your, when you look back on your career there [in the Illinois General Assembly], what are you most proud of? Speaker 2: I'm proud of a lot of bills that I passed. One was the Good Samaritan Bill, where if you had a party at the Hilton Hotel, so to speak and you ordered 500 chicken dinners, only 300 people showed up. The other 200 dinners are there, so what you could do is contact a soup kitchen, like the Pacific Garden Mission. They would come over, pick up the 200 dinners, take it back and feed the homeless and the hotel would get a tax write off for it and the food is not thrown away and the people at the shelter will have a wholesome meal. That's a bill that would exempt liability, they can sue them if someone were to get sick and die. But as it turned out, no one has gotten sick or died as a result of those gifts. So the restaurants, the hotels, the fast food stores can now take part in this program. There's an organization called the Greater Food Depository. They supply canned goods and food stuff to many of the pantries that we have here in Chicago [Illinois]. I passed a bill that would allow Stokleys, Campbell's, Van Camp; the list goes on and on, to donate these canned goods to these pantries or to the Greater Food Depository for a tax write off and not be held liable. So these two bills really spoke of the liability factor. As a result, thousands of canned goods, many items of foods have been distributed to the Greater Food Depository. Story_ID: 57399 Speaker 1: So do you know much about the history of those people there or were there [in the Illinois General Assembly] people that you admired or-- Speaker 2: Corneal Davis, I admired him. He was an outstanding speaker and a persuasive kind of a man. Whenever he got up to speak, you knew he was speaking from the heart. Sometimes when, in fact, for example, I would get up to speak, there would be a hush over the room because they wanted to hear what I had to say, because I didn't speak a lot on the floor. Individuals who didn't speak a lot, people stopped and they wanted to listen to them; but those who spoke all the time, early and often, they kind of like tune them out. Speaker 1: But also, through Jesse White Tumblers, you also had this built in constituency. So you had sort of a reputation, everything that gave you a presence, as a do gooder. Speaker 2: All over the state of Illinois and that's one of the things that I think helped me in my bid to become the Secretary of State. A lot of people knew me and they knew of me, but they never connected me with the Jesse White Tumblers. So against my better judgement, the people who were handling my campaign said, "We have to connect the dots here. We have to use the law of association. They know who you are, but they can't--they think that you are a different person than the guy Jesse White, who's the coach of the tumblers. So if we put you together, then we think it will make a difference." Sure enough, the numbers jumped off the scale. Story_ID: 57400 Speaker 1: But you were, weren't you--you were record-- Speaker 2: I was the Cook County Recorder of Deeds with-- Speaker 1: Yeah, let's talk about that. So you in 19--you run for the Cook County Records of Deeds in what 19-- Speaker 2: '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: '92, so was it--what was--was that a part of advisors or was that you had sort of done your state step? Speaker 2: I had completed 16 years of service in the [Illinois] General Assembly. But let me go back. My first two years in General Assembly, I was successful; the second two years I lost out. Then I came back and won by a landslide and that was a part of a double crossing. People who know me and know the story, they know it well where I was endorsed by the party and this other fellow was endorsed by the party and we were to go out and ask for a vote and a half for each one of us and this person asked for a bully vote for his, so I lost out by 3,000 votes. Sat out for two years, came back and won by a landslide and have been sent in that office until 1992. [HM] Carol [Moseley] Braun was a Cook County Recorder of Deeds. Recorder of Deeds is a repository for real estate. There are, Cook County is the second largest county in the nation, second to Los Angeles County and third is Harris County which covers Houston, Texas. Within an office, you collect information about every piece of property in the county. You know how much the person paid for it. You know if there are any liens on it. You know the history of it. You know the ownership of it. As we move to modernize, streamline, computerize the office, we brought it into the 21st century. Many times individuals would use that office as a stepping stone. In the case of Carol Braun, with all due respect, she used it to promote herself to become a U.S. Senator and proud of it. Story_ID: 57401 Speaker 1: After I had completed five and a half years [as Cook County Recorder of Deeds], I decided to run for the office of [Illinois] Secretary of State. I was told that I could not win, shouldn't waste my time, shouldn't spend anyone else's money, that someone else was going to be the Secretary of State. I said at the meeting, that I can't see no reason as to why I shouldn't run. You give me every justification as to why I should run. So I ran and defeated this gentleman who they said was going to be the next Secretary of State by 110,000 votes. Then in November, I was to face a Republican by the name of Al Salvi. The polls about two weeks before the election said that I would, the race was too close to call. It was a 39 to 39% tie, with 12% outstanding. I won by 400, more than 450,000 votes. It sent a message to me that the people wanted me to run the office like it was a business, restore some integrity to it, and of course, put it in a posture by which the people can be proud. Then I decided that things that I had done in the Recorder of Deeds Office I should do in the Secretary of State's Office; modernize, streamline, and computerize the office. As we speak, that's what we're doing. Story_ID: 57402 Speaker 1: Now that's, now let me ask you about the--were there lessons that you learned running the Cook County Recorder of Deeds Office first that were different from anything that you had learned being a [Illinois] State Rep.? Speaker 2: No, not really, just one thing and that's the bidding process and the hiring process. I had to get up to speed on that, where you take applications and then you interview people and then you make the determination. Then they also have to take a test. In the political arena, true political arena, you could say "I want you to work here and I'm going to give you X number of dollars. I want you to work over here and I want to promote someone" I could do it rather easily without going through the steps. If she had news in the office left and the office I have now, so you cannot just automatically just increase the salaries and move people around like you want. You can move them around, but you have to stay within the parameters of the union contract. But when you have those individuals who are exempt, then you can do that. When I came on board in this office [Illinois Secretary of State], I found out that Jim Edgar had 700 exempt positions when he came in. George Ryan had 400 and when I came in, I had less than 100 exempt positions. So I had to kind of like juggle the ball a little bit to make ends meet. Speaker 1: So you would--because it's been very interesting to watch you as Secretary of State, because you--so you're saying they have, those numbers exempt and suddenly suddenly when you come in, it's only 100. Speaker 2: Less than 100. Speaker 1: That's amazing. So that makes it hard maneuvering because to get your staff in place-- Speaker 2: It makes it hard for me to maneuver and also, create problems, especially when you have a senator, President of the Senate, who's a Republican and thank God we have Mike Madigan who is the Democrat. We had a situation that we--we're in a situation now that we're dealing with that involves us being able to refund back to our senior citizens their overpayment for their license plates. They paid $24.00 normally if they are, it's called they get the circuit breaker. Through the energy program you qualify because you fall into the area of low income. What they would do is, they would is, it's time for them to renew their license plates, they would pay the $78 and then after their classification indicating that they are qualified for the circuit breaker comes forward. Then we have to refund back to them, the difference. Well they raised the threshold from about 15,000 up to 21,000. We ended up with more people and they raised the license plate fee, so that cost a bit more, so we didn't have enough money to refund back to all those individuals. So I had to ask for a supplemental appropriation. Senator [James Pate] Phillip said, he did not want me to have it. He wanted me to transfer some dollars within my budget. We didn't have the money because we had allocated those dollars for other improvements within the office. So right now there's a stalemate between Pate Phillip and Mike Madigan as to how they want to resolve my supplemental appropriation. It really speaks to politics rather than working in the best interest of the people in the State of Illinois. Speaker 1: But you can tell you're enjoying your job. Speaker 2: I love it. Speaker 1: What is interesting to me is that you, I just want to say you've had, you're a Democrat, but you came under with a Republican governor and during this whole license scandal. Story_ID: 57403 Speaker 1: But you inherited, your office [Illinois Secretary of State] inherited, so you had sort of a lot of clean up to do there in many ways, right? Speaker 2: Yes. We brought on an Inspector General by the name of Jim Burns and Jim Burns is the former U.S. Attorney from the Northern District of Illinois. He's rich in talent and he's well qualified for the position. We're working to root out corruption within the office. Matter of fact, we're in the process now of retesting 80 individuals whose names have been brought to our attention by the U.S. Attorney's office from Northern Illinois because these 80 people, they have received their drivers licenses under questionable circumstances. We've retested over 1,700 people during my term thus far. We had a situation where we had 400, probably 578 individuals from an Indian drivers school. We thought that they had received their license under questionable circumstances. So we called all 578 in to be retested and only 40 passed the test; to let you know that there's a problem out there. We have a new computer system that is coming up. It'll be in the Elk Grove Village [Illinois] starting next week and next week would be about April the eighth or ninth [2001]. One of the things about that is that you would sit before the screen and the questions would go across that's facing you and you would punch in your answer, right into the face of the screen; as compared to having others to assist you in the process. That's new. When I arrived in the office, anyone could take the CDL [Commercial Driver's License] test. Under my policy now, if you can't speak English, you can't take the test. We're talking about tough love big time. We want the roads of Illinois to be the safest ever. We won't allow anyone who is not qualified to drive on our roads. For example, back about eight months ago, there was a fellow who had gotten his driver's license under questionable circumstances. He and his partner were driving in California and they were involved in a 74 car pileup. As a result of that accident, some people lost their lives, a lot of property damage. They asked if, they realized his license had been questioned. So they asked him where did he get his license. He said he paid $800 and he got it from Illinois. One of the things that we've done too and that is, as a result of a lot of things that took place and specifically the one with the train truck accident in Bourbonnaisse [Illinois] [1999], where this fellow [John R.] Stokes had been driving well beyond the period of time that he was allowed to drive, was involved in a train truck accident where 11 people lost their lives. We realized that he had some court supervisions, which means that you would go, there are 102 counties in Illinois and if you had a court supervision in each county, meaning you had a ticket and the judge says, well I'm not going to make just a punch on your license, we're just going to observe you from the court. That's called court supervision. You go to school, read the newspaper and read the Rules of the Road or something. Well we realized there could be others out there, so we established a data base in Springfield [Illinois]. So all court supervisions from the various counties are all sent to me, to my office and before a judge or a prosecutor can issue court supervision, they have to look at our database and if a person can conceivably have 102 court supervisions and the other county would not know. Story_ID: 57404 Speaker 1: I was asking you what the Secretary of State's Office does besides-- Speaker 2: The Secretary of State is a repository for vehicles and all vehicle related matters. Corporate values and securities, court of claims, Literacy Program, Organ Donor Program, license plate stickers, state IDs, keeper of the Seal, those and more. I distribute 50 million dollars to 2,300 libraries that come under my jurisdiction. I'm referred to as the head librarian. We distribute 8.4 million dollars in the form of Literacy Grants to those organizations whose mission it is to educate our population. There are times when an individual may come to the State of Illinois and may not be able to speak English and they want to learn to speak English in the manner which they can become employed. Or there's a parent who may have dropped out of school or there's an individual who's at the worksite and want to improve his reading and his speaking skills, so he can get promoted on the job. There are parents, mothers who have become disenfranchised; father left them, now the mother has to become employed. There's a time when maybe the parent would like to be able to read to their children. For these things and more, are important to helping an individual to become better educated, better informed. Going back to the libraries, we distribute up to about $250,000 for the direction of a library in the form of matching grants. This is a grants program. People of the various libraries have to submit to us their request for making the library handicapped accessible. Maybe the roof has blown off. Maybe the stairwell needs to be replaced; maybe they need computers of books. The list goes on and on as to those functions. The organ donor program is one that I'm really proud of. We lead the nation in number of people who have signed up. We have over five million people who have signed up to become organ donors. But yet in the state, we have 5,000 people who are on the waiting list; 450 people died because the organs don't arrive in a timely fashion. Everyday one or two individuals are added to the list and one person can improve the quality of life or provide a person with life up to the tune of 25 or more individuals. We believe that when you're alive, you should give blood. We also believe that when you're no longer here, you should give organs. When you've done those two things, you'll have made a positive impact upon society. My experience with the organ donor program goes back about 20 years ago. My brother [George Elliott White] who was a pharmacist at the Lakeside VA Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] wasn't feeling well. We took him to the hospital and the night before he died, I was asked by a member of the Regional Organ Bank of Illinois is his organs can be used for transplantation purposes. I said, "No, don't touch his body." Well he passed that night and we buried him a few days later. I didn't think any more of the conversation I had with the gentleman. But five years later my sister became ill and was in dire need of a kidney and an anonymous donor came forward and gave her a second chance in life. As a result of those experiences, I became a strong believer in the organ donor program. I'm just really disappointed in the fact that blacks are 35% on the list and we participate at the level of 22%. So we're involved in an education program to encourage our black brothers and sisters to step up to the plate and do what is right. Right now, we're in the process of distributing seven million new license plates for the people of the State of Illinois. Back in 1983 when they were distributed, the ones that we have now, were made and distributed. They distributed 4.6 million over a three year period of time. We plan to distribute seven million over a one year period of time. There's a little orange sticker in the back window's of cars that's called a TDP, Temporary Drivers Permit. 250,000 of those are not real, they're fake. We're coming up with a document that's foolproof, counterfeitproof, tamperproof. By the way, the state loses about 20 million dollars a year because of that item. This one will be placed where the rear license plate is located, as compared to in the window. It will have all the bells and whistles that will hunt back to our system in Springfield [Illinois]. The one that you have now won't hunt anywhere. Like they would say, this dog won't hunt. Story_ID: 57405 Speaker 1: So you really, in many ways, you've turned the adversity that was shining on your office [Illinois Secretary of State] so quickly, when you came in, to your really advantage. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It's not like people don't really hear about what the Secretary of State's office does, so you see in the press a lot, what you're doing. So what are your plans then for the future? Do you have a plan for the Governor's office? Speaker 2: No, they did a polling not long ago and my numbers came out better than anyone in the state for Governor and I don't have any plans of running for that office. I said during the campaign, that I wanted to run for this office and this office only and I want to hold true to my promise. When Mike Howlett was the Secretary of State, he later ran for governor. When Alan [J.] Dixon was the Secretary of State, he later ran for Senate to be a senator. Jim Edgar followed him and became our governor. George Ryan followed him and he became our governor. So it's been said that individuals who hold this office use it as a springboard or a stepping stone to become the Governor of the State of Illinois. I'm here to fix a problem and I want to stay here as long as I can to be a good representative, a good administrator for the people of the State of Illinois. Story_ID: 57406 Speaker 1: So what do you want to do? You're still vibrant. You've made a lot of contributions, so what do you want to do from this--I know that this is where you are and you are very committed and you've had a pattern of successes when you've taken something on, but what things haven't you done in your life that you would like to accomplish? Speaker 2: Not very many (laughter); not very many. I kind of like, span the gamut. I think if you look at my resume, it would speak to an all American boy type; baseball, the military, teaching school, State Representative, Recorder of Deeds, Secretary of State, Scoutmaster, Cubmaster, Explorer Advisor, Drum Corp Director, Gymnastic Coach. Those things and more speak volumes. Speaker 1: So what would you say has been your greatest accomplishment of those? Speaker 2: I think probably becoming the Secretary of State considering the fact that someone said to me that I could not be. I think that's the worse thing you can ever say to a person of my caliber, tell me what I can't do. I'll spend the rest of the night trying to figure how I can. Speaker 1: It's interesting because I think, I also--the thing that had a lot of publicity on is really the Jesse White Tumblers, maybe because it carries your name and that it's such a predominate, and such a positive. It was almost like the shining light to come out of Cabrini-Green and that area. It was the thing that was the most visible and the most positive. Speaker 2: Well, I've had over 5100 kids who come through the program within the 42 year period of time and only 93 have gotten themselves in trouble with the law. It's been an effort to combat juvenile delinquency. We spend about $4,000 a year on each youngster. The Board of Education spends between five and 6,000 to educate its youth. But yet in state government, we spend between 13,000 and $50,000 a year to incarcerate an individual. Yet, when you look at the numbers who are individuals who are in prisons today, 83% had not graduated from high school, so now you know who the people are who create problems for we, in society. That's why we have a mission reminding our young people that they have to be in school, on time, everyday and have one aim in mind: and that's to get the best education possible. I always remind them too, that there's a lot more within them than they give themselves credit for having. The easiest thing that they'll ever get a chance to do in life is say, "I quit or I can't" and I don't want that ever to be a part of their philosophy of life. I want our young people to become better educated and better informed and that's why we have a tutor program, the Jesse White Tutoring Program for the tumblers whose grades have fallen below C average. We have the Jesse White Scholars as a program that will help our young people to go off to college. We distribute to them in August between 1,000 to $5,000 depending on their need. You can be a good tumbler, but we also want you to be a good human being and we want you to be a well-informed individual. Once your feet become firmly planted on this earth, we want them to come back into their community and do some of the things that they've seen us do and that is to give back. Story_ID: 57407 Speaker 1: Now I just want to ask some other sort of questions. Do you have--as someone who is in this interview, I've been very impressed. You're a very disciplined person and you, for that reason, I think would be an excellent role model. Speaker 2: You asked me to be here at eight o'clock. Speaker 1: You were here (laughter); so and I wasn't. But what--I ask that because I'm wondering and you've had a very positive impact on the black community too and youngsters. My question for you is, what do you--do you have hopes or concerns about the African American community and its direction? Speaker 2: I've always had concerns. When I taught school, I realized that when young people come to school, that many times the parents seem to think that their job has been complete, that the job of educating their children rests with the school and with the school only. I have a problem with that, because I know for a fact that when parents are involved in the education of their young people, we're going to get a better product. When they show concern, we're going to win with that. I also believe too that, the people within the community specifically the adults and young men should set a good example for our young people. When the older brother is swearing and talking about drugs and talking about negative things in life, the little brother will quickly acquire the same language and the same habits. So it's important for us to make sure that we be good stewards, be good brothers, be good leaders to the young people in our community. Story_ID: 57408 Speaker 1: Now what do you view sports? It's an area that African Americans have excelled in, but you obviously have used this. It has taught you a great deal of discipline, I think. I'm wondering, how would you--what would you say the importance of sports is? Speaker 2: Well being involved with sports will keep a person away from Sidewalk University. That means, standing on the corner and becoming involved with negative aspects of life. When young people are involved with athletics, they meet people of other ethnic backgrounds and they get a chance to break down the barrier of discrimination. They establish good bonds with others and that's wholesome, because not only should we play together, but we should eventually prepare ourselves to work together in peace and harmony with one another. I think that that's important. I also believe too, that when you take young people out of their immediate environment and eat in the various restaurants that are different from yours. For example, I've taken some of my tumblers to some Polish restaurants to eat Polish food. I've taken them to Italian restaurants to eat Italian food. I've taken them to Greek restaurants to eat Greek food. I speak about seven different languages, not fluently, but I play around with them. So when I go into a particular community, I can relate to them in a few words that they understand and can appreciate. All those things and more would put you in a better light with that particular ethnic group. Story_ID: 57409 Speaker 1: What about politics? Why do you think that that is important to you? You know, there's a big focus right now on business, that blacks should really start move in business when political, politics had sort of taken a beating. But I'm wondering as someone who's young, who's looking at careers, why would you say being African American and explain why a political career is important. Speaker 2: Well I think that they should go to college first and put something between their ears, other than scalp. Once you have become educated, then you could almost write your script. Many times young people will major in political science, that's a prelude to getting into law school. But at the same time, they could help out on some of the campaigns. Eventually, if the person is successful, become Chief of Staff or some of those Chiefs of Staff make well over $100,000; which is a lot more than you'll make teaching, about 35,000. Well, I don't mean to demean the teaching profession because I was there and I love it. I think we need more people to venture to that area. But that's a way of getting into the political arena. But there are other individuals who like to become law makers and alderman, etc. I would suggest that they spend some time working within the framework of the organization that is within their ward or within their district. If you want to become a State Representative, you have to learn about the job. A young man came up to me the other day and said, "I'd like to become a manager of one of your facilities." I said, "Well what kind of experience do you have. He said, well I'm well educated." I said, "Well, you have some people there who have been there for 20 years and now all of a sudden you're going to come in from the outside; you're going to make more money than they make and they'll have to spend time teaching you how to manage the office." I said, "Thanks, but no thanks, that just won't work." So I believe when you're on the job, you learn a lot from it, if you apply yourself. Story_ID: 57410 Speaker 1: The question I want to ask now is when you look back on your start in Alton, Illinois and-- what do you think when you sort of look back over your career? Speaker 2: I look at it as a success story of kind of a career that was "made in heaven" so to speak; when you come as a Public Aid recipient and it's like a person standing on top of the John Hancock Center [Chicago, Illinois] and you're able to jump off and land on your feet and keep going. I just look back at everything that I've done in life and I kind of like say "Jesus Christ, how did you do it?" And then I look back and always say thanks to those who helped me to be where I am today. I couldn't have done it by myself. A lot of people believed in me and I said to myself "I have to do something about this because people have been so kind and generous to me." Story_ID: 57411 Speaker 1: And what do you think are the key ingredients for being successful? Speaker 2: Hard work, dedication, honesty-those will carry you. Intestinal fortitude; those things and more will carry you far and then a good watch which will make sure that you're there on time and then a commitment to discharge your duties to the best of your ability. Story_ID: 57412 Speaker 1: And the other question I have is one-- and it's related to the Pioneers in the Struggle--the title for the project is called "Pioneers in the Struggle" and my question for you is what does that title mean to you as it relates to this group of African Americans? Speaker 2: I would think that overcoming the odds. I think that all of us at one time of another or sometime or another have had to overcome the odds. I was told that I couldn't win, couldn't be who I am today and I fought very hard and committed myself to travel throughout the state of Illinois to tell my story and that prevailed. Speaker 1: You're the second--aren't you the second African American to hold a Statewide office? Speaker 2: The second, yes. Speaker 1: The third position. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because [HM] Roland [Burris] served in two. Speaker 2: In two, yes. [Illinois] Comptroller and Attorney General. But I'm the first African American to ever run for this office and the first to attain that. He's probably the first, no, I think someone else ran for that office as well and I think that was [HM] Earlene Collins. Speaker 1: So what does that say about things because this is--we're talking about a State Government that's pretty old and you're still a trail blazer. Speaker 2: It says that the people of the State of Illinois are fair and they're not concerned about the color of your skin; it about your commitment to your duty. Story_ID: 57413 Speaker 1: Okay, my last question is a legacy question, I ask this of everyone; what do you want you legacy to be as Jesse White? Speaker 2: I want someone to put on my tombstone that I cared and I gave back. Speaker 1: (pause) Speaker 2: Ok, that's it. Anything else? Anything else you'd like to say? Speaker 1: I really said that with regard to the [Jesse White] Tumblers. With regard to the political arena, not only did I take on a job but I took on the responsibility that goes with it and that I worked seven days a week, 24 hours of the day determined to make the office that I held the best office in government. Speaker 2: Okay, well thank you, Jesse White...