 Story_ID: 658134 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Hazel, H-A-Z-E-L, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson]. Most people know me by Mitsy, M-I-T-S-Y. Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the professional name I go by at work. Speaker 1: So, now is that a, is Mitsy a nickname or a-- Speaker 2: You could say it has become my name by default. In South America, my sister gave me that name. We had a set of wild horses, and one of the horses (laughter), their name was Mitsy, and she said I reminded her of the horse (laughter). I was, I was one of those kids that was out there, you know, constantly running all over the place and just, I was very active. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And she says, "I don't like Hazel. Name her Mitsy" (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born December 13, 1950 in Georgetown, Guyana, South America. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I'm currently a re- a retired executive from Fox [Fox Entertainment Group] and News Corporation [News Corp]. I was the senior vice president of diversity development for both organizations. I am now a founding partner of a non-profit called ForAfrica. In Swahili, it [fora] means success. And I have two other colleagues, and we're looking to develop future leaders in Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is December 20, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? And you don't have to give your address but-- Speaker 2: Okay. You're currently in my home in Mission Viejo, California. Story_ID: 658135 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm up. They only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I do have a favorite food. It's probably roti and curry chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite co- color? Speaker 2: You know, I thought of a favorite color, and I thought black and red. However, I love bright colors. So anything bright and exuberant, I like. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I would say all the bright colors of the r- of the rainbow. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The Christmas holiday. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Christmastime. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Wow, that's an interesting one (laughter). Favorite vacation destination. Well, I do so much of my work in Africa. So I want to put that aside, although I love Africa. I don't have one in particular. I am a world traveler, so I love traveling the world. I love seeing things. So all I have to sit back and do is think of a place I'd like to go, explore what that place means and just go. Probably South America. I loved Costa Rica while I was there. So I'll stick with that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My nieces would say, "Oh, that's phenomenal" (laughter). They wait for me to say that. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I guess I'll go with that one. Story_ID: 658136 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Clement Wilson] side. But we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Pearl Wilson [Pearl Richards Wilson], P-E-A-R-L, last name Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Berbice, in Guyana. It's outside of Georgetown [Guyana]. Speaker 1: How do you spell Berbice? Speaker 2: B-E-R-B-I-C-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think my mom was born in 1926 [sic. 1924]. I don't have the exact date. I know she was born in Ja- on January 6th. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting. A couple of years ago, I did the swabbing with the African ancestors to find out where the origins lie. And we came up with the Kru tribe in Liberia. And it was very exciting for me to sit back and actually start to do a lot of research on the Kru tribe in Liberia. I found out that the Krus were one of the few African tribes that were not enslaved. They were indentured servants, particularly in Guyana. They were navigators. So they had a sign that they would put on their heads to indicate to others that they would be the ones to navigate you out of Africa. So they weren't enslaved. They then landed in Guyana, all the Guyanas, but Guyana in particular, at that point which was British Guiana. They had the most Krus, and those Krus came as indentured servants. They came to a place called Essequibo [Guyana], which is where my grandmother [Amy Gibson Lo Hing] was born and lived. And came there to do the, you know, we're known for gold and bauxite and diamonds. So a lot of what they did had to do with the mining of those natural resources. Speaker 1: And Kru is spelled K-R-U (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) K-R-U, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. My grandmother, who was an educator and a seamstress--we were lucky in that she wrote things down and kept the history of the family. So it goes--dates back to 1866. I've got what we call the little black book from my grandmother. And we're missing about twenty to forty years. Because the Krus came in 1820, and she started her chronology in 1866. So we go, we have information all the way back to 1866. So, you know, we've tried to keep it up over the years. The issue is when I was in Guyana recently, they don't have what you call a repository of history and information. So it was very difficult for me to try and link things back together. We're trying to do that now. Speaker 1: Okay. So they don't keep birth and death records? Speaker 2: They keep birth and death. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have to go to the post office. You have to schedule an appointment. You stand on line. You know, it's not like here where you can get on a computer and look those up. So what we're doing now is looking at an individual who--a cousin of ours who's in Guyana--part of the family's still there and asking them if the university would help us actually put together the whole chronology. So my grand- my mother's side of the family, my grandmother, was a, what they call native to Guyana, an Amerindian Indian [Native American]. She does have a little bit of the European side of her because her maiden name was Gibson McCray [ph.], which means there's a Scottish piece. And it probably--that's one of the reasons why we sit back and we look at her today. All the pictures we have of my grandmother, she's got gray eyes, very, very fair skin. But the gray eyes is the thing that kind of always got to us. Where did those gray eyes come from? And she was one of, she was the larger of the big people. So my grandmother was only 4'6" as an Amerindian. Speaker 1: The larger of the big people? Speaker 2: Yeah, we call-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because she was 4'6". Now the smaller people are, you know, 4'. She was the big--we said the larger of the big people, the small people. And it shows in some of the family members. My mom was only 5'. I have a sister that's 4'12". My uncle is like 5', was 5'2". So we took my dad's side of the family, which we'll talk about. I did at least. I'm the tallest (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because you're at least, what, 5'9"? Speaker 2: 5'7". Speaker 1: 5'7". Speaker 2: Yeah. I took the, I'm the, I took the dad's side of the family. Story_ID: 658137 Speaker 1: So grandmother [Amy Gibson Lo Hing] came from the area near the rainforest. My mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] was born in Bor- in Berbice, in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana]. And both of them moved to Georgetown [Guyana] where they lived until my mom and my grand- we all immigrated to the United States. My mom had one--two sisters, two brothers. A brother died when he was nineteen from--I'm trying to think of what happened with him. He had, oh, he had, what do you call it? Not a stroke. Epilepsy. He died of epilepsy. I had an aunt that died in the early '50s [1950s], and then my other aunt--and she died of cancer. And then I had another aunt that lived for quite some time. And my uncle, who is probably the one we were closest with, he left Guyana at nineteen to go to England to join the Royal Air Force, stayed in England, and it gave us the opportunity to travel back and forth. So we would spend the holidays and times in England with the family in England. So we're the closest to my uncle's side of the family only because of the, probably the distance, and the fact that my mom and uncle were close and kept together. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This--go ahead. Speaker 2: So, no, I was just going--did your mother--she share any stories about growing up, with you? Speaker 1: You know, it's interesting. Speaker 2: What it was like when she grew up. Speaker 1: She--my mom shared, my sister shared. I went, really went back and spoke to my sister. She was twelve when she came here. So she had the most memory. And I said to Yvonne [Yvonne Wilson], "I need you to really share some of this." And then my sister Pat [Sybil Wilson] shared as well. But growing up in Guyana was very different. First of all, we were under the British rule, which was a very strict rule at that time. Education was critical. You know, we went to school at the age of two and a half. They called it government school, so we were all went to St. Philip's government school [St. Philip's School, Georgetown, Guyana]. My sisters went, I went, my mom went. Uniforms were important. We learned all the fundamentals by the time we were about seven. So between two and a half and seven, you were grounded in fundamentals--reading, writing, arithmetic, you know, math. All of those things just came naturally to us. There was no TV. So we had--and we used kerosene lamps as--for electricity. Because Guyana is below sea level, all of the homes are built on stilts. So you had trenches around the home to prevent flooding, you know, so the water could then escape. And I remember her telling us about going to the country when she was younger to visit family. My granddad [Samuel Richards] was a shoemaker, and he'd make shoes. And we're--firmly believe that my granddad was the African in the family. Because if you look at my grandmom being fair skinned with gray eyes and then you look at my mom, and my uncle in particular, they're very dark. They're about three shades darker than me. So we're saying that's the African side of the family that came out. Other than that, you know, she, you know, she would talk about just growing up. She had a great childhood. Religion was very important. They were all Episcopalians my, on my mom's side and spent a lot of time in the church. My mom was a seamstress, my grandmother was a seamstress, so they made all of our clothes. And at that time there were four of us, so they needed to make sure that they had the wherewithal to do things. Holidays, for example, was Boxing Day and the day after Christmas, where we would go to the sea wall and they'd fly their kites, you know, for the holidays and things like that. So it was a very, it was a simple life, but it was a good life at that time. And everything they did came from the ground, the earth. So they grew their own fruits, they grew their own vegetables, they raised their own chickens. The only thing that they actually said they went out and bought would be, you know, beef or pork if they needed to. And that came with no preservatives. So we come from a line of long livers who have been healthy. My grandmother passed away at ninety, my mom at eighty-three, my dad [Clement Wilson] at eighty. Story_ID: 658138 Speaker 1: So your mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] became a seamstress, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And did--now she finished government school [sic. St. Philip's School, Georgetown, Guyana]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --there, which goes to, what, the equivalent of-- Speaker 2: Equivalent of twelfth grade here, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, so she could sew. Did she have any other talents or-- Speaker 2: When she came to this country, she had to find work because, you know, there's now six of us. And my dad [Clement Wilson] worked two jobs, and she decided she needed to contribute to the household. And she went to work for the Hebrew home and hospital for the aged [Hebrew Home for the Aged] in the Bronx [New York], Kingsbridge Road. And she started out as a nurse's aide. And I remember her telling me about some of the stories, some of the horror stories that went on there. You know, the, just the lack of respect for people at that point. She became very involved with the Civil Rights Movement. And I, you know, I did a tribute to her, and I'd love to read it to you at some point. Because she did the March on Washington, and just involved in making sure that hospital workers had equal rights, equal benefits and were treated with dignity and respect. So I look at my mom as being a pioneer in terms of that aspect, considering she had six kids, she's new to the country. This is not something she, you know, she would normally undertake--she's a house maker. But she saw a need, and she accepted the challenge to represent the hospital workers and marched with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, in March on Washington and in New York City [New York, New York]. And part of the legacy is they were--that core group was able to develop Local Union 1199, the hospital workers' union [Local 1199; 1199SEIU, United Healthcare Workers East]. When my mother left and retired from the Hebrew Home for the Aged, she was a recre- recreational therapist. So she went from nurse's aide to union delegate to a recreation therapist, which kind of takes her back to her origins of really being creative and working with people on developing various types of, you know, creative modes that you like, planners and plaques. And I still have some today. As a matter of fact, the one right behind me is one--her knitting and crocheting that she does and just some of the, the ornaments that we put on the tree. Story_ID: 658139 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Sure. My dad's name was Clement, C-L-E-M-E-N-T, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N [Clement Wilson]. And this might be a little shorter story (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, now what is his date of birth and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: My dad was born on Christmas day (laughter), December 25th. Speaker 1: What year, about what year was he born? Okay. I didn't see the look (laughter). Was he, was he older than your mother [Pearl Richards Wilson]? Speaker 2: By about twenty years (laughter). Speaker 1: About twenty years, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) was born in 1926 [sic. 1924], then he was born in 1906? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was about twenty years older than my mom. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we laugh at that, and say, "Oh ma, what are you doing with this old man?" And interestingly enough, you know, we're his only six kids (laughter). You know, you say to yourself, at that age--and I think my mom probably had the first child [Yvonne Wilson] when she was nineteen. So my dad was thirty-nine or thereabouts. But he's only had six kids. Speaker 1: Okay. So what do you know about his side of the family, the Wilsons? Speaker 2: Well, my dad--dad's mother died when he was young. So probably right after he was born. So I knew nothing about my grandmother on that side. And I--that history stopped because of that, because my dad didn't talk about that a lot. And it might have been because it was so painful to him, you know, to not have a mother at that time. Family came from Barbados, so they were known as Bajans. And my dad was known as the Red Man because he was, his complexion was very red. So don't know anything about my grandmother. I do know that his sisters raised him. My aunt, Dorothy [ph.], who I knew very well, and who sponsored my dad to come to the United States, is the one who raised my dad, along with his sisters Hazel [ph.] and Eloise [ph.]. So he was raised by his sisters. My dad also came from Berbice [Guyana] and was a mason. So he actually worked on building the roads in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana]. Speaker 1: Okay. So occupationally a mason-- Speaker 2: He was a mason. Speaker 1: --not a-- Speaker 2: Not a mason in the terms of-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) how we look at a mason. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes, occupationally he was a mason, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So he was like a brick mason? Speaker 2: A bricklayer, yeah, yeah, a brick mason. Story_ID: 658140 Speaker 1: So he worked on roads and-- Speaker 2: He worked on the roads (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: And met my mom [Pearl Richards Wilson], and I don't remember what year. And that's part of the history that we don't have. I keep saying, "Ma, so how did you and daddy met?" They, you know, they met in town through a friend of theirs. You know, I think the friend's name is Vibrant [ph.]. And, you know, all I remember is that he had the first one which is my sister Yvonne [Yvonne Wilson]. And then, you know, six others after. My dad [Clement Wilson], my brother said my dad would take the family--because I was young at the time. I was only four when I left Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana]. So a lot of the memory of Guyana--I think I have some, and I'll share with you what I have. But most of it's coming from my sisters and my brother. My dad would take us to his family in the country where we would eat, you know, the Indian food, the roti and the curry chicken. And that would be out in the open on, you know, stones and watching them cook on the stones and things like that. So that was, you know, for my brothers [sic.] and sisters, they said that was the--important part of their lives because it was the connection back to his family. The other thing he would do--and my sister told me this--is on Saturdays he would take them to the racetrack, and they'd watch horseracing. So, you know, we had, Guyana had a racetrack that--it was quite famous in that time and a lot of horseracing. And he would do that. So he stayed actively involved. When we were in school, he would--if my mom didn't send lunch for us, my dad would bring a lunch every single day to school. So he was, he was quite an active dad even when we came to this country. You talk about the Masons. There was an organization called the Guyanese benevolent association [British Guiana Benevolent Association]. And it was just an association for people who were from the--Guyana that wanted to maintain that contact and that cultural history and connection. And on the fourth Sunday of every single month--and this was for years--I remember us getting dressed up in our Sunday finest, and my dad would take all four of us to the Guyanese benevolent association where we would then, would be in touch with our culture, our history, the people. So dad really tried to impress upon us the importance of culture and history. Interestingly enough, my dad is also the one that named us. My mom was Episcopalian, my dad was Catholic. We were all Catholics, you know. We were, you know, raised Catholic. My eldest sister is, name is Yvonne and my--Yvonne Dorothy. Her original name was Dorothy Yvonne. My aunt's name was Dorothy [ph.]. My name is Hazel Eloise [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], and I come directly from my aunt, who's Hazel [ph.]. And there's another one, Eloise [ph.]. My brother's name is Ivan [Ivan Wilson]. And my uncle, my cousins and, now my nephew's name is Ivan [ph.]. So had a lot of influence in terms of the children, the naming, the religion, and just the way in which we were brought up. Story_ID: 658141 Speaker 1: I just want to ask. Did--was your father [Clement Wilson] raised in Barbados? Speaker 2: He was raised in Barbados. Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he came to Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana] as a, as a grown up? Speaker 2: Yes. He came, yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I don't think he was born in Guyana. I'd have to go back and look (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the opportunity in Guyana for him, you know? Was the government working on something or was something going on there that drew him, I mean, work? Speaker 2: I couldn't-- Speaker 1: Because I know a lot of people we interview-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who go from one island to another-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --do it because of some big work opportunity-- Speaker 2: Opportunities, yeah. Speaker 1: --that's there. Speaker 2: I can't, I can't answer that one for you. I couldn't tell you. I didn't delve that deep. Speaker 1: But his whole family came, right? Speaker 2: But his family was in Guyana and then family left Guyana. His sisters left and came to the United States in the '40s [1940s] and then sent for my dad in the '50s [1950s] to come to the United States. So he came up to the United States in '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: Okay. So did he bring the whole family in '52 [1952]? Speaker 2: No. No, he came up in 19-- Speaker 1: Because you came up in '54 [1954]? Speaker 2: --fifty-two [1952]. I came up in '54 [1954] with my mom [Pearl Richards Wilson]. And the only reason I came, I was the youngest of the four. And they felt it would be a hardship to leave all four, particularly me being the young wild one, as they called it, with my grandmother [Wilson's maternal grandmother, Amy Gibson Lo Hing] who was taking care of all of us in the household. And then my brother [Ivan Wilson] and my sisters came up in '57 [1957]. So it was stages that we came. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My dad--it was interesting--he said to us that he actually took a boat from Guyana to Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago] before he took a plane into the United States. I know we did a prop. We went from Guyana to Trinidad, Trinidad to Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico into the United States, on Pan Am [Pan American World Airways]. And that was a prop, that's how I came. My sisters, something very similar, yeah. Story_ID: 658142 Speaker 1: The only other thing I would probably say about my dad [Clement Wilson] is his whole side of the family was into medicine. This--again the influence that, you know, family members can have. My aunt was a dietician, two of my aunts were nurses, and then my unc- my cousin Ivan [ph.], who's my aunt's son was an engineer. And he actually was an air traffic controller and engineer at Kennedy Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York] when he came up. And my cousin was telling me he was actually part of that team that built the grid at Kennedy Airport. So you've got all the sciences on that side of the family. And I remember being young and my dad saying to me, and to all of us, "If you're going to be successful in this country, you go into medicine or teaching." Well, five of the six of us went into medicine (laughter). And guess who didn't go and follow dad's advice? I was the only one that did not get in--go into medicine. So it was very interesting to see not only the influence but the, I guess the passion that the family has for science and medicine, which is carried over to our generation is now carrying over to my children as well. Story_ID: 658143 Speaker 1: So your parents [Pearl Richards Wilson and Clement Wilson] were introduced by a friend? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. In Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, all right. And they got, they get married. Was that un- was it unusual in Guyana for a young woman to marry an older guy? Speaker 2: That old, yeah, yeah. And it, and it was unusual in Guyana for an older gentleman to not be married by the time, you know, you hit a certain age. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because that's just a part of the culture, yeah. Speaker 1: But they met and fell in love and got married and six children. Speaker 2: Six children. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Four born in Guyana, two born here. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you think about their personalities, their sense of humor, the way they walk, talk, what they look like, their, what their interests are, their talents--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Oh, that's an interesting one. Wow. My dad was a workaholic, so he had two jobs. And he worked at the coating cabinet company. On the weekends he worked in security. And I, you know, I often wondered is that because there was six of us and he needed the money? And I thought of that at first. But even after we grew up and left the home, he still continued. And even after we forced him to retire, and said, "Daddy, you need to retire. You've got--," you know, he still worked. So I have that piece of him in me. Greg [Gregory James], my spouse, will tell you I am a workaholic in terms of the passion that I have to accomplish certain things that carries over. But if I had to say who do I take after, you see, it's so interesting, because people look at my mom and they see her as this very demure, you know, woman, quiet. I, you know, I'd have to probably say my mom, and the fact that she was a risk taker. She really believed, whatever she believed strongly in, she not only spoke about it, but she followed through in doing things. And I think a lot of what I do today comes from just watching my mom during the civil rights era and taking that risk. You know, leaving six kids in a home--and all we had was a black and white TV to watch--and listening, hearing that there was going to be so much violence in Washington, D.C. And I kept saying to her, "Why are you going? Why are you doing this? You have a family. You have a family here. Why would you do that?" And she would just look at us. And I remember her saying, "If I don't go to help others now, you will never, ever be free or safe." And I just watched on that TV, waiting for something to happen to her. So I would probably say I take after my mom more so because she's the one that constantly stepped out there doing those things that--first of all, people were shocked to see she would do--and really follow through on those things that she believed in. Speaker 1: Okay. So she was a leader, in other words (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was a leader. She spearheaded quite a bit, yeah. And she was a subtle leader, so she didn't have to be a--didn't necessarily have to be up front. But you knew her presence was there and that was felt. The presence was felt in the home with the family, at work, and even in some of the activities she was doing, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 658144 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your brothers and sisters. Can you name them, from the oldest-- Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to the, to the youngest, include yourself and the place that you fit in? Speaker 2: Okay, their place. Speaker 1: And tell us what they're doing. Speaker 2: Okay. So Yvonne [Yvonne Wilson] is the eldest. She is sixty-nine years old. She'll be sixty-nine this January. Yvonne lives in New York [New York], will never leave New York. She's a diehard New Yorker. And she works in a hospital. She is--supervises medical records. So that's the medical aspect. Yvonne has been doing this all of her life. So probably forty plus years. Patsy--well, Sybil [Sybil Wilson], is the second oldest. It's interesting. In the family we all have names. So Sybil is my sister's legal name. It's Sybil Patricia. But for some reason, we call her Patsy. Patsy is sixty-seven, she just turned sixty-seven December 7th. And she works at Children's Hospital of L.A. [Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. So she's at CHOC [Children's Hospital of Orange County]. She has worked there since 1978 in the emergency room. I have a lot of respect for anyone who can work in the emergency room of a children's hospital and experience some of the things she's experienced. She went into the [U.S.] military, [U.S.] Air Force and became a pediatric practitioner and uses those skills today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ivan [Ivan Wilson] is the third, and he's the only boy out of the group (laughter). And as I said, Ivan's named after my uncle and my cousins and things like that. And Ivan is sixty-four, and Ivan retired two years ago. And he retired from Beth Israel Hospital [Mount Sinai Beth Israel] in New York City, as well. And Ivan was an inhalation therapist. And then, of course, you have Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], December 13th. And I'm--just last week turned sixty-three. Lorraine [Lorraine Wilson] and Gwen [Gwen Wilson], Lorraine is my--the next youngest. She comes after me. And Lorraine is fifty-eight, and she'll kill me if I get this wrong. And she's the first that was born in this country. She was born in the Bronx [New York], and (laughter) Lorraine was born in a taxicab because they couldn't make it to the hospital on time, December 27th. So we all say that, you know, even though we were all born in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana] in homes, look where you were born, in a, in a cab. Lorraine is--works for Scripps Mercy Hospital [San Diego, California], and she is executive director of medical records. (Laughter) (Unclear) family. Speaker 1: Okay. And number six? Speaker 2: And number six is Gwendolyn Edith. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Gwendolyn has my mom's middle name, Edith. And Gwendolyn is fifty-five, and she's the baby. And Gwen is not working right now. She took care of my mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] for years when my mom was ill. She's no longer working now. However, she got her degree in recreational therapy. Speaker 1: Okay. Which is what your mother did? Speaker 2: Which is what my mom did, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 658145 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory I probably would say I have is from Guyana, coming home from school [St. Philip's School, Georgetown, Guyana] and dropping--in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana], you used a slate and chalk pencils at that time--and dropping the chalk pencil in the trench on my way home from school and getting in trouble all the time for doing that (laughter). I'd just run up the thing, drop it in and keep going into the house (laughter). So that--for some reason it's so, it's so clear. It's vivid to me--of that memory. The other memory I have is when I first arrived, I remember arriving in the United States and running off that plane and running to my dad [Clement Wilson] because, oh, my gosh, it's my daddy, you know. So I rea- I can see myself running towards him, you know, as I got off the plane, leaving my mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] behind. And then we spent a few months living in Harlem [New York, New York], and it was an apartment building. And I want to say it--for some reason, my recollection is it seemed like it was the projects, I'm not sure. But I remember being on the swings and having kids poke fun at me because of my accent and running into the house crying and saying to my mom, "What's wrong with me?" You know, "The kids outside are poking fun at me because of my accent." And I think for me that was the first time that I experienced differences. Because you know, Guyana is the land of six people. So you have got all types of culturally and ethnically diverse individuals in Guyana. Speaker 1: What are the ethnics of Guyana? Speaker 2: Well, Guyana of the Amerindians, which is the Indians [Native American]. You have the blacks--Africans. You have the Portuguese, you have the Chinese. As a matter of fact, my grandmother's last name when she married was Lo Hing [Wilson's maternal grandmother, Amy Gibson Lo Hing], so we've got the Chinese side. You have Amerindians, black, Chinese, Portuguese. Of course, you have your whites. You have your mixed race. And I'm leaving one out. Speaker 1: Are the whites divided up between English and Dutch? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because Suriname and Guyana are so close. And at one point, it went back and forth, you know. The Dutch owned Guyana and then they sold it to the British. The British owned Suriname so it--back and forth, yeah. As a matter of fact, we have family who left Suriname and went to Amsterdam [the Netherlands] to live because of that, you know, living in Suriname as opposed to living in Guyana. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know the, one of the largest ethnic groups in Suriname are the black--I mean, in Holland [the Netherlands] are the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, other--yeah. Speaker 1: --black folks from Suriname? Speaker 2: Suriname, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So let's see. Okay, so you lived in Harlem at first. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and then came to a very quick and abrupt move and then we-- Speaker 1: I want to ask you about that accent. What is the accent? Can you do the accent? Speaker 2: I can't--you know, it--they say it's the Queen's English. So it is not a West Indian accent. It's not a Jamaican type of an accent. It's not (adopts Jamaican accent), "Oh, man," you know (adopts Jamaican accent), "Jah, man." You know, it's not that type. It's more on the British side than it is--you know, we use terms like Ia go 'long (laughter), you know. That means just go along. Ila go you with (laughter). So there's certain key words and phrases that we have that we use, you know, quite a bit. And it's kind of singsong. It is singsong. (Adopts Guyanese accent), "I mean I know what you're doing today, man." Okay. Speaker 1: All right, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So there are so many West Indian people in New York City [New York, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --that you would just think that-- Speaker 2: Ours is a little, ours is a little different because it's got so--it's--we're so heavily, you know, influenced by the British side. And as a matter of fact, my mother would often say, "You speak the Queen's English." And she couldn't understand Americans because they just did not speak the Queen--you don't speak proper. You know, we speak the proper English, you know. Story_ID: 658146 Speaker 1: So you didn't stay in Harlem [New York, New York] long? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: And the family moved? Speaker 2: We then--my aunt, my uncle and my dad [Clement Wilson] moved. We--they bought a home, a two family home in the Bronx. This is in the '50s [1950s]. I was blown away--in the Bronx on University Avenue and Fordham Road. And-- Speaker 1: So it's an integrated area, yeah? Speaker 2: Well, this is interesting, yeah. Bronx, New York, we had the last house on the block. It was a two family home, and it was right around University Avenue. We had--at that time--and I stayed until I was thirteen. We--there were Jews on the block. We had southern blacks, we had Quakers, we had Spanish, we had--I think those were the predominant--and we had whites. So it was so mixed that the block itself, the neighborhood was so mixed, and everyone was curious about each other. So, you know, I spent a lot of time learning and understanding what it meant to be diverse in this small block. So we would go to bar mitzvahs, you know, the one the Quakers had, their events we would, you know, actually participate in those events. Our Spanish colleagues today, my brother's [Ivan Wilson] best friend was one of the gentlemen who lived in the neighborhood, you know, in the neighborhood. And we've kind of carried that on since then. But, and you had, you had West Indians as well. But it was a very diverse area, that block. But University Avenue and that whole area as a whole was not that diverse--heavy Irish influence, heavy Irish. Story_ID: 658147 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of your neighborhood growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I--let me start out by talking about maybe some of the foods that we cooked that was very important for us. So you had--for Christmas we always did pepper pot, garlic pork. We had the fruitcake. Unlike your fruitcake, it's very different. We--a matter of fact, Greg [Gregory James] is sitting there now doing the butter so I can finish the fruitcake. Of course, all the curries. So those were the, you know, and a lot of baking. We did a lot of baking. So my dad [Clement Wilson] baked. I loved when he did his coconut buns. My mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] baked the bread and braided it, you know. I couldn't wait for it to come out the oven so I could eat the bread. And then we had--some of the smells that I can think of is the ginger beer, which you make from ginger--the mauby, which you make. You know, the sorrel, which you get from the tree. And you know, you have the sorrel with the--so all of their smells--and I love pineapples and mangos, so all of those smells were something. I knew when they were baking--doing ginger beer versus, you know, some of the other things. I re- I do remember one time, and this is very interesting. I came into the house, and there was this odor in the house. And I said to my mom, "Oh, my god, what's that odor," (laughter)? And I says, "It smells like dog mess." And I kept saying, "Mom, what--," and it was all over the house, to the point where when we came home from school, we left the house. And I kept saying, "What is that odor?" And what I found is my aunt was learning how to do chitlins and didn't know how to do it properly (laughter). She didn't get the recipe right. So interestingly enough, to this day, I will not eat chitlins. Ne- I've never eaten them, I will not eat them and primarily because of--you know, you're talking about experiences--that experience that day--I just said there's no way I'm going to do that. So you talk about sights and smells, you know, it was those types of things. You know, for--you know, I remember eating the matzah ball soup and matzah. I mean there was a time when, you know, matzah, was just something you ate, you know, if not daily, once a week because it was there. It's what they eat, you know, that and the matzah ball soup. So those are some of the--you know. The smells--I remember, you know, the barbequing, the woman next door barbequing ribs and, you know, us sitting here saying, "Oh, they're cooking outside. They're cooking like we cook." You know, I didn't know at that point it was a, you know, the barbeque grill and a pit. I just thought everybody, you know, did that. So I remember the barbeque. The sights--I would say at the time when we lived there, at first, you did not have the Major Deegan Expressway. And they were just building that. So before the Major Deegan Expressway was opened, all the kids in the neighborhood would go down two blocks to the Major Deegan, and we'd ride our bikes. We'd, you know, ride our--run around, we'd do roller skates. That was our playground. The Major Deegan Expressway was our playground until it opened and then we got very upset. You know, what are you doing, you've just taken our playground away from us. But yeah, when we moved there, there was no Major Deegan Expressway. And when they opened it, it was, it really hit us hard because that was the safe place, safe haven for us that we no longer had. Speaker 1: Now what, now what was the main street that ran through your neighborhood? Speaker 2: University Avenue was the main street. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, University. Fordham Road was another one. People, if people know University, they know Fordham Road. They know the Major Deegan, yeah. Story_ID: 658148 Speaker 1: Was church a big factor in growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, huge, huge, huge. You know, as I said, we were baptized Catholic. My mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] and my grandmother [Wilson's maternal grandmother, Amy Gibson Lo Hing], they were Episcopalian. So we went to church every Sunday, even when we were in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana]. And then when we came here--but the interesting thing about it is when we came here, we started going to Catholic church. And, but when we came home--my grandmother lived with us all her life--you know, all of our lives, you know, that--when she was alive. And in the evening, she would sit back and teach us the Bible. Because at that time, and even up to I'd say about ten or fifteen years ago, Catholics, they didn't have, they didn't read the Bible. They had the Baltimore catechism ['Catechism of Christian Doctrine, Prepared and Enjoined by Order of the Third Plenary Council of Baltimore'] that you had to memorize. So there was very little connection to the Bible. So my grandmother took it upon herself--and then my mother after that--took it upon themselves to sit back and teach us the Bible. And I remember vividly sitting on the t- the floor and having her go over, you know, the books of the Bible, Genesis, Leviticus, Deutero- you know, and then actually talking about what occurred in the life of Jesus through this Bible. Speaker 1: And that is one of the complaints that the Protestants had early on that the priests could read the Bible but-- Speaker 2: But that, yeah-- Speaker 1: --people could not. Speaker 2: The people couldn't. The other complaint they had is why do you have to go to confession to confess to a man? Why don't you just go directly to God? So it was always one of those things. That's why I would laugh because I'm sitting there saying, "You guys are such firm Episcopalians, and you got all your kids Catholics," (laughter). But yeah, we, you know, we didn't miss a Sunday. Requirement was you went to church on Sundays, you prayed-- Speaker 1: So was church a source of moral authority or maybe or just a family gathering place or do you think-- Speaker 2: You know, I think when you looked at my--particularly the influence that the Episcopal side had on my mom and my grandmother, it was a source of moral authority. You lived by the Bible, you know. You knew the Ten Commandments. And you knew that, you know, you would be penalized if you stole. You knew--you know, so there were just certain tenets within the Bible that you knew you were required to live by, you know. And then put on top of that, you know, that whole Catholicism, where then things became sin. And, you know, slap your hands--you're going to, you know, you're going to go to purgatory or you're gonna, you know, go to hell. You can just imagine at times, for me, it was just like whoa. You're afraid to step out and do anything for fear that--you know. When I was growing up, I saw God as being a very vengeful God. I thought he was a, he was not a kind God, he was not a loving God. I thought--for me, I said, and I think some of this had to do with my Catholicism--he waited for you to make a mistake (laughter). Yes, and then he would ding you. So growing up in that life for years, that's how--that was my religion, which was a little scary. Because you know, I think to a certain extent it prevents you sometimes from stepping out. I kind of took the opposite approach. I was the risk taker, so I would do the opposite and say, "Well, let me test it and see what happens." I was my--you know, there were times when my mother would say, "You were my worst nightmare." I was the only one that went to a Catholic school, but I was the rebel in the group. And part of that, I think was I was struggling. I was struggling because I couldn't understand how could this person be so powerful and yet at the same time just have, you know, just wait for you to make all these mistakes and knows you're going to make these mistakes and then punish you for it? I struggled with that. Story_ID: 658149 Speaker 1: Speaking of school, where did you start school? Speaker 2: So I started school in the Bronx [New York]. This is, this is another interesting story. I started in the Bronx-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: I started at P.S. 91, Public School 91 [P.S. 91, Bronx, New York]. And I was in kindergarten at the time. And, now keep in mind I told you that we started school in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana] at two, so you knew how to read and write and everything else. So I get into kindergarten. And at that time, not today, but at that time all they did in kindergarten was color, and you went for half a day. And my mother [Pearl Richards Wilson] sat back and looked, and said, "I can't believe that I'm putting you into school and walking," you know, it was like a twenty minute walk every day, "so that you can color. You know more than this." She went to the school and, now is when I think back to just how progressive she was. She went to the school and asked them what they could do. They said there's nothing they could do because of my age, this is a requirement. So she pulled me out and put me in a Catholic school. So I spent twelve years of my life--matter of fact, all my life, in Catholic school. I went to St. Nicholas of Tolentine Elementary School [Bronx, New York] and high school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is St. Nichols? Speaker 2: St. Nicholas-- Speaker 1: Nicholas-- Speaker 2: --of Tolentine High School [St. Nicholas of Tolentine High School, Bronx, New York]. Elementary school, Tolentine. Speaker 1: --of--St.--how do you spell Tolentine? Speaker 2: T- T-O-L-E-N-T-I-N-E, St. Nicholas of Tolentine High (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --elementary and high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were run by the Dominican nuns [sic. Order of St. Augustine], so the Dominican order in the Bronx. And Dominicans were known for their education. So highly, highly, educationally focused. So I, that's how I started my school. I was one, and I was the only African American child in the school for twelve years. Speaker 1: The only? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In the whole school? Speaker 2: In the whole school, in the whole school. I did my first eight years--and it's interesting, because I do have a picture there that I was able to find. And I'll show you the graduation in the eighth grade. As a matter of fact, when I graduated in the eighth grade, the Daily News [New York Daily News] actually came and took a picture to show who's graduating. It didn't dawn on me at that time that I was the only African American child in the school, you know. But then it started to. You know, why are these people coming here to take pictures and things like this? But it created for me, particularly after elementary school, the fact that I was living three lives. There were three separate and distinct lives that I lived as I was growing up. You know, one of those lives was integrating myself into the tradition, you know, the more traditional culture within the United States, in school. The other one was I was viewed within the community that I lived as an African American, not necessarily, you know, as someone who came from South America. You know, people would just--you know, you were an African American because they lumped you together. And then at home, you know, you were South American, you were Guyanese. You, you know, the culture. And all of that was paramount in those days. So three very distinct ways for me to live which, you know, created challenges. But I think part of the reason why I am successful today is because of that. Story_ID: 658150 Speaker 1: Did you have any, were there any particular teachers or individuals at school that, that were like mentors or role models for you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, um-hm, quite a few but--probably, there's two of them that stick out. Well, Sister Paracleta [Paracleta Sweeney] who was my math teacher and created for me the love of not only math, I loved math but a love of learning. So when I graduated from high school [St. Nicholas of Tolentine High School, Bronx, New York], I had already taken calculus in high school because I loved math. And I just kept taking it, you know, until I, you know, would keep going. And then Sister Mary Aquin, who was our English teacher. And she challenged me. Because I had received a scholarship in high school from the beauticians association of New York [New York State Beauty School Association], and that was the first scholarship I received. And I--remember, I think I was telling you I was a part of a debutante ball. I was, you know, my cotillion. And part of that cotillion was a scholarship, and I received that scholarship for school. And I go back in, and I'm so excited to tell the school that, you know, I received this scholarship. And she looks at me in front of everyone in the class and says, "And you, Hazel [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], you're going to have to do a lot to maintain that scholarship." And, you know, I'm thinking, well, she's going to be happy for me. What she didn't realize is it was a challenge. So I looked at her and I said, "Not only am I going to maintain it, but before I leave here, I'm going to get a couple more." So she challenged me in a way that I didn't think I could be challenged. But I was like, how dare you sit here and not think that I'm capable. After you look at my grades--I mean, you know, A student the whole time. If I got a 90 [percent] in a class, I could run home crying. You know, so how dare you think I could not compete effectively. And then the last person was probably Ethel McBride. Ethel McBride was, I met Ethel when I was in the fifth grade. A couple of us were hanging around playing. There were, you know, a couple of my girlfriends were playing basketball. I didn't know what they were doing. They said, "Come join us." And I came and joined them and started to play around. And Ethel came up to me and she says, "Oh, you know, you could be pretty good. You should really come try out for the basketball team." Basketball team, what's basketball? You know, we don't know anything about basketball. So I tried out. I was on the basketball team in the sixth grade [at St. Nicholas of Tolentine Elementary School, Bronx, New York] and then when I went into high school. And at that time, basketball was very big in the Catholic schools. It was the biggest sport in Catholic high schools (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In girls schools, high schools? Speaker 2: Girls and boys. Speaker 1: Boy and girl (unclear), all right. Speaker 2: In girls, it was absolutely the biggest. Speaker 1: Even bigger than the boys? Speaker 2: And--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then for the boys, of course, you had the basketball. And St. Nicholas of Tolentine of course had a legacy of being state champs, you know, the girl, on the girls side even before I got there. So I come in in the ninth grade. And you have to try out for basketball. And everyone's trying out. All my friends are on the team with me, and people that I thought were just great. And, you know, I looked down one day at the list of people who made the basketball team, and I was the only freshman to make the team. And I was like whoa. You know, and again, she saw something in me that I didn't see in myself. And she was also my science teacher. And she had--every year you would do a science project. And at the end of the year you would get, you know, the state something award for having the highest science award for the school. And I think because she was my basketball teacher and she had so much trust and faith in me, I wanted to show her that I could win that science project. And it was always one young lady, Patricia O'Leary [ph.], who would buck me. She'd get--she--at one point she had a 95 average out of 94. And I'm like, oh, I can't let this happen. But over the years, every year, I'd get that science, you know, certificate, you know, because I think I looked at her, and she saw something in me I couldn't see in myself. And she allowed, it allowed me to excel in ways that I didn't think I could. So, I would say those three had the most influence. Story_ID: 658151 Speaker 1: Now did your basketball team [at St. Nicholas of Tolentine High School, Bronx, New York] win the state championship when you played (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did win the state champion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Matter of fact, my daughter played basketball for Woodbridge High School here [Irvine, California]. And at one point, I gave her my pendant. It was a round basket with Tolentine on it and champs on the other side. And I was the only one, the only freshman, you know, at that time on the team. And we won it for two years in a row after that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went out to work and stopped playing. Speaker 1: You stopped playing your senior year, after winning-- Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Well, you see, but coming from South America, you don't know that you could go on and get a basketball scholarship. I was also very good in track. I ran track, and I would beat all the other kids in, you know, the other schools. Speaker 1: But you didn't know you could get a scholarship for it? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, they didn't really talk to you about that. And my pa- one of the things--I think why education is so important to me today is, I have to find my way, you know. We knew education was important and that you had to get an education. And we all knew we were going to college. We knew--I mean that was a given. But how we were going to get there, not the foggiest idea. Had I known that I could have gotten a basketball scholarship, I'd have stayed my last year. Had I known that I might have gotten a track scholarship--you know, I was running the, you know, quarter mile in no time. I mean, I literally--and my, and my oldest daughter [Meisha Wilson Leonard] was a track--she went to Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] on track. So I just sit back saying had I known all of that at that time-- Speaker 1: The quarter mile? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of schools lined everybody up to see who could make it, if you could run a quarter. Speaker 2: It was easy for me. Speaker 1: But you-- Speaker 2: I was a, I was a sports junky. I loved it, I loved it. And I think more than that, I liked competition, I liked competing. And I hated to lose (laughter). Like, I mean, I hate to lose (laughter). Speaker 1: There must have been something for the, for having-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so but I didn't know. Speaker 1: Ne- you never played basketball, and the coach [sic. classmate, Ethel McBride] just saw you play one time and said, "Hey." Speaker 2: Did- didn't play, yeah, you know. And yeah, so for me, it was, it was interesting. It was--there were--it all new adventures. It was all very new adventures for me, yeah. Story_ID: 658152 Speaker 1: Now you were a good student in school. Speaker 2: I was a good student (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Top--one of the top studen-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Are you, were you the second highest student? I mean, were you always behind this other (unclear)-- Speaker 2: You know, they--we had a core group of us. There was about fifteen of us in our school that were just off the charts--brilliant, just off the--I mean there were some young ladies in my school that, whew, I mean, we're talking brilliant, you know. So I would probably say I was in that core group. But no, I was not second or third, you know, not in, not in that class. You know, my average [grade point average] ranged probably about 90, 92, 94, every year. But, you know, I--there was one girl--I think it, was it Mary McBride [ph.], who had near like a 99 average. She was just, she was just brilliant. Story_ID: 658153 Speaker 1: Now in terms (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --of popular culture and in light of what you subsequently would do in television in terms of diversity, did you watch television, and did you pay attention to who was on it? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did watch TV. We were restricted to a certain extent in watching TV. You know, you had to finish your homework and do all that stuff and do your chores and everything. But I did watch TV. I'll tell you the negative impact TV at that time had on me. I thought every family should be like 'Ozzie and Harriet' ['The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet']. So you look at some of those shows that they had on then. And you're like, oh, 'Leave It to Beaver,' 'Ozzie'--you know. And why aren't all families like that? You know, we're not like that. And I couldn't, I didn't at that time reconcile that it was just TV. You know, the boob tube came on, and I thought this is real. So the one, the show I liked the most was 'I Love Lucy' (laughter) because she [Lucille Ball] seemed to be down to earth, would get herself into trouble. And, so for me, I could gravitate towards that. But I thought a lot of their--I thought TV at that time did more harm than good. 'Leave It to Beaver,' 'I Love Lucy,' 'Marcus Welby' ['Marcus Welby, M.D.'], all of those family types of shows. I just felt--people would--just sat back saying this is what the family should be like, when in fact, it shouldn't. Another one I liked was 'Ben Casey' because I liked his sternness. But yeah, it was, yeah, it was a very interesting time for me. Speaker 1: So did your family watch 'Ben Casey' a lot? Speaker 2: Yes, we watched it. My grandmother [Wilson's maternal grandmother, Amy Gibson Lo Hing] would watch 'Ben Casey' and, what is it? 'Picture for a Sunday Afternoon.' And they had a clock. It would go (makes sound). And then we all knew 'Picture for a Sunday Afternoon' was coming on because of this clock. (Make sound) And I hated it. But everything on 'Picture for a Sunday Afternoon' was like 'Jane Eyre.' So it was all of your classics. Speaker 1: All the classic movies. Speaker 2: All of your classic movies that she forced us to watch. That and wrestling. She was a wrestling fanatic. So it got us involved into all of your classics. And then of course, the wrestling we loved--Argentina Apollo. I mean we would sit with her and then just have a ball. But, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was, it was an interesting, just an interesting dichotomy at that time, yeah. Speaker 1: And 'Ben Casey,' the medical show-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --everybody goes into medicine. Speaker 2: Yeah. And yeah, well, every- everyone's into medicine. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everyone's into medicine, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 658154 Speaker 1: On the verge of graduating from high school [St. Nicholas of Tolentine High School, Bronx, New York], now what was your social life in high school? Did you socialize in the black community or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, it was, it was-- Speaker 1: I know those times being what they were. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was interesting because I did not, I didn't socialize in school. Did not go to my prom, didn't do any of those things. I had--by the time I hit the eleventh grade I realized that I was different. And, you know, there were times that I just didn't fit in. People started asking me about my hair, you know, and just various things like that. And, so I kind of began to understand that there was a difference there. So I started to separate myself from the social activities of the school. I refused to march in the St. Patrick's Day parade. We were required to. I refused to do that. So I--the rebel in me starting coming out. And some of the things that were required, I just wouldn't do it. And I'd go down to the principal's office, and I'd make my justification. And she'd look at me and say, "Okay, Hazel [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson]." So that social life didn't occur in school. But I had a social life with my family. You know, coming from South America, you're a very close knit family. So you stay close, you do a lot of things close. You've got fa- relatives--my cousin Yvonne [ph.] and Carol [ph.] lived around the block. And, so everything we did at that time, we all did together. We'd go to Riis beach [Jacob Riis Park, New York, New York] on Sundays. That was our activity during the summer. And you'd catch the seven o'clock bus, come home seven o'clock at night. All the parties, we would go to parties together. And that would be--and be- because my two old- my sisters were older--my mother [Pearl Richards Wilson] would allow myself and my cousin who was my age, Yvonne, to actually go to these parties with my sisters. So we'd go to parties in Brooklyn [New York]. We'd go to parties all over the place. You know, and we'd watch them have fun. And Chick and I would sit in the corner and just enjoy ourselves because we were out. So a lot of the activities took place with the family. And a lot of what we did, the social activities, was with the family. I didn't date at that point. Liked boys, had, you know, a couple but--didn't date. Dating at that point wasn't, you know, top of my list. Story_ID: 658155 Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968] is when you graduated, right? Speaker 2: I graduated from high school [St. Nicholas of Tolentine High School, Bronx, New York] in 1968. Speaker 1: Now this is a pivotal year. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So many things going on. Speaker 2: Oh, my god. Speaker 1: The Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois], the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --takes place just before you graduate, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. As a matter of fact, I remember the day Dr. King was assassinated. I worked for Bloomingdale's and I worked in the credit department. And then my girlfriend who was African American, and she was a fencer at the time was, she was doing the phones for credit. And I was in the back. So if a person called in that was requesting, you know, a hundred dollars or five hundred dollars to buy something, and they were in collection, they'd come to me and then I'd have to look through the record and see if we could do it. So I get this phone call from her. And she says, "Oh, my gosh. Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], Dr. King just died." I said, "What?" You know, and then she said, "He was assassinated." And I was like, oh, my god. And the only thing I remember her saying to me is, "We've got to make sure we get home safe." That scared me to no end. But I, you know, we experienced at that time, I was twelve with Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], and we sat looking at that, and it was my cousin's birthday. And then I--we watched Malcolm [Malcolm X]. We watched the other Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]. As a matter of fact I actually, we actually attended Robert Kennedy's funeral because of the school, and Martin's. So we watched all of this take place. And the only thing I kept saying is, why? You know, what is--what's occurring now, and why are our leaders being taken from us? And, you know, I didn't come up with answers. But what I did was I said to myself--I looked at what he was doing. And I was more a Malcolm person than I was a Dr. King person. So my thing at that point, rebel, by any means necessary. We need to go do what we need to do. And I had to sit back and really get myself to a point where I understood what Dr. King stood for. My mother [Pearl Richards Wilson] did a lot to help me with that--what he stood for and what he wanted to do in the future. So when I left high school and started college [College of Mount Saint Vincent, Riverdale, New York], we had the Vietnam War going on. I protested the war. I joined part of a--the Black Panther faction [Black Panther Party] because at that point--and I tell people--you know, people look at the Black Panthers and say, "There was, they were the negative aspect." And I say, "No. How do you think the school lunch program was started? You know, the Black Panthers started that." I says, "How do you think, you know, those after schools--programs started?" So, you know, they were doing such positive things, but people were putting such a negative spin on it. So I spent quite a bit of my time wrestling with who am I, and what am I going to become, and what does all this mean in terms of my life and our life--you know, lives of others going forward? And I didn't come up with an answer. But in searching, I--you know, I'd, I'd do the war, I'd protest this. You know, it was protest mode. Story_ID: 658156 Speaker 1: You graduated [from St. Nicholas of Tolentine High School, Bronx, New York], what, in June of '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: I graduated in June of '68 [1968] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968]. And had you received any counseling about college at this stage? Speaker 2: I received three scholarships, one, two, yeah, three scholarships at that time. And I wanted to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. That's the only university I knew, black school [HBCU], I wanted to go black. And I'd written Howard, and of course Howard at that time took a long time in responding. But, you know, so I was accepted into, I think, Hunter College [New York, New York]. And I think it was New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York], upstate. And then all of a sudden at that time, the Catholic universities, the government must have said to them, in order for you to continue having funding, you've got to increase your diversity, because you're lily white and (makes sound). So at that point, the College of Mount Saint Vincent in Riverdale, New York came after me. My cousin was in Manhattanville [Manhattanville College, Purchase, New York], and all of sudden I'm the College of Mount Saint Vincent. So, you know, they called my mother [Pearl Richards Wilson]. They were smart, they call my mother to the office and talked to her about getting this scholarship, and telling her, "Look, you know, you don't have to pay. You've got X amount of kids, you don't have to worry, and you need to go up to the school." So we go up to the school, and they offer me a full scholarship. And of course, my mother looked at me and says, "You're taking it." And I was like, "Okay, there's nothing else I can do," praying the whole time that Howard would come through for me. When I finally got the acceptance letter from Howard, I had a cousin at that point who was in med school in Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. And up to today I could really slap him for doing this. My mother went to Genard [ph.] and said to him, "You know, Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson] just got accepted into Howard. What do you think?" And he turned around, and he said, "I don't think it's a good move for her. She's coming out of Catholic school. You know she can be a little bit of a renegade. Howard would expose her to things, and I'm not quite sure if she goes she'd finish." So that squashed me going to Howard and then I went to Mount Saint Vincent, the college of, and the proper title is the College of Mount Saint Vincent, which is now Fordham University [sic.]. Did I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really? I mean, it's now a part of For- Fordham? Speaker 2: It's now a part of Fordham, yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause, well--okay. Speaker 2: It was Mount Saint Vincent. Mount Saint Vincent merged [sic.] with Manhattan College [Riverdale, New York] and then Fordham took all--both of them. So, now it's Fordham University [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 658157 Speaker 1: Fordham [Fordham University] was a Catholic, was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fordham was Catholic. At the time, I didn't want to go to Fordham. Speaker 1: Was Fordham like-- Speaker 2: Jesuit. Speaker 1: Well, at that time it was, it was coeducational, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a four year, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Manhattan [Manhattan College] was the boys, and Mount Saint Vin- Mount Saint Vincent [College of Mount Saint Vincent] was the counterpart. We were the girls. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So both Manhattan and Mount Saint Vincent were in Riverdale [Bronx, New York]. Fordham was in the Bronx [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But no one--if you, if you went to school and you had at that point high grades, you didn't go to Fordham. It was just like, no, we're not going to Fordham. You'd go the Mount or Manhattanville [Manhattanville College, Purchase, New York] or something like that. You went to the more higher class schools at that point, is what we considered it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (laughter). Speaker 2: So I get into school. I wanted to major in math. I loved math, just loved math. And I couldn't think of anything else to do but major in math. And I had a nun that looked at me and my mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] at the time and said, "People like you go into social work." And I--so these are some of the things that I remember today. And I kept saying, "Well, what do you mean, people like me go into social work?" She says, "Well, you just do well in social work. So you need to take sociology." I said, "Well, what about math?" "Well, what would you do with math?" "I don't know what I'd do with math. Find me someone that can help me understand what I'd do with math. But I love math." So again, I wasn't given the options. Nothing was available. And I walked out of there feeling so despondent and saying, looking at my mom saying, "You know, maybe I should just become a doctor. I've got the grades. I mean I'm good, I hate blood but, you know, what--." I didn't even know what social work was at the point. What is social work? What are you talking about, social work? But again, I was pigeonholed. Because I was African American, just go into social work. And because, you know, the family didn't know any different other than teaching and medicine, it was like, "Well, Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], you've got a choice. What are you going to do?" So I said, "Oh, okay, well, I'll go into social work." So I did sociology. Did math but sociology. Story_ID: 658158 Speaker 1: Now were there any special teachers or anything special learned in sociology when you were at college and taking it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two things. I had one Arab teacher who just infuriated me to no end because this was my radical time. I was a junior at the time. And I took a sociology course that dealt with urban, I think, urban studies. And he had the audacity to sit back and say that blacks throw garbage out the window in Harlem [New York, New York]. And I just (laughter), I was like, what? How dare you insinuate that that's who--but by the way, in a predominantly white class. Because, you know, you go to Catholic school, Mount Saint Vincent, Riverdale [College of Mount Saint Vincent, Riverdale, New York], they're mainly white. So they don't know that much about me the person nor my culture or history. But for you to make statements like that--oh, it just, it infuriated me to the point where I did speak to him after, and I told him I was having a hard time (laughter) remaining in his class. I said, "Because this is not, this is not true." I says, "And you're painting a picture that is so negative in terms of my people." I says, "I'm concerned." I says, "And I'm embarrassed. I'm sitting in here and you've got people thinking that all we do is, we're--you know, we're not clean, we--." It was not a good, not a good scene. I finished his class. I promised never to take another one by him. In my senior year I had to take the last--he was the senior most instructor, so I had to take the last class. And we agreed that he would give me the material, I'd read it, take the test and not have to come to his class. So that's how I, that's how I got out of that. I had another sociology professor who wanted me to go into law. He says, "You'd make a great lawyer." But again, you know, at that point, I'm like okay, so what's it going to take for me? You've got to go to grad school. Oh, okay. At that point, I think Lorraine [Lorraine Wilson] was coming up. Yes, Lorraine was getting ready to graduate. So I opted to work to help Lorraine go through school. Because now you've got three of us--one, my brother--the three of--my brother's--I was the first one to graduate from college, the four year university. Pat [Sybil Wilson] and Yvonne [Yvonne Wilson] and Ivan [Ivan Wilson] are all going now and, now you've got the two younger ones coming up. So I deferred that plan to go--I was accepted into Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], and I deferred going so that I could, and I did go up. I spent a semester, but I deferred it and said, "I need to help my sisters get through school." And-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Because I understood some of the, the processes going on, it was a little easier for me to say to them, "Here's what you need to do." Story_ID: 658159 Speaker 1: At College of Mount Saint Vincent [Riverdale, New York], did you--was there a black student organization or any (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We formed a black student organization. There was--yeah, amongst the young ladies that were there. We formed a black student un- organization, and we formed it with Manhattan [Manhattan College, Riverdale, New York]. So it was a joint organization between the girls and the guys. And we were able--you know, look, I--we brought the Panthers [Black Panther Party] up, we brought several people up, you know, to speak. I think Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] came up at one point. So we were able to get people to come up and speak. So in that regard, they were open to--but I think it--because of the times, I don't know if they could have said no. Because I'm not quite sure if they knew what the ramifications could have been, particularly since, you know, after the tenth grade we merged [sic.] with Manhattan. You know, we were taking classes at Manhattan. Manhattan would come up and take classes with us. And some of the people who were--the guys from Manhattan had actually come back from the war [Vietnam War], and they were very vocal. So they weren't quite sure what was going to happen. So to appease the radicals, they kind of, "Okay you can do four events a year," you know, and things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Was there much emphasis on Africa when you there or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None whatsoever. Speaker 1: --were you a part of any organizations that-- Speaker 2: None whatsoever. Speaker 1: --dealt with it. Speaker 2: None whatsoever (laughter). As a matter of fact it's, you know, as far as people were concerned, Africa didn't exist. Speaker 1: Well, those were the days of African Liberation Day in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Peo- people were, you know-- Speaker 2: Stokely Carmichael-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: ---you know, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and Miriam Makeba. You learned that. And I got that because I had friends that went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and some HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], and we would go up and visit. So, we'd go for homecoming. They'd invite us to different places, we would go. And then we would spend the time learning, you know. I had friends at Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York]. So I had friends all over the place. And we began to understand and learn what was going on. But it didn't come from my education whatsoever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It didn't come. Matter of fact, my education never, I'll never forget. In the eleventh grade [at St. Nicholas of Tolentine High School, Bronx, New York], I had an economics teacher who talked to us about black history. This was the first time she did it. And she did it in such a way that I sat in her class, so proud to be a person of color. And I'd never heard some of the things she was telling me about. And I just sat back and said, "Wow, we did all of this?" So what it caused me to do--as my kids grew up, the focus was on all of the history, both African history and African American history that I never learned, that they, that I insisted that they knew, but didn't know anything, didn't know anything. As far as I was concerned, everything in this country and the world was done by white folks and, you know, we just kind of toed the line. Speaker 1: Okay. I know, yeah, like City College of New York [New York, New York] with the African studies program (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, CCNY, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had friends at CCNY. So we would go down to CCNY, join their marches and their para- but that's how I learned, you know, just by my friends saying, "Come here and do this, come." It was not on campus. Story_ID: 658160 Speaker 1: You said you spent a semester at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in law school? Speaker 2: No, just, I just went up there for the summer semester. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was to determine whether I wanted to go or not. And then I got accepted, but I didn't go. Yeah, it was Saint Mary's College [Notre Dame, Indiana] at the time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, because at that point Notre Dame was an all boys school. And if you went, you went to Saint Mary's. But, and they were just beginning to merge. So it was going to be the first year that they were accepting women, which was another thing, you know, into the university. And it was like, whoa, okay. Yeah, yeah, so the summer was interesting. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So whatever happened that summer, you didn't want to go back (laughter). Speaker 2: I did not want to go back. Did not want to deal with, you know-- Speaker 1: So what did your peers think about you not wanting to pursue law school if you could? I mean-- Speaker 2: You know, they--I think at that point my parents [Pearl Richards Wilson and Clement Wilson] probably--I got the four year degree [from the College of Mount Saint Vincent, Riverdale, New York], they were excited. You know, for them that was important. So going on didn't really matter. Story_ID: 658161 Speaker 1: I have a note here that you worked at WPIX-TV [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In--okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Channel 11. I know, like, I did- didn't even know anything then. I, you know, graduated from school [College of Mount Saint Vincent, Riverdale, New York] and went in this for interview. And there was a woman who was heading up commercials at the time. And she needed an assistant, and they were only taking college grads. And she interviewed me and said, "Fine." The wonderful thing about it is--and who is the African American woman that was on Channel 11? Alma, oh, Alma Johnson, I think it was. She actually had a program on Channel 11 ['Black Pride'], and I had a wonderful opportunity to meet her. She kind of mentored me along the way in terms of understanding TV. But I, you know, I started out typing, you know, being an assistant to the head of commercial insertion. And then one day, I looked at the folks that were working and said, "Look, I can do more than this." So I became a commercial inserter. And that was interesting at that point because everything was done by typewriter. So you'd get a show, and they'd say the show is twenty-three minutes. And you'd have to fill the rest with commercials and public service announcements. So they tell you, "Okay, the show starts at eight o'clock, and the first break is at 8:01, 8:07." So then I'm typing in 8:07:00:00 to eight--and if it's ten seconds, fifteen seconds, it's got to be exact. So, and you're doing this by--manually. You know, you're not, there's no program there to help you do it. And I would sit back--and they were kind enough to give me the daytime programs because you couldn't screw up the evenings. If you screwed up the evenings with commercials, you were in trouble. So I got the daytime programs. And on Channel 11, I did kid programs, 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] and all of that, Captain Joe Bolton and, so it wasn't that bad if you, you know, you were blank in those areas. But I will tell you, I used to sit there and watch, and my heart used to pound. Because if it went to black, it meant you messed up, and you didn't, you didn't allow enough time, or you may--had too much time in there. And the next day you'd just have your ops meeting, and, "What happened?" So I did that for a while. I enjoyed it, but my heart wasn't into it. And again, I didn't know what opportunities they had at TV. Had I known, I would have stayed. Story_ID: 658162 Speaker 1: Instead of that, I looked and I says, "Look, I--I went into social work. I might as well do social work. I want to do social work." And I just so happened to send out a letter to the Society for Seamen's Children [Seamen's Society for Children and Families], and I got a phone call that said, "Come on in." And the gentlemen, Mr. Daniels [ph.], was an African American executive director of the Society for Seamen's Children in Staten Island [New York]. James Hair [ph.] was my boss. And he was from the South, he was African American. And they took a chance. They said, "Look, we'll teach you everything you need to know." So I came in working adoptions, which was very interesting for me. I was spared the foster care route. I had colleagues who, you know, in the same office with me that did foster care. And if the child is being adopted, then they would turn it over to me. And my responsibility was to free the child for adoption and then to have the child placed in adoption. Speaker 2: Now where was this? This was on Stat- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is-- Speaker 2: --Staten Island? Speaker 1: Staten Island. This is the Society for Seamen's Children in Staten Island. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, you know, it was exciting for me because I could see an end result. I can place a child in a home and that child would now have a family. So again, being results oriented, it was just like oh, this is perfect, this is fine. And I did that for two years. And then year two, I got a call to come into the executive director's office. And I felt, oh, he's really going to tell me what a great job I'm doing and thank me for all the great work and everything. And he looked at me, and he says, "Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], I have to tell you, you're doing a wonderful job. Our kids are being placed in wonderful homes. Some of the kids that have been in the homes for a while are now adopted." He says, "It's great." He says, "But you have to understand business." And I say, "Well, what does that mean?" He says, "For every child that you get--have adopted, we lose money because the state no longer gives us money," (laughter). He said, "So I'm not asking you to slow down, but I just need you to understand business." Every child that I place, you lose money because the state isn't paying you? I walked out of that meeting. I was so angry because here I thought this is what I'm supposed to be doing. I'm supposed to be placing kids in homes and getting them ado- and you're telling me to slow down because you're in business and, but I didn't realize at that time, people are, companies are in business to make money. See, that to me was foreign, you know. I didn't realize they were in business to make money. Speaker 2: It is a not-for-profit. So you were, you were taking this the way it should be taken, that these are-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) organizations to serve the public interest. Speaker 1: To serve, yeah. Speaker 2: Not to-- Speaker 1: But it was-- Speaker 2: --you know. Story_ID: 658163 Speaker 1: I will tell you, it was a great experience. I learned a lot, lot of training. One of the things I did get trained in is martial arts, shotokan. Because I was going into very dangerous areas with people who, you know-- Speaker 2: Did-- Speaker 1: --didn't particularly want to see me. Speaker 2: --did they teach that in the-- Speaker 1: No, I had a colleague of mine who had his own dojo. So I learned shotokan and went through the ranks, went through the ranks, yeah. So I learned martial art. Speaker 2: How far did you go? Speaker 1: I did brown belt third degree, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. And shotokan is from Japan? Speaker 1: Yes, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, Sensei Styles [ph.], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. He had one of the few dojos with females. So whenever we went to do tournaments and compete, he had three or four of his women up there competing against men all the time. Just had a ball, enjoyed just taking them out (laughter). Yeah, but, you know, and it was--I turned around and I was just talking to him one day. I says, "Look, I went into this house, I was standing on a chair. You know, the mother was drunk, the husband came in. He was pissed off. He wanted to throw me out the window. I can't be, you know--." He says, "You need to learn how to protect yourself." And I said, "Oh, I never thought of that." So that's when, yeah, yeah. He says, "Because, Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], a thick man is a dead man. You've got to learn how to respond when you're placed in a situation like that." And I said, "Okay." Speaker 2: So did you ever have to use it on the job? Speaker 1: Once, once, just once, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the story? Speaker 1: I was in a home, and there was a female. And I had been in the home a couple of times. Lovely daughter, she was four. And mom, she was an older woman. And I knew she was either on methadone or she was, she was on some type of program. And when they're on a program like that, you're willing to work with them as long as they're keeping their meetings and doing all of their stuff. And the child was referred because she had been in, placed in foster care. They placed her back home and, now they're, you know, you do the next preliminary set of meetings. And the social worker that was supposed to do it quit. So I got the case. So I go into the home, and I'm sitting there with the parent. And mom is there, and I'm sitting here noticing mom is a little inebriated, she's not coherent. You know, so then my next question is, "Can I see the child?" Because now, you have to make sure the child is okay. And, "She's in the bedroom sleep, leave her alone." And I says, "No, I really need to, I need to--you know, part of my responsibility is to protect the child, but it's also protect you. Because if I leave here today and say that I was not able to see the child then protective services could come in and just assume that something's wrong and take the child." So I was trying to get her to understand why I was there. In the process, out comes the boyfriend, and--, "What is this, and who do you think you are?" And just ca- starts carrying on and carrying on. And, "No, you're not going to see her, and we told you she's okay. And that's all you need to know," and started to push. And I said, I said, "Please," I said, "I'm only here to help. I'm only here to help the child." I said, "So I'm going to ask you not to put your hands on me." I said, "Please," I says, "I will leave if need be, but please just let me--." I said, "All I want to do is see the child." I said, "If I see her, it's fine." And he pushed one time too many. And I just did front kick, lunge. I mean, lunged, pu- I mean it was just such a natural reaction at that point, you know, where you kind of (makes sound) (gesture). And pushed him against the wall, he backed up, and he was like, whoa. And I said, and at that point, I feel bad, I'm sorry. I says, "Look, you know, this is not going to work. So I'm going to have to call service, because I, I'm not going to, you know, put myself in a position to be hurt. And I don't want anything to happen to her." And I left, and I left quickly because I wasn't, I didn't know what could happen at that point. You know, but just the reaction, he--I think it stunned him so much. And they did come and take the child, they had to take the child, yeah. But, you know, it's unfortunate because I--to this day--you know, because I don't know what happened after that. I was pulled off, and then they placed a real social worker who does this--you know, the abuse and, you know, things like that. And I went back to doing my adoptions. But to this day, I just sit back sometimes and say, "Had you only let me see her. If she was fine, all I had to do was write she was fine. But because you wouldn't let me see her, I had to, I had to take other action." And, you know, those are the things that in the back of your mind you sit back and say, "I hope I made the right decision." Story_ID: 658164 Speaker 1: So how long did you work for the-- Speaker 2: I think I worked for Society for Seamen's Children [Seamen's Society for Children and Families, Staten Island, New York], I think two years, maybe two or three years. In the interim, my sister was at a program called District 27 drug prevention education program. And she said to me, "Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], I really want you to come and help the kids. You're--you know, they need counseling. Can you come and work at night?" So I started out working with the kids at night, volunteering (laughter) and really began to enjoy it. It was the youth of the neighborhood. We lived in South--it was in Park, Queens [sic. Ozone Park, Queens, New York] at the time. It was the youth of the neighborhood, and it was students who were having a difficult time adjusting in school, having a difficult time in school. They would bring them in, they'd do counseling. And then they had an educational component, where they would work with students who needed help in their formulized educational piece. So I would go in the evening. I'd work with some of the kids and, you know, using my social work background, the counseling and the coaching. And then they asked me to set up programs, so I set up a couple of programs for them. And one thing led to the other. The assistant director quit. They asked me if wanted to assume that job. I took the assistant director's position, left Society of Seamen's Children. And then the director, I think either quit or got fired. And then they asked me to assume the position for the director's role. So up until 19--I think '81 [1981], from seventy--I'd say '75 [1975], seventy something like that to 1981, I was actually with the District 27 drug prevention and education program. Had a lot of success with the program, developed some very unique programs. And I think some of them are still in existence today. One of the programs that we developed is we took students who were in the fifth and sixth grade. At that point in New York City [New York, New York], if you scored a certain level on your math and reading test, you were promoted. It didn't matter what else you didn- scored within a percentage point, you were promoted. So we would take those students, who were kind of borderline. You know, we would take fourth, fifth and sixth graders. So if you--say in the fourth grade, you should be scoring a 4.2. Well, if you're at a 3.6, our goal is to see if we can get you up to the 4.2. So we did that--fourth, fifth and six grade. And we, we meaning myself and my workers at the district [New York City Community School District 27]--we developed a program during the summer where we would take those students from the surrounding elementary schools. And in my district, I had six that I was responsible for. Take those students from those surrounding elementary schools, gain agreement from the principals that if they completed the program and passed the test when they came back in and were successful, they'd get promoted. And we worked with those students during the summer. I was fortunate to have a gentleman at that point who was a professor at, I think at Adelphi University [Garden City, New York]. And I can't remember his name, but he was a professor in African history. And I got him to come in and work with us. So not only did the kids have the benefit of your traditional math, but he also taught them African history, which really pulled them in. I mean they were, they were excited. We would go, like, to the Museum of Natural History [American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York], and he'd start asking them questions. And all of a sudden, you'd see--we'd have a whole following of people because they knew all the answers, and people were amazed. What I found is if you focus on something that children like, enjoy and are passionate about, you can get them to learn. So we used that as our, you know, a vehicle for learning--very successful. Most of the students we had in the program during the time I was there actually went into the next grade. And then the requirement was they would come to the center in the evening so--afternoon, so we would keep up those grades. And the program was really successful for us in New York. Story_ID: 658165 Speaker 1: That and working with at risk youth. I had a couple of at risk youth that I worked with. And if you don't mind, I have one quick story. This one young man was fourteen years old, had been arrested eight times for various things. And, you know, I'm in a center where some of the high school kids would come in, and I'd open the drawer and tell them put the gun in the drawer when you come in, and I'll lock it. So it was--you're talking about things like that, where I'd say, "Just don't, don't bring it into the system, you know, let me just lock it in here. What you do with it on the outside is up to you." And then the counselors would try and work with them. Well, we had one young lady who was working for me part time. She claims that this very specific young man--she accused him of rape. And I was like, wow, that's strange. I says, "I was there that night, I reme- ," you know, so I'm trying to go through my mind what could have happened. And of course, it was a difficult time because she was also the--one of--she was a preacher's daughter. So he was a well known minister in the community. And I'm like, oh, this is it, he's going up for life. So she accuses him of rape. And I'm sitting there saying, "Oh, my gosh. You know, we've been working with him, he seems to be making progress, you know," (makes sound). That night I get a knock on the door. And I look outside, and I think my brother [Ivan Wilson] says, "I think it's one of your kids from the center." And I say, "Okay," and it's this young man. And he looks at me and he says, "I didn't do this." I says, "What are you--?" I says, "What do you mean?" He says, "I didn't do this." And I said, "Okay." I said, "What happened? What do you want me to do?" He says, "If I go to--if I turn myself in now, I'm going to jail." He says, "And I'm not--I don' want to go to jail for something I didn't do. You've got to help me." So make a long story short, I had a friend of mine at that time who was a police officer, worked in that are- district [New York City Community School District 27]. And I called him on the phone, and I said, "I need a very big favor of you." We were very close to the community, the police department and things. I said, "I have the gentleman here. He says he didn't do it. He's willing to turn himself in. He does have a piece that I need to get rid of. I don't know what to do with it. What would you suggest?" So we worked it so that he did not get--he wasn't penalized for the gun. They just brought him in for this alleged charge. He got off, thank god. I was just so thankful he did get off. And I tell you this story to say, sometimes it's just what--I--trusting in him allowed him to be what he is today. So he got off, got his GED [General Educational Development]. There were years when I would go back into New York [New York] to see how he's doing. I, when I was working with the airlines I was able to get him a job, I think in baggage or something like that. I would go back to see is he still there. And, you know, I would just take a deep sigh when I'd see him. And the only thing he'd say to me is, "I was given an opportunity, and my goal is to give someone else an opportunity." So for me, that's the passion. Story_ID: 658166 Speaker 1: So you were (clears throat) the director of this program for--from '75 [1975] to '81 [1981], you say (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-one [1981], yeah. Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what happened in '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty one [1981], my then brother-in-law needed a ride to the airport [LaGuardia Airport, New York, New York] because New York Airlines [sic. New York Air] was hiring. It was a brand new airline in New York [New York], and they were hiring non-stop. And he called me on the phone and he says, "Can you give me a ride to the airport? I'm going to interview for this job at this airline." He said, "As a matter of fact why don't you just come with me?" And I'm like, "I don't need to work at the airline." He said, "Oh, just come anyway." So we go, and instead of me dropping him off, we both get interviewed for the job. I get the job, he doesn't (laughter). So I-- Speaker 1: Did you want the job at this point? Speaker 2: You know, I really didn't want it. But it--at that point I was like "Oh, the airline industry, interesting, corporate world," you know. Here's the interesting thing. It was a five thousand dollar pay cut. And at that point I had already had my daughter, Meisha [Meisha Wilson Leonard], so she was two at the time. Eighty-one [1981]--she was born in seventy--so she was four at the time. So I really, I started to struggle--do I do this, and how can I take care of my family? But at that point I saw it as such an opportunity, you know, to get into corp- the corporate world that I said, "Oh, I'll take the risk and see what happens." So I started at New York Airlines as a customer service representative in reservations. Quickly after that, I think probably six months, seven months after, the head of reservations realized that I had training experience and said, "We need trainers to actually train people in reservations. Would you be willing to do it?" I said, "Oh, I'd love to, you know." So I sat in on a training class and then went ahead training. And you know, God works in mysterious ways. As a trainer, you can work all kinds of hours. So there were times when I would do back to back training classes. That's how many people we were hiring. I would do a class from six at night to two in the morning or twelve at night. I'd go home and come back again at nine o'clock in the morning to do another class. So I was doing classes like that for--I'd say about six or seven months. However, it was overtime. So the money that I lost, you know, working for the board of ed [New York City Community School District 27], I more than made up for it working with the airline industry, in terms of what they were paying. It was a great opportunity. I went from a trainer to quality assurance specialist. So, now I move from training people to monitoring the calls. How are people doing when they're actually speaking to individuals over the phone? And how can I correct them, so that they can close the sale, they can overcome objections and all of those things? So I did quality assurance specialist. And then I had a VP who came up to me and said, "You know, this person is moving into human resources and manager of consumer affairs is open. I think you'd be great." "What do you mean? What's consumer affairs?" "Well, it's handling complaints, customer complaints. So when people write letters," because at that point, you wrote a letter, "if people write letters or call the airlines, you have to log it, and you have to respond. And in addition to that, you're going to be responsible for baggage service." "Oh, well, what's baggage--?" "Well, when people lose their luggage, you now have to find their luggage." So I said, that that might not be too bad. The problem is that, you know, the [U.S.] Department of Transportation logs the amount of complaints, lost baggage. So it's incumbent upon you and your department to minimize those complaints and those lost baggage. So I spent quite a bit of my time doing consumer affairs and working directly with the president of the airlines in terms of really getting folks in the airline to understand the importance of customer service and then handling those customers once something occurred to them within the airline industry. Loved it, loved it. The beauty of working for New York Airlines is that you couldn't go into a management position unless you had line experience. So because I had reservations, I had quality assurance, I was able to move into the management ranks. And to me it was a nice model, that I used quite a bit as I moved on. Story_ID: 658167 Speaker 1: Probably when--'81 [1981] and--'86 [1986], I think, Frank Lorenzo decided he wanted to have the world's largest airlines and decided he was going to take--he owned New York Airlines [sic. New York Air], had Continental Airlines. So he was going to merge Frontier Airlines, which was in bankruptcy, People's Express [People Express Airlines], which at that point in New York [New York] was one of the premier--it's--People's Express would remind you of a Southwest [Southwest Airlines Co.] today, as would New York Airlines. New York Airlines was born out of deregulation. So a lot of the--there was no unions involved. A lot of the creative things we were doing, other companies couldn't do. And they were very progressive. At that point we had shared benefits, we had shared--job sharing. So if someone was pregnant, you could, two people could work one job and share it--a very progressive organization. But problem was in addition to those four, they were going to merge Eastern Air Lines which was your--you know, they were the pinnacle of airlines, you know--out of Miami [Florida], very large, global company. They had unions, regulations, and I was selected to help with the a- mergers and acquisitions. In the merger, I was also given an opportunity to become director of training, operations, customer service and baggage for Continental. I was one of two African American directors in the company at that point. And my boss looked at me and says, "Oh, I think you can do the job." And, you know, I should have thought a little more. And I said, "Okay, let's go for it." I mean, I have tr- a training background. I know about consumer service, I've been doing it for the last few years, and we'd been very successful. Our DOT [U.S. Department of Transportation] numbers are down. We're not even on their watch list anymore. Baggage service, I've been doing. The only thing I was a little hesitant about was operations. Now operations went--weight and balance of the plane. So as those planes were taking off, I had to make sure I had people trained on weight and balance and that they adequately balanced that plane before it took off. So that was one of the areas that I was like--and then they gave me the ticket counter training. Well ticket count--you know, if you do training on one, you do training on the other. So I accepted the responsibility-- Speaker 2: This is 1986, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then for six months, I moved, I went back and forth between New York and Texas. I spent Sunday through Thursday--Wednesday night or Thursday sometimes--in Texas. And then I'd fly home and do Thursday all day at New York Air. And sometimes Friday af- Friday morning and then, you know, take the rest of the day off. But that was my life for the--probably about six months. At that point I had two girls at that time because my daughter was born in '77 [1977]. The other one was born, Meisha [Meisha Wilson Leonard] was born in '77 [1977], Alia [Alia Wilson Stewart] was born in '84 [1984]. So, now I have these two girls and I'm sitting here, like, how do I do this? So it worked okay for the first six months. My mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] took responsibility for the kids. My husband at that time took respon- a heavy responsibility, for the youngest one, Alia. So it worked for a while, but I knew it couldn't continue, and I knew I'd have to make a decision and move to Texas. I made the decision to move because the Panamanian side of the family. My ex is Panamanian, and his side of the family, who I was closer with than he was--all of my aunts, my tias, the three of them--were all living in Houston [Texas] and said, "Come, we'll take care of you." So again, I stepped out in faith, I trusted, and I said, "Okay, I'm going to Texas," you know. So moved to Texas and brought the kids to Texas to work for New Yor- for Continental Airlines as their director in '88 [1988]. Story_ID: 658168 Speaker 1: That same year, you went to Times-- Speaker 2: I went to Times Mirror [Times Mirror Cable Television, Inc.; Cox Communications, Inc.]-- Speaker 1: --Times Mirror-- Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: --in-- Speaker 2: --from '86 [1986] to '88 [1988], is when I did Continental [Continental Airlines]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1988, I went to Times Mirror. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So how did that happen? Now you go from the airlines to Times Mirror. Speaker 2: Well, the cable industry was just deregulating, itself. So, you know, they were moving from a mom and pop operation. You know, you had very small cable companies, to now major businesses buying up these companies. The one group that had cable companies all along was Times Mirror Cable. So they had companies in New York and Pennsylvania, in Rhode Island. They had in Irvine, California, they had Phoenix [Arizona], they--so they had a unit of cable div- divisions. And they were looking for someone to come in and work on their management development training and plans for all of their managers. Because now all of a sudden, you're playing with the big boys. You're in Corporate America, and we've got to train these people to be managers and to really look at their customer service group to see is it working efficiently. So I got the call. Matter of fact, I didn't even get the call. A colleague of mine who was director of, I think he was director of--oh, he was the ma- the director of management training for Continental. We were good colleagues, coming from New York [New York]. And he said to me, "You know, I just got this phone call from an organization in California, and they're looking for a manager of management development. I think you'd be great for it, but I don't know if you want to leave Continental." And I said, "You know, I really don't." However, I knew that at that point with the merger, the culture was not going to be where I want it to be. And there were just certain, you know, things that I was seeing that said, "Not, not for me." So I jumped on the opportunity, just shot my resume off, thinking nothing of it because I had a job. And I get the phone call to come out to California and interview, and I came out to interview. And my boss at the time who I'm still in touch with today--both my boss and the three colleagues that worked as, we worked as peers. We still meet once a, you know, quarter now and go back and forth. But my boss at the time looked at me and said--she took me to Las Brisas in Laguna Hill--Laguna Beach [California]. And Las Brisas is in Laguna Beach and overlooks the entire ocean. It is one of the most spectacular sights you want to see. And she walks me out to the edge overlooking the ocean and says, "All of this can be yours, if you just say yes," (laughter). My sister [Sybil Wilson], the one who was working at U- Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], she was already here. So, and I had often said to her, you know, "My next job I'm going to come and live with you in California." And, you know, I turned around, I says, "I've got this job offer." And then my youngest sister, Lorraine [Lorraine Wilson], I said to her, "I got this job offer in California." I says, "I'm not quite sure if I should take it, because American Express [American Express Company] really is looking at me to go to Atlanta [Georgia] and work with them. And I'd love to work at American Express." But my younger sister kind of convinced me because she says "Well, I don't know what you're doing, but we're moving out to California soon." So I said, "Well, I've got the older, older one here and Lorraine's going to be here, I might as well go to California." So I took the California job, yeah. Story_ID: 658169 Speaker 1: Great company, Times Mirror [Times Mirror Company], parent company of the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times]. But we worked the cable division, and it was the start of my diversity efforts with organizations. Because at that time, diversity was at the forefront. And the company looked and said, "Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], you're doing management training. You might as well do diversity as well." I made a couple of statements, you know, about being the only African, I was the only, the senior most person in there. And I said, "Look, this--it's got to stop. You know, we've got to do something." So I was given responsibility for diversity as well. So I developed programs responsible for diversity and then did the succession planning, where you would identify high potentials, bring them in and develop people. So even today there's one young lady that I can think of that came in under the, one of the programs I established. And I mentored her and worked with her in one of the cable divisions. And she went on to be the executive director of one of the national programs for cable. So I look at that and say, success, you know. You put the program together and you work the program, and it'll work. Speaker 2: Well, who is it? You may as well name them. Speaker 1: Kathy Johnson. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was with NAMIC for quite some time. I think she just left. NAMIC has changed its name, she just left. But Kathy's one of those that I remember coming in and--bright, brilliant, just--you know, all she needed was to gain an understanding. And yeah, we placed her in San, she was in San Juan Capistrano [California] at the time, at that facility, yeah. And I, you know, I was on the board of NAMIC and all those organizations, trying to make sure that we increase diversity and, yeah. Speaker 2: Now what, now what is NAMIC? Now that's-- Speaker 1: It was called, it was the National Association for Minorities in Cable [sic. National Association of Minorities in Cable; National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, at that point. I know they changed names. But at that point, it was National Association for Minorities in Cable. Everyone knew it as NAMIC. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So what was your, was your strategy to find people who, like yourself, were involved in some other field and bring--or some other company and bring them in? Or was it to, you know, find college graduates or grad students or-- Speaker 1: It was a little bit of both. You know, it was, you know, identify those college graduates that you can groom and develop in the company, particularly in those non-traditional areas that people of color go into. So I wasn't as focused on bringing people into human resources as I was placing them in the systems, either in sales or marketing or operations. Because those were the areas that really moved, you know, the organization forward. So my focus has always been what's the, what's the nu- nugget? What's the most important components of an organization? And that's where our people need to be. If someone came in with the breadth and depth for HR [human resources] or training or customer service, fine and well, we can handle that. But I really wanted to get people in those non-traditional jobs. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was my focus. So I would either go out to college graduates and get them to come in and actually intern with us, start with us. Or I would look for individuals who've had that experience. And then it was my responsibility to convince executives that they have transition--skills that are transferable. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, so you're at Times Mirror for quite a, for about ten years (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was at Times Mirror for a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I did Times Mirror Cable [Times Mirror Cable Television, Inc.; Cox Communications, Inc.] until-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --nineteen ninety-four [1994], and I loved it. I probably would have stayed at Times Mirror Cable all my life. The culture was great. The CEO at that point was a warm, caring, individual who clearly understood the impact that diversity was having on consumers and really gave me the leeway to do what I needed to do to turn the culture of the organization around to embrace diversity. Speaker 2: Who was this? Speaker 1: Larry Weinberg [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then Larry did some great things. He hired an Af- two African Americans as VPs in marketing and sales, at the corporate level. So not only did he provide me with the opportunity, but he walked the talk, you know. We had some really sharp folks, you know that we were able to sit back and, and groom and develop and, so that was important. Story_ID: 658170 Speaker 1: We were then sold to Cox Cable [Cox Enterprises, Inc.]. Because of--in 1994, Times Mirror sat back and said, "The company--either we get big enough to be a cable company, or we need to sell ourselves to someone else who can be big." And they made the conscious decision that they didn't want to be involved anymore in the cable industry. So they sold Times Mirror Cable [Times Mirror Cable Television, Inc.] to Cox Cable. Cox Communication and Dimension Cable [Dimension Cable Services] then turned into Cox Communication [Cox Communications, Inc.] or Cox Cable. And I had opportunities to look in other companies--Pacific here. There were several organizations. But I got tapped by a gentleman by the name of Edward Bruton [ph.], who was an African American male. And he was the director of leadership development for the Times Mirror Company, the corporate office. I met with Edward, and we found that we had very good synergies. And he brought me in then as the manager of management development for Times Mirror. Now Times Mirror at that point had newspapers. We owned Jepp Sanderson [Jeppesen Sanderson, Inc.], which was the pilot's black book. We had magazines--so Popular Mechanics and Sports Illustrated--all the sports--I don't--it wasn't Sports Illustrated. It was Sports--I forget the name. Speaker 2: Sports and Field [sic.]? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that was it. Golf and-- Speaker 2: Golf Digest? Speaker 1: Yeah, we had all of those magazines. Speaker 2: Sport magazine, was that one of them? Okay. Speaker 1: So my responsibility at that point was the development of the next tier of leaders, the managers in the company, to assume greater responsibility. I did that for several years. And at that point Edward Bruton left and went to--we also had training divisions--Cassette International [ph.] and Learning International. He went on to become a VP of HR [human resources], so he could get HR experience. I somewhat assumed the responsibility for leadership development for the entire company, except I had a person who I admired tremendously, from cable, come in as the director of management and leadership development over me. We worked jointly together and had quite a bit of success with some of the programs that we initiated in the company. I worked quite hand in hand with Mark Willis, who at the time, he was known as the cereal killer because he came in from, I think it was General Mills [General Mills Inc.]. He had no newspaper experience. Speaker 2: The cereal killer (laughter) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no newspaper experience-- Speaker 2: Cereal like C-E-- Speaker 1: Like C-E-R-E-A-L. No newspaper experience. They bring him in to head up a newspaper organization. He was one of the most creative individuals I've ever met. And the interesting thing about him--in 1994, '95 [1995], '96 [1996]--he saw that need for us to do things differently in newspapers. He says, "Or else, we're going to be obsolete." So he started looking at some of the different ways in which we can operate and got a lot of pushback from the newspapers in terms of operation. During that time, I was given responsibility for executive development and succession planning. So I was responsible for that book that you call it, the infamous book where people are identified as being high potential. And then not only was I responsible for that but also responsible for developing the programs that would develop the high potentials. So I had a chance to, you know, I did the board books. I, you know, met with board members. Story_ID: 658171 Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999], Mark [Mark Willis] asked me if I would do a presentation to the board. I did a presentation to the board, and I just had two wing tipped shoes on the front cover, and it said, "The face of the executive ranks are changing." And then the next page showed women's feet because it was changing at that point. Women were becoming, were beginning to take more executive positions in major corporations. I did not know that I was being introduced to the board so that I could become a corporate officer at Times Mirror [Times Mirror Company]. So one of my, one of the major accomplishments in my life--I mean I know people at Times Mirror who wanted to be corporate officers for thirty years. And for me to be given that opportunity to be a corporate officer at Times Mirror was probably the highlight of my life. So I left Times Mirror as a corporate officer. Speaker 2: So when did you become a corporate officer? Is that-- Speaker 1: In 1999, I became a corporate officer. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, all right. So this is the highlight of your-- Speaker 1: That was probably-- Speaker 2: --at this point, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, it was unexpected. If anyone had told me that that was going to happen--I mean I've always known I work hard, I'm diligent, I'm efficient, I'm a good people manager, my budgets are always, you know, intact. But for someone to say that you possess the skills we're looking for to lead this organization as a corporate officer to me--and after that, what I was told is the head of human resources for the entire organization was going to retire soon, and they were going to groom me to assume that position as head of human resources and leadership development for the whole corporation. So it was--whoa (laughter). Yeah, I was there, I arrived. I, you know, I didn't have to go anyplace else. They used to call Times Mirror the velvet coffin. And I said, "I'm done. No need to go anywhere else." Yeah. Story_ID: 658172 Speaker 1: Now in 2000, Times Mirror [Times Mirror Company], mirrors--merges with the Tribune Company [Tribune Media Company], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Stutters) They were hostilely acquired by the Tribune Company-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the heat of the night. I received a call in March of 2000. And I was going to the laundromat because I think we had quilts that couldn't fit in our washing machine. And I said to Greg [Gregory James], "I'm going to take it to the laundromat." And, you know, phones [cellular phone] had just come into existence then. And it's a Sunday and Jim Simpson [James R. Simpson], who at that point was my boss, calls me on the phone and says, "I need to talk to you. Are you available?" I said, "Oh, I was going to the laundromat." He said, "Well, I think you might want to pull over." I'm like, oh, my god, who died? That's the first thing you think of when you say that. And then he starts to tell me that the chief financial officer and head of legal, I think, Tom Letterman [ph.], worked a deal. And not even the--you know, Mark Lewis [ph.] knew about it, and Tribune was going to be acquiring us. And, no, we had no say in it. So we were hostilely acquired by the Tribune Company in Chicago [Illinois]. And that began my exploration, you know, into Fox [Fox Entertainment Group] and News Corp [News Corporation; News Corp]. Because I was offered a job at Tribune, but it would mean that I could only stay here for a year. My youngest daughter, Alia [Alia Wilson Stewart], was in high school at the time, and she was a sophomore. She was on the basketball team, doing very well. And I just said to them, "I can't pull her out because schools are looking at her now for scholarships. And if I pull her out and start over, she potentially could lose that opportunity." So they gave me the opportunity to stay for two years. But after that, I would have to move to Chicago. And I said, "You know, that's okay," you know, and as I went along, you know. Culture and fit for me is very important. So I have to know that I'm going to be valued in an organization. My principles will be something that people can listen to and value and understand. I can challenge and also not be challenging. And that it's a place that I really want to give my heart and soul to. So I thought about it long and hard, and Greg looked at me says, "I'm not going to Chicago." And we said, "If we're going anywhere, we might as well go back to New York [New York] where--," you know, he's from Grenada but lived most of the time in New York. He said, "We might as well go back to New York. And we're not going back to New York, we like here." Story_ID: 658173 Speaker 1: So I got a phone call. Bonnie Hill [Bonnie Guiton Hill], who was corporate vice president of com- community and public affairs for Times Mirror [Times Mirror Company], a ver- a wonderful woman--she worked in the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] White House and then came to us--called me on the phone and said, "Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], I just got a phone call from a headhunter. You know, Fox [Fox Entertainment Group] is looking for a head of diversity for their company. They have just signed an MOU, a memorandum of understanding with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And I think you'd be perfect for the job." And I said, "Fox, the Fox," (laughter)? That was the only thing I could say. "Rupert Murdoch's Fox," (laughter)? And I said, "(Makes sound)." She said, and she was so good. This is where it helps to have mentors and people who can help you move through your journey. The first thing she said to me is, "I hear what you're saying. But before you sit back and say, 'I don't think so,' I think what you need to do is hear them out. Find out what the company's about, find out, find out what they want they want you do to. I think you'd be great at it, anyway." So I said, "Okay, I'll do that." I met with the headhunter and went through a series of interviews. I then went to Fox and had about eight interviews at Fox--legal, the president of this company, president here--I mean I was, I was meeting everyone. And then I finally got a phone call saying that my--I'm a finalist and that I will now meet with the president of Fox, who was Peter Chernin at the time, and I might also be meeting with Rupert Murdoch. And at that point, they said to me, "And if you're not interested, please let us know now. Because I don't, we don't want to put you up for this and then have you go into, you know, the president and you know, the chairman, and say no." So I spent quite a bit of time to looking at, you know, what's this organization about, you know? What are some of the things they're doing, you know? And I had to separate--at that point, Fox Entertainment was its own stand alone company, and it was not connected to News Corp [News Corporation; News Corp]. So Peter ran Fox Entertainment as their chairman. And then Rupert ran News Corp. Peter was the CEO of News Corp, but they were stand alone units. So I sat back and I said to myself, "If it's Fox, I can do it." You know, and I looked at what the memorandum of understanding was asking for, and it's everything I've done in my career. So I felt comfortable with that. Now it was just a matter of going in and meeting with Peter Chernin and see do we agree? How is this going to work? I went in, met with him, had a wonderful interview, wonderful meeting with him. I was so impressed with him, and I think part of it is because he was a New Yorker (laughter). So you've got to understand, you know, the New York [New York] mentality. But he sold me on the job. Gail Berman, who I reported to when I got there--a go getter, definitely another New Yorker, who saw things outside of the box. You could tell she was committed to diversity in some of the work she'd done before she came to Fox. But Peter was the one that sold me on that, on, on the position. So I took the position as senior vice president of diversity and development. Story_ID: 658174 Speaker 1: Two things to take note of, and, you know, because of this appointment. You, when you were hired, you were the highest ranking black female executive at Fox [Fox Entertainment Group], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's correct. Speaker 1: All right. And number two, you were hired to create and run the department, not just run the department that was already there. You were hired to create a department. Speaker 2: I had to start it from scratch. There was nothing there (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which to me was interesting, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you do? Speaker 2: Well, the first thing I decided to do was to clearly understand the industry. I knew cable, I knew publishing. I knew many of the aspects of the business. What I didn't know was the broadcast side of the business. And I've always been a firm believer that, you know, you learn from those that you employ. And that you always hire people smarter than you so that they can teach you what you need to know. So I started out by looking to see what needs to be done, and who are the first few people that we need to hire? I was lucky, in that a gentleman by the name of Gerald Alcantar, who worked for me at News Corp [News Corporation; News Corp], at Times Mirror [Times Mirror Company], running a leadership development program called METPRO.biz, a diversity program, actually, was not being picked up by the Tribune [Tribune Company; Tribune Media Company, Chicago, Illinois]. So because of that--and Gerald is an attorney by employment, lawyer by trade, did most of the recruiting for the organization. And the beauty of it was, he worked, he worked for Motown [Motown Records] in his early years and then worked at Fox. So he had an understanding of the industry. And he had an understanding of the industry in a way that was helpful. He knew the legal aspect, and he could really work through that process. So the first person I reached out to was Gerald. And I said, "I'm going over here, I don't know what positions are going to be available. I know I'm going to need help. Are you willing to sit back and by faith work with me, and let's see what happens?" I said, "Until I put a budget together with staffing, I don't know what's available. So I just need you to help me." And Gerald being Gerald, was very gracious. We sat back many a days and nights, and he would go over the industry and tell me the things I needed to understand and things I needed to know. And based on that, I put a preliminary budget together. And that preliminary budget had a director of recruitment, a director of the creative aspect and a manager of sourcing. So there was five of us in total and then an administrator, my administrator and then an administrator for my other three directors. Story_ID: 658175 Speaker 1: Here's the interesting thing. When I came into the organization [Fox Entertainment Group], all of the, the notion was that we were going to place, they were going to place me in what they call building eighty-nine, which is the HR [human resources] building, to work with the HR folks. And this is the beauty of Peter Chernin. Peter Ch- Chernin said, "Absolutely not. This is a position of importance and power. Not only do I want her in building 100," which is the executive building, "I want her on the fifth floor." Well, the only people on the fifth floor is Rupert [Rupert Murdoch] and Peter Chernin and two other execs. So my office was directly across from Peter Chernin's office. What a message it sent that not only am I viewed as being critical in the organization, but I now occupy the same space as Rupert and Peter. And I think that in itself allowed me to do things in the organization I would not be able to do. The second thing that occurred is, even though I reported at that time to Gail Berman, who was the president of the network because Peter was all over the place--I would still have meetings with Peter Chernin. And, you know, he would say to me---and he approved the budget. So he was responsible for all of that. Went in and met with him for the budget, and he gave me the approval to hire the heads, hire the heads. Then I said to him, "You know, here are some of the plans we're laying out." And I said, "And I need your support." I says, "This is not going to work unless you're absolutely behind this." So here's the second thing he did. So I'm on the fifth floor. The next thing he does, is Peter and Rupert have executive meetings every single Monday, we call, in the board room, and that's on the fifth floor. And that's where all the presidents of his division meet with Peter, and if Rupert's there, they meet with Rupert. And they give them an update on what's happening in the business unit. So he now invites me to the meeting. And he looks at all of the presidents sitting around the room. Now you've got Fox Sports, film, and you've got, you know, all of those--the individuals, the broadcast side, the production house. And he looks at all the people sitting around the table. Matter of fact, it's probably about fourteen people around the table. And he looks at them and he says, "I've invited Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson] to this meeting. And I've invited her to this meeting because she's a part of this team. She's an executive on this team. Diversity's critical to--," so he gave the message to all of those presidents and the chairman sitting around the room. So all of a sudden now, not only do I have position and power because of my location and the fact that Peter Chernin is supporting me, but he has now made a verbal statement and commitment to diversity that everyone around the room has heard. And then he goes to say, "Within the next few weeks, what I'd like each of you to do--," didn't ask me. Said, "What I'd like each of you to do is schedule an appointment to come and meet with her." He didn't say, "Mitsy is coming to meet with you." It's just so interesting, some of the things that he did. "Come and meet with her, so you can talk about your organization, and she can see how to best help and assist you." So that laid the groundwork and foundation for me to do the work in the organization. Story_ID: 658176 Speaker 1: I think the next piece that really allowed me to do it, is because of my operational background and the fact that I don't come from a diversity background--I have corporate, I have business experience. When these presidents came into the room, I wasn't sitting there saying to them, "Can we talk about how many people of color you have?" No. "Tell me about the organization, tell me about the business." So I could ask legitimate business questions. And all of a sudden, they kind of sit back and like whoa, whoa. So, yeah, I know about your business. I know how business operates. And I think when you have a person like myself or a [HistoryMaker] Paula Madison or a Josie [Josie Thomas], that are in these positions that come from a business background that can speak the language, all of a sudden you're on a different level. It's no longer that person that's looking to bring in bodies. You clearly understand the business. My objective was how can we assist your business efforts? We can sit down and talk about it, but my goal is to assist your business efforts--completely different perspective than most diversity folks will take. So that allowed me entree into the business, in all levels. I could pick up the phone and call, and I know I could get Jim Gianopulos or Gail Berman or Tom Rothman [Thomas E. Rothman]. And they would return my call if they weren't there at the time. I think the thing that really made me understand that I was a part of the team--there were two things. I got into the meeting, a Monday meeting one time, and I looked around and people were, you know, everyone has to speak about what they're doing. And I looked at Peter Chernin and I said, "I pass." And he looked up at me and says, "You have no right to pass." He says, and he really kind of chastised me in a decent way, professional way. He says, "This is one of the most critical initiatives this company has undertaken. And you're going to sit in my meeting and tell me you pass, you have nothing to report out?" So he looks at the rest of the room, the whole room, and he says to them, "You each have one pass." He says, "You've used yours." So I walk out the room, and two things happened that made me clearly know that I was a part of the team. One of the presidents looked at me and said, "Hey, Mits [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson]." Well, only close buds call me Mits. So I knew, okay, I've made it to that level. The second thing, another president came up and said, "If you have nothing to say, don't come to the meeting. We forgot to tell you that" (laughter). So at this point I'm sitting here saying, "Okay, I've got them on my side. I've got them on my side." Story_ID: 658177 Speaker 1: So we started out by just putting a diversity advisory board together. I identified the senior most executive in each of the business units. We had presidents from the business units. We had legal in there. And we sat back and we did this once a week for eight weeks, from the time I announced it, to get this process going. And the commitment from each of these execs [executive] was to sit back and really look at the organization and determine what needs to happen. It was rigorous. We had lots of debate and discussion. However, because we had the senior most people in the room, we were able to move mountains. So when we put the plan together, I then turned around and said, "I'm not delivering a plan to Chernin [Peter Chernin]." So I selected someone out of the group, one of the presidents, to deliver the plan. Matter of fact it was one of the presidents, someone from legal, Gary Robinson [ph.], delivered the plan. I was there. I went in, I spoke to Peter. I gave him an update on what we were doing, kind of gave him overview. I said to him, "These are some of the areas you may have issues with." I said, "These are the areas they have an issue with." Then we went into the room, and the diversity advisory board sold him on the plan. So we started out with a plan that we knew would be implemented in the, at the network and then we would take it to each of the respective business units. Now we were going to roll it out slowly, but we knew the network was going to be the first place we would tackle. And then we said, "Where are the greatest needs? Where are we having some, where do we have the greatest opportunities, and where do we have the greatest need?" And we started rolling it out that way. We would meet once a month in the first year and then after that it was once a quarter. There were updates that were given periodically, not periodically, every single time we met. At the end of every year, I would provide a summary to Peter and the senior execs of the company [Fox Entertainment Group]. We would also meet with all of the respective organizations, you know, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Hispanic council, the national Latino and Hispanic coalition, the Asian coalition, the Indian. So we were--and the Native American coalition. And we would have to report out on what we were doing. Story_ID: 658178 Speaker 1: We did some really unusual and unique things [at Fox Entertainment Group]. I hired a young lady, Wenda Fong, who was my head of creative at first. And then Ron Taylor took over. Wenda had experience as a producer. So again, I'm dealing with people who've got some of those connections that can pick up a phone and call an executive producer and say, "It's Wenda, it's So and So," they understand the process and what people go through. Joe [ph.], the same way, because he's got the background, can understand the process. And then I brought a brilliant young man in, Jerry Jacobsen, to run my supplier diversity and to also do all of my communication because he's got, he's just an extraordinary communicator. He was so bright that he developed our diversity website, which, by the way won a couple of awards because of the website. It was an interactive website. So we had the website going, we had several programs, both diversity internally as well as externally that really allowed us to be successful. We hummed along for years, years, years. Story_ID: 658179 Speaker 1: I guess you could say one of the programs that we could, I'd like to talk about--there are several. We had a Journey to Excellence, which was our high school mentoring program. We had a program that was developed by FOX News, an apprentice program. And I know people talk about FOX News and, you know, just the slant that it has. When I met with Roger Ailes, it was very interesting. Our first meeting he looks at me, he goes "I looked you up. I did my homework on--and I know all about you." And I says, "Oh, it's interesting you should say that because I did my homework on you, and I know all about you, too," (laughter). So I knew he came from a poor background. I knew that, you know, he would tell you he would walk to school sometimes and he'd have cardboard in his feet, you know, for shoes. I knew where he came from. And I also knew the work he had done with Martin Luther [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and with Malcolm [Malcolm X]. So I knew there was a side of him that said, "My purpose and goal in life is to really enrich others." So what we came up with was, he went back to Rupert [Rupert Murdoch] and got Rupert to approve a million dollars to do an apprentice program for FOX News. And that apprentice program would bring in individuals from various aspects, into various aspects of his business. So editor, a writer, you know, a script supervisor. And bring them in, and they would each have a mentor. Shep Smith [Shepard Smith] was a mentor for one of them at one point. And this program would last for a year and eighteen months. And then these individuals, if they graduate, would be placed in management positions. Extraordinary program. Here's the interesting thing. He's in his office one day, and the woman who cleans his office--you know, he sees her all the time, "How are you doing, how's the family?" (Makes sound). And then he--for some reason he says to her, "Your--is this what you want to do, or have you thought of other things you'd like to do?" She says, "Well, as a matter of fact, you know, when I go downstairs to clean the makeup area, I really get a kick out of that because I love makeup. I work on doing that--I would--that's something I'd love to do." Roger took her from cleaning the floors and cleaning the offices and put her in a program for hair and makeup. This woman today is the person when you have Bush [President George Walker Bush], when Bush was there, Oba- [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], any person of importance that comes in, she's the one that does the hair and makeup. That's, that's where she's gone, from there to here. Story_ID: 658180 Speaker 1: I say that because a lot of times people sit back and say, "Oh, it's Roger Ailes." I know the other side of the person, and I've seen the success we've had in FOX News, to the point that in 2008 I was required--requested, to give a presentation to Rupert [Rupert Murdoch] and his entire senior team at News Corp [News Corporation; News Corp]. And this is when we were, we had moved from being Fox Entertainment [Fox Entertainment Group] to News Corp. And I was now responsible for both Fox and News Corp. And I--it might have been 2008, maybe it was 2006. And I had to give a presentation, not only to Rupert, but to the Fox, the News Corp senior team. I was petrified. I didn't know how they would respond. You know, Rupert and I had worked together on many of--initiatives. And very supportive, had to understand diversity, but worked together on initiatives. And, but I was still nervous about going in now with him and his entire senior team. So I asked Roger if he would open the meeting for me. And I said, "Would you mind opening the meeting because, you know, I can bring in the people from the TV stations and the wonderful things they're doing. I can bring people in from the broadcasting network. But you're here. You're right in New York [New York], you're FOX News. You've got the biggest platform. I'd love if you wouldn't mind opening the meeting." And he was so gracious. He opened the meeting. He talked about what they were doing, he talked about the apprentice program, he shared the results. And, you know, then I gave my report. And people in the room--first of all they were blown away because it was Roger and then they were blown away at the results we were doing. And most importantly, Rupert sat there saying, "Wow." He says, "When we started, we didn't think we would move as fast as we could and accomplish as much as we have." He says, "I'm so very proud of the organization and what it's doing." He says, "Now let's move News Corp forward as fast as we can in that same direction." So my second moment, other than being a corporate officer is, you know, having someone like a Rupert acknowledge your contributions, acknowledge how critical diversity is--has become to his organization. And by the way, giving me the opportunity and the flexibility and the funds to do what I need to do. I think for me that was critical. Story_ID: 658181 Speaker 1: Now the memo of understanding-- Speaker 2: Memorandum of understanding (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Memorandum of understanding. Speaker 2: MOU. Speaker 1: Yeah, co-signee, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]-- Speaker 2: Yes, Kweisi Mfume-- Speaker 1: --awarded you in 2007 [sic. 2006], right? Speaker 2: I was awarded the President's Award. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, which was a huge honor. President's Award in 2006, and then that award in-- Speaker 1: Oh, right. Speaker 2: Two thousand six [2006] was the President's Award. Matter of fact, it was two days after my mom [Pearl Richards Wilson] passed away. So I remember that so well. And I wasn't going to go. I said, "I just can't go. You know, I just lost one of the most important people in my life." And my sisters and my brothers [sic.] talked with me. And Greg [Gregory James] said, "What would she want you to do?" So I went that day and I--it was a tribute to my mom. So I accepted it on her behalf. And I still get emotional today--on her behalf for paving the way for everything I've done and just paving the way for the family. So it was a real, it was an emotional time. But it was, it was one of those proud moments where I could sit back and say, "Mom, look at, look at your, look at the little one that you brought with you from Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana]. And look what she's been able to accomplish." Speaker 1: So this indicates on some level that the N- NAACP was satisfied with the progress? Speaker 2: They, you know, it went back and forth. I would say probably the first six years, six to eight years, it was satisfying. We had a lot of programs in place. They would come back, just for something. I mean they tell you they're satisfied, but, you know, what else can you do, you know? We at one point had the most writers of color on TV. When you look at our writer's program, we had writers that started out as staff writers. The day I left, we had several that were co-executive producers, you know. So I think we had sixty-seven writers. You know, out of the sixty-seven, I think thirty-eight are still working and then you've got these five that are co-ex- that's unheard of within a relatively short period of time. So we were deliberate and focused on--and because of that, you know, we got the accolades from the NAACP. The gay and lesbian association--we, you know, they gave us accolades for having characters that were outside of your traditional character. You know, 'Dark Angel,' Jessica Alba, who would know that she would blow up to be the star that she is today? But we introduced Jessica Alba to TV. You know, I think I was telling you about '24' with, you know, having the first African American president [David Palmer], you know. So the things we were doing because we're Fox [Fox Entertainment Group], were so unusual. And we were acknowledged for that. And I looked at in all aspects. So it was in front of the camera, your talent. It was behind the camera, your writers, your directors, your producers, if at all possible. We worked with an organization called Hollywood CPR [Hollywood Cinema Production Resources, Los Angeles, California], and this is where Gerald [Gerald Alcantar] came into play. And an organization that I was chair of, Workplace Hollywood [Workplace Hollywood, Inc., Los Angeles, California], we were able to get eight unions to agree that we could train individuals in various crafts, and they would hold a hundred slots for us on the union roster. And we would able to place those people on the union roster. I mean, what an accomplishment, to have the head of the union sign something like this off and say, "Go ahead and do it." So those were some of the things that we really worked at trying to do. How do we integrate diversity into every single fiber of an organization, particularly into those areas where it has become known as either the good old boys network or it's passed down from generation to generation? And you're blocked from getting in because you're not a family member. So it's those types of things that we were diligent about looking to do. So that--you know, I say to people, yeah, a grip, a cinematographer, these folks make twenty-five, thirty, forty dollars an hour, you know. Sometimes they make more money than some of the talent, you know, if they're walk ons. So why not be able--and it's sustainable. If you're doing construction, you know, for a production company, you can take that and do construction anywhere. It's sustainable income. So for us, we had to go out and make sure that individuals understood there was more to life than acting and directing and writing, but there were other jobs out there where you can make a good living. And by the way, the only way we could do that is by getting the unions to kind of understand and give us those slots. It was, it was extraordinary. That was, that was a day that I sat back and said, "Wow, it took us eight years, but we did it." Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and it's still in existence today, it's still going. You know, the program Hollywood CPR is working. And they're--the training is just unbelievable what they do with the students, to get them in and get them ready to, to move. Story_ID: 658182 Speaker 1: So did you retire in 2011? Was that-- Speaker 2: I officially retired in October of 2010 from my SVP position. And for a year, I was a consultant with News Corp [News Corporation; News Corp]. And I--my official retirement date was January of 2012. So for the year, I was actually a consultant. And what I did at that point was really work with the organization. They took and split my position into two. So you had (burps), excuse me, a vice president of diversity for News Corporation and a vice president of diversity for Fox Entertainment [Fox Entertainment Group], both building their core groups and working jointly. So for that year, they asked me if I would stay and just assist in counseling--guide and direct those groups as they moved forward. Speaker 1: Okay, now, all right. So, well, in 2011 you're the founding partner of ForAfrica, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, (laughter) my labor of love. You know when I decided to retire, and I started this in 2000, and said, "I'm going to be there for seven years." Five years then turned into seven. And I would say to Peter [Peter Chernin], "I'm going to, you know, I want to, you know, move myself out of business. So you'll no longer have a need for me." But, you know, in 2010, I felt the time was right. I felt I had accomplished what I wanted to accomplish in the organization. The organization was on solid footings. They had good programs. Journey to Excellence was running, the high school program. We had a management development program that was going. Our supply and diversity program was effective. We had--you know, the highest ranking person in the president's position was an African American female, Vanessa Morrison, heading up animation [20th Century Fox Animation]. And, you know, animation is a complete men's field. So to have Vanessa be the president of our Fox animation division and have the success that she's had in animation, I just felt, you know, this is a good time. I looked around the organization and, you know, Henry Ford comes in in sports [Fox Sports] and, you know, I've got, you know, Cabrera's [ph.] coming in in another area. So we had individuals in very, very senior positions doing some great stuff. And we had the foundation established, so that people owned diversity and they could talk about it in meetings, and they could challenge people when they needed a challenge. So I turned around and said to my financial advisor and to Greg [Gregory James], "Here's the time, I'm, think I'm ready to go. I want to retire when I still have the physical ability to do what I need to do and the mental ability to do what I need to do." Story_ID: 658183 Speaker 1: In 2005- 2006, I started to have either lunch or coffee with some colleagues of mine. Cheryl Williams is a cultural anthropologist by trade and has--got a Ph.D. in cultural anthropology in leading across cultures. And I would tell her what I would do. I says, "Look, I've been going to Africa now since 2000, and it's a labor of love. And when I retire, I want to go work in Africa or third world countries developing future leaders." Speaker 2: So you st- first started going to Africa in 2000 (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand [2000], yeah. Speaker 2: And where did you go first? Speaker 1: I went with--South Africa with Judge Mablean [Mablean Ephriam] and Kym Whitley, yeah. I was talking to Judge Mablean. She had her show on TV, and she said, "Oh, I'm going to Africa." She had owned, she owned a home there, and she was going down. I says, "You know, I've always wanted to go." I says, "It's been a passion that I have." She said, "Come with me." And I was like, "(Stutters) Okay, I'll come." Speaker 2: So she's in South Africa, is that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She, yeah, she has a home in South Africa, in Joburg [Johannesburg, South Africa]. So I went with her for the first time, and it just blew me away. You know, we went to Soweto [South Africa], we went to visit an orphanage where--it wasn't even an orphanage. It was just a facility, where this woman in the community in Soweto would take care of all the kids in the neighborhood, four years and under. And she'd have these big pots that she would just fix food for them, so they had food every day. And I tell you, we all walked out of there and got on our knees to thank God for the blessings but just crying because what can we do to help? And then I started thinking, what can we do to help? So we, you know, we started looking at programs to see is there a way that we can financially help. Because most of the time, you financially help. And then [HistoryMaker] Paula Madison, she's got a group of friends. They call us the big girls club. And every January the big girls would meet at Paula's home in California as a way to relax, you know, during MLK weekend [Martin Luther King Jr. Day]--rest, relax, rejuvenate, fellowship, partnership. And this one year, we all sat back and said, "You know, look at the skills--," and we were all professionals--judges, lawyers, I mean all kinds of things. You know, Paula at that point, general manager. "Look at the skills that's in this room. Why don't we do something?" So we decided the next year we would go to Africa. So sixteen of us embarked--seventeen of us embarked about going to Africa. My two sisters, Pat [Sybil Wilson] in U- at Children's Hospital of L.A. [Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and Lorraine [Lorraine Wilson], the one in San Diego [California], went with me. So we all went to Africa that year and spent the year. And we--in addition to it being an eye opener for everyone there--because we did some interesting stuff. You know, we mixed bl- business with pleasure. We all sat back and said, "We have an opportunity to make a difference. And it's not just by giving money. But we have an opportunity to make a difference in a very meaningful way." And Paula had had some friends who had already moved to Africa. So we met with them to find out what they were doing. They were living there, they were loving it. And I just came back and said, "What can I do?" So we started out by just supporting a high school, a high school where the young--and it was a women's school, where the children needed books. They needed uniforms and things like that. So we started out doing that. And then I sat back--and I'd gone back a couple more times. And I said, "You know, education to me is the most critical thing in the world. If you're educated, you can move mountains." So for me it's been education within my own family and education here. And I decided, I'm going to tap into that education. Story_ID: 658184 Speaker 1: So you went with Paula [HistoryMaker Paula Madison] on a-- Speaker 2: Went with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) second trip around 2003-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Around 2003, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: She came back and, you know, Paula is remarkable. I, I so admire and love her for her spirit and her drive and for the partnership that we've shared over the years and the camaraderie. When my daughter was going through a difficult time, my eldest one [Meisha Wilson Leonard], in Texas, Paula just came through and said, "What can I do to help? And I lived and work there, let me give you the names of some of people that can help you." So we share such a bond, you know. And that bond, part of that, is the diversity aspect that she did in NBC that I did here. And then Josie [Josie Thomas], of course at CBS. But she came back and, you know (laughter), you know Paula started Africa Channel. And I turned around and said, "Okay, can't start The Africa Channel, can't start a channel. But what can I, what can I do that would be fulfilling, and at the same time, give back?" And spoke with my colleague who's a cultural anthropologist, then we started meeting with another colleague, who is an ex-college president. And I had met him before. We'd, you know, had, you know, various conversations. And they both looked at me one day and said, "Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], we love what you're planning on doing, and we want to get involved. We want to--how do we work with you to do this?" So we decided to do it--start a non-profit called ForAfrica. And it's F-O-R-A. Fora, in Swahili means success. So when you look at it, it's F-O-R-A-F-R- you know, it's not the For and then Africa, it's all together. And our primary goal is to develop leaders, in country, in primary rural areas. And here's the reason why. When individuals leave their native land to go study abroad--the Center for Creative Leadership [Greensboro, North Carolina] did a study. And they say out of all those individuals that leave, only 15 percent of them return. Out of the 15 percent, only 8 percent of them stay. So there's a brain drain. So how do we expect your third world countries to be economically viable if we're, if the drain is on those bright minds, and we're not looking to do anything to assist those that are still there? So that's when we came up with the idea--okay, here's what we're going to do. We're going to develop leaders, in cou- I'm going to take all those--that experience, all of that that I have, everything that I've learned. "Cheryl [Cheryl Williams], you're a cultural anthropologist. Jack [J.A.O. Preus III], you are--you're a college president. So you know how to deliver, you know, programs. Why don't you take all that we know, and we're going to put this plan together and we're going to put this non-profit together, develop leaders, I -country. And we know we can't do it our own--by ourselves." So here's where we tap into all of those people that we've worked with over the years. And we could say to them, "Give us ten days, give us a month. Here is the need, can you assist?" So we would be the bridge for those individuals. We'd be the bridge between either governments, non-profits in third world countries and individuals here who really want to give back in a meaningful way but haven't figured out how to do it yet. Well, we figured it out, we're going to try it, come work with us. So we started to do that. Story_ID: 658185 Speaker 1: We've been very fortunate in that our first venture was to meet with the first lady of Zambia [Thandiwe Banda]. And I hosted the first lady of Zambia at Fox [Fox Entertainment Group] and looking at what we can do in Za- in Zambia educationally. Because our real, our focus is education. Make no mistake about it, we tell people that's it. We're not looking to do anything else. So we started with that. And then in doing so, we got a phone call that the ambassador from Namibia is here and is in California. And this is a colleague of mine called Matt Rosenthal [Matthew Rosenthal], who at that point, had a non-profit called Prevent Hate [Institute for the Study and Prevention of Hate Crimes, Studio City, California] but then moved into socioeconomics as his organization. Because he understood that in order for company--economies, to thrive you need trade not aid, which is, you know, something we should have been doing years ago. We're doing it now. But, so he calls me on the phone and says, "The ambassador from Namibia is here and his senior fellow. Can you meet with us? I think what you have to offer is just something that Namibia is looking for. Is there a possibility?" So we decided that we would call on our colleagues at the Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], and we met with them at Dodger Stadium [Los Angeles, California] to give him a California flair. And introduced him to who we were, what we were looking to do, and if there was any synergies that could take place. He was impressed, and wanted to continue working with us. We then went to Namibia--no, I'm sorry, after that he brought up the economic ambassador, and an entire Namibia delegation came to California. I hosted them on the Fox lot [20th Century Fox Studios], introduced them to ForAfrica. We had our booklet of what we were looking to do and that began the relationship there. We've since gone back a couple of times and met with the first lady of Namibia to solidify some of the things we're doing. We've got--Cheryl [Cheryl Williams] was able to get a memorandum of understanding between her university [Concordia University Irvine, Irvine, California] and Polytech in Namibia [Polytechnic of Namibia; Namibia University of Science and Technology, Windhoek, Namibia]. We've identified several organizations that we'd like to work with in Namibia. So all the plans are being put into place now to do that. Story_ID: 658186 Speaker 1: In the interim, we've, we've worked with an organization called Themba Foundation [Dallas, Texas] in South Africa, where we've, where we sent two college graduates to actually do some on the ground work with Themba. For them, it was a life changing experience. They did eight weeks last January, really working to see what is it they can do and bring to the organization? That worked out very well for us. And what it said to us is that when you send people into, you know, the country, you need to do it in cohorts. So we've learned that that two is better than one. We've also, you know, so that's what we look to do. And we were able to identify individuals who had a passion for Africa, who had already been to Africa, so they understand the country and who had skills that that organization needed. Worked well. This past July, Cheryl [Cheryl Williams] went to Ethiopia, Ghana, South Africa, and Namibi- Namibia. I then went to Liberia and Ghana. I was supposed to go to Nigeria, but we backed off on that one because of some of the issues that were happening there. And again, looking at, you know, we're working with certain organizations in Liberia and Ghana and, you know, South Africa and Namibia where they've got the foundation and the platform there that would allow us to sit back and provide them with assistance in terms of developing their future leaders. So it's been an exciting adventure for us. Story_ID: 658187 Speaker 1: This past year, I took a gentleman with me called Ramsey Jay [Ramsey Jay, Jr.], who's worked with me--M.B.A. from Dartmouth [Tuck School of Business, Hanover, New Hampshire], investment banker, motivational speaker on an unbelievable level, unbelievable motivational speaker. He's worked with us for the whole twelve years I've actually been at Fox [Fox Entertainment Group], doing motivational speaking for our high school and college students. Ramsey had never been to Africa before. And I said to him, "Trust me, this will be an experience. And can you give me ten to twelve days because the minimum we require is ten to twelve days." And Ramsey came along, and he will tell you that it was a complete life changing experience for him. The one thing that was so interesting for us when Ramsey got there--and I said, "When I go in, from now on, I have to take our men." The kids at the orphanage--because we were at two orphanages--the kids at the orphan- and it's a self-contained orphanage. So you've got housing, you've got schooling, you got medical, you've got everything. But the kids in the orphanage ran up to him. One little girl at three, she was three and a half years old--and these are all orphans--and said, "Are you my daddy?" And wouldn't let him go the whole time he was there. And then other kids turned around and looked around and said, "Are there others like you in America?" So I'm sitting here saying, "That's a message right there." They see your traditional groups going into Africa, your missionaries, in particular. They don't see us and particularly the black male, they don't see as much. So for me, it's going to be important whenever we embark in going to Africa--that there's so many students now--I stay students because I'm the elder--that are interested and willing to give of their time, that that's what we're going to do. You know, my nephew just graduated MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Ph.D. I said to him, "You've got to come out of the ivory tower. You've got to go with me [at ForAfrica]." My two daughters [Meisha Wilson Leonard and Alia Wilson Stewart] are just waiting for me to say, "When is it you want us to go?" So that we can then, you know, participate and give back. All of their friends now, it's that age group, are sitting here saying, "We want to go, we want to be a part of this. We want to, we want to do more than just be a consumer." So what I'm finding is I started a movement that I'm hoping--you know, between myself, Cheryl [Cheryl Williams] and Jack [J.A.O. Preus III]--we can lay the foundation. And then our kids and our kids, our kids' kids will then be able to move it forward, particularly the kids. I want my children to be able to move this forward. I want Cheryl's--Cheryl has a son who's a veterinarian--move it forward. Jack's got a son who's a principal, an educator. You know, so we want the children to be able to take this and move it forward in a meaningful way so that it has an impact on not only, you know, Africa. We've been to Suriname, we've been to Guyana, you know. So any--all third world countries. We want to have that impact in terms of developing those leaps. Story_ID: 658188 Speaker 1: Is there a timetable for, I mean, do you have, do you--do you have a plan for, you know, that you want to acco- accomplish so much by, a certain time? Speaker 2: We've got, you know, we've got two proposals out today and waiting to hear back. As a matter of fact, this morning, I just left a university where we have a proposal, and it looks like it might go forward. So, and very--it's a solid proposal in terms of developing our master's in international studies. But it will be different from most other programs. They asked me to come in and do it because of my affinity for Africa, my work in Africa and my work in the corporate world. And I said to them as I was looking at all of the programs, I said, "You know, all of these programs are academic in nature." So you sit back, you go to school, you're in a classroom, you get all of this, you know, academic knowledge. And then they say, "You know, by the way, let's go spend six weeks in Africa or South America, or let's go spend a month." And then (makes sound) you've got a master's [degree] and, now you go out there and help the world. And what I said, "That's not good enough, not when you're dealing with different cultures, language, tribalism. There's so much that you have to understand if you're going to have an impact outside of the United States." So this program that we're developing is a one year immersion program on the ground, in the country. So you get pre-work here in this country that prepares you. If there's students in Africa that we're putting in this program, they will get that pre-wor- and then you're spending a year on the ground working with either a non-profit, governments, businesses, clinics. So you really begin to understand the country, the culture, the people, the needs, the opportunities, the strengths. And then when you come back, you're better able to sit back and develop whatever you need to develop, be it business, be it educational components, be it, you know, just an NGO [non-governmental organization] and the fundraising and that of that. You're able to better develop because you clearly understand the landscape. So it's exciting. I presented it this morning, and they were very impressed. So I'm hoping--that to me would be a, it would be a goldmine because all of a sudden now we're exposing our students to a continent that they're not aware of, in a very meaningful manner. Story_ID: 658189 Speaker 1: So do you think like an international understanding or inter- international venture like this would improve, I guess, conditions for African Americans here? Speaker 2: You know, I look at, you know, all of the programs that they have, particularly in the universities, for, you know, that they consider African studies and things like this. And again, I sit back and I say, "Where is the on the ground wor- real work experience--not six weeks--that really gets individuals to understand what are some of the issues?" And if we understand the issues, then we have to start looking at what are some of the creative ways for us to go about solving problems that are not your typical and, or traditional. I go back to those things that we did, you know, with the board of education [New York City Community School District 27] for kids who were at risk that couldn't sit in a classroom and understand or gain the knowledge they needed but put them in a different environment, and they're learning. So I'm just sitting back saying, "How do we get to a point where we begin to understand what is it going to take for our students to gain the knowledge and the skills and the experience they need and potentially in a non-traditional way?" You know, I think we've got to look at things in a little different light. And we have to use technology because, you know, our children today are so into technology. We have to use technology as a bridge to do that. Story_ID: 658190 Speaker 1: You've addressed this before and probably in what you're saying now even. But we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: You know, I do, I do a lot of executive coaching. And I do tutoring, I tutor at my church at night. But I've always, I've always, tutoring has always been a part of me, you know. My concern is education is not a core, is not viewed as a core for our families. So our students are not developing a love of learning. One of the things I did with my children [Meisha Wilson Leonard and Alia Wilson Stewart] and my nieces and grandkids and anyone I come into contact with, I try to instill in them the love of learning. When you instill a love of learning into students, they're learners forever, lifelong learners. And that's what you want to do. You don't want learning to be a burden or a chore, a burden or a chore. And I look at, you know, what's happening today--looking, you know, I'm working in some places in Orange County [California], you know. The school system has got some of the best in the world. You know, then you look at the seventeen we worked in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I'm not seeing that love for learning. I'm not seeing that desire to learn, to take, to take what is given to us through the educational system and to just journey steps further. It rea- it concerns me. It concerns me, and I'm just, I'm struggling with what do we need to do? How do we allow parents to become advocates for their kids? Keep in mind, remember my story. My mother didn't know. So if I was not guided because of, you know, something plopped in my place or, you know, someone said something, I don't know where I would be today. You know, but my parents [Pearl Richards Wilson and Clement Wilson] didn't know. My, you know, so how do we make parents advocates so that they are clearly aware of what their childrens, children are entitled to, what they can and can't do? And what avenues are available to them? I think that, I think it's important for us to understand that parents need to be advocates, and we need to make sure that they clearly have that opportunity to be those advocates for their children. Story_ID: 658191 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would undo or do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Wow, is there something I would undo or do differently? (Pause) (Laughter) What would I do differently? You know, if there was something I would do differently and--it probably goes back to my nephew, Jamal [ph.]. He's the eldest of all of the--my mom's kids [sic.] and a wonderful young man. He--he's forty-four, he is a corrections officer at Rikers Island [New York, New York] so you can imagine what he goes through. He will be retiring in a few years because of his length of service and moving on to what, you know, will be his own core career. I remember when I was at the cable company [Times Mirror Cable Television, Inc.; Cox Communications, Inc.], and my nephew was getting ready to graduate from high school. And he called me on the phone--and he played ball, and he was a very good ballplayer--you know, 6' something basketball player, you know, the whole bit. And he called me on the phone--and excuse me for getting emotional because this sticks with me like you would not believe. And he needed my help at that point in understanding what he should do in terms of his college. My sister, my older sister, she--you know, New York City [New York, New York] is such a different animal. You can work for the transit authority [New York City Transit Authority]--which my brother-in-law at that point worked for, became captain--very good money and the whole bit--and you're fine. You can work for sanitation [New York City Department of Sanitation] and you're fine. You can work for, you know--so there are opportunities for you to do things outside of the--your educational system that you would have four years and be successful. When he called me, I knew he was asking for help in terms of understanding and deciding what do I do with the rest of my life? "I, you know, I'd like to play basketball, and I'd like to go away to school. I've got some of these HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] that are calling me." And I--for whatever reason, I didn't respond to him. I didn't provide him with the guidance and direction he needed to potentially make that right decision. Bothers me today. Story_ID: 658192 Speaker 1: So you were just really busy at that time or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. (Crying) I think this is where I allowed work to interfere, and I shouldn't've. The good thing is, you know, he went to John Jay school of criminal justice [John Jay College of Criminal Justice, New York, New York], you know. He played ball, he did all those things, and he was successful. But I sit back and I say to myself, maybe this is why I'm so passionate today. What could he have been had his aunt taken the time to really work with him? I've never shared this with anyone so, and it's something I think of a lot. So what I've done is, all of the nieces and nephews knew that as they went to college, Aunty Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson] had a fund, and it was an educational fund. And that educational fund would pay for books, it would pay for whatever they needed to get through school because I wanted them to get through school. And they know that today, you know. The--you know, I only have, I have my one niece who's graduating this year from Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], and will be going on to physical therapy, while the other one is graduating from law school at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. But they know that they call on the phone and say, "Aunty, my books are a thousand dollars this year." And I send them a check, you know. Or, "Aunty, you know, (make sound)," and I send them a check because I won't pay for their schooling and I won't pay for their housing because that's something their parents have to do, and that's, you know, something they have to come to a decision to do. But I've seen too many kids not be able to succeed in school because they don't have all those ancillary things. So, you know, my nephew went to Texas Tech [Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas] and didn't have the money for books. And I said, "You know, that's your fault. You were supposed to call me." So when he did call, you send him the check. So I think that was probably my way of saying I screwed up with Jamal [ph.], but I can't do it with the rest of them. So, now as I look at the grandkids and the great nieces and nephews--myself, my sisters--we've all kind of sat back and said part of our legacy is making sure that we have an educational fund for the kids, so that as they want to move forward in school, there's not going to be things to deter them as they go forward. Speaker 1: Well, what I hear you saying also is we all have to do better in terms of that, (unclear) those of us who can. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely have to do better. We can't sit back and just, you know, allow ourselves to say, "Not my responsibility." That's not, that's absolutely not true. And I don't care if it's family or not. I've helped my niece's best girlfriend, who was getting ready to, you know, leave FAMU because she couldn't afford the rent. She didn't have any place to stay. And I said to her, "Look, how many months you got left?" She said, "Six." I said, "Okay, find rent, here's how much you're going to pay, and I will pay for the rent for six months. Here's the agreement. You have got to maintain a B average. The moment you fall below a B, I'm not paying anymore, and I want to see the de- degree." How exciting, in month six when I gave her that check. And she turned--and Greg [Gregory James] doesn't even know this. When she turned around and she sent me a copy of her degree. And she's working today. You know, I mean this is a student that--she's not related. But she--her family couldn't do it for her. So if I have the wherewithal, if we have the wherewithal, we need to make sure we're reaching out in that manner. Because that child would have dropped out of school in her senior year with six months to go. You can't have them do that, you can't have them do that. Yeah. Story_ID: 658193 Speaker 1: Likewise if you look back over everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My two girls, my two girls. Well, we've got three. You know, Greg's [Gregory James] got his daughter, who's in Canada with three granddaughters. We see the granddaughters through the summer. We take them for the summer, and we're grandma and grandpa, and we spoil them to death (laughter). And, you know, I was blessed with two daughters. You know, Meisha [Meisha Wilson Leonard] is the eldest. And when I was pregnant with her, I was a single parent. And the doctor said to me that I had a cyst the size of a grapefruit, and she would not survive. And I said, "Okay, that's fine, I can just keep going." And I come back a month later, and the doctor says, "This is strange. The cyst has shrunk and now, you, you know, it's down to the size of a peanut, and there may be hope." She was born premature. She was born, you know, four pounds, twelve ounces. But she's a beautiful young lady, master's in physical therapy, lives in Houston [Texas], has a wonderful husband [Darrell Leonard (ph.)] and just doing great things. She's my Mother Teresa. She'll save the world. And then my Alia [Alia Wilson Stewart] who's twenty-nine, when I was five months pregnant with Alia, I started to hemorrhage. And the doctor again said--not going to live. So took me in the hospital and said, "Bed rest for the rest of the time, let's see what can happen." And I stayed in bed from March until July 18th, when Alia was born, on complete bed, in a bed. I just could not get--the only time I got up was to go to the doctor, so the doctor could check me and see how I was doing. You know, literally went back to the days in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana] where you take a pail to wash your skin becau- I couldn't get out of bed. Because any movement would--it was--I had what they call placenta previa. So any movement would create a bleeding, which would create, you know, so, she too was born premature, five pounds and eighteen ounces, I think. (Laughter) But, you know, it was me, it wasn't her. Alia is my 6' basketball player today (laughter) who, you know, she'll be my Bill Gates. She's the one that decided after Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] she was going to live in Australia, lived there for five years, take the challenge, the risk. Has her master's in media, arts and production, and we'll definitely look to see how she's going to sustain herself and the rest of the family in a meaningful way. So I've two very beautiful and very unique daughters that are, I would say my legacy. And then of course, I have to, you know, make sure that Shermian [Shermian James Mitchell] is included because that's Greg's daughter with the three granddaughters, Shermika [Shermika Mitchell Hypolite], Sherine [Sherine Mitchell], and Esther [Esther Mitchell]. And that's, that's what life is all about. It's, you know, growing and developing others. Story_ID: 658194 Speaker 1: Tell us how you met Greg [Gregory James]. We didn't ask about him. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I went to see--well, let me back up. My brother-in-law, God rest his soul, Dave [David Pecaran (ph.)], passed away from cancer, mesothelioma, in 1999 and was a very big part of my life when I was a single parent taking care of my daughters [Meisha Wilson Leonard and Alia Wilson Stewart]. As a matter of fact, he was their uncle and dad the whole time. And his brother-in-law at the time was Spike Lee's accountant. And there was a play coming out, 'A Good Man's Hard to Find' ['A Good Man is Hard to Find,' David Payton]. And Dave, my brother-in-law, had gotten tickets--got me tickets for this play. "It's in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you really need to go see it. And then they're going to have an event after." And I said, "Oh, okay." So I took my girlfriend with me and we went to see 'A Good Man's Hard to Find.' It was a great play, it's a spiritual play, you know, and all of that, very good play. And at that time, there was a club in L.A. that was a West Indian club, a reggae club. And my girlfriend said, "Let's go to club after." So I said, I said, "Okay, let's go to the club." So we go to the club and I'm in the club. And I'm just standing in the corner, just kind of, you know, relaxing--just, I was really thinking about the play and the message that it was delivering. And up comes Greg and starts talking to me. And I'm like, and he says, "So where are you coming from?" And I says, "Oh, I just came from this play, 'A Good Man's Hard to Find'" (laughter). And he looked at me, and he says, "That's because you haven't been looking in the right place," (laughter). And I said, "Really?" He says, "Well, I'm a good man." And I said, "Oh, yeah, okay." And we started talking that night, and I think I gave him my phone number. He called me on the phone and we--it's so interesting to watch Greg now. Because at that point, Greg would talk to me on the phone for two or three hours. And we decided to go out (laughter). This is so interesting. During the summer, both my kids would go back to New York [New York] to either be with their dad or whatever. Most of the time, it was back to New York. And, so I had the house, and we had a little Shih Tzu that I called Gizmo [ph.]. So this day, we come, and I had to take the dog to get her groomed and my car to get fixed. So Greg comes down to meet me for dinner, and I'm late. He's sitting in the front of the house. There are no phones at this point. So he's just sitting there waiting. Now he's coming from L.A. because he lived in L.A. He comes down, I finally get there. I run in. I got the dog in this hand, the car--I did not know he was allergic to dogs at that point. He wouldn't tell me. And, so we go out on a date, and he looks at me and he says, "Well, I know you said a good man's hard to find, and I'm looking for a good woman," (laughter). And that's how we started. You know, we dated for a while and when we found that we were soul mates in terms of, you know, culturally matched--what he was looking for matched. He wasn't looking to be a replacement dad to my kids because that was very important at the time. But he was looking to be a partner and in being a partner, then helping with my children. And that--you know, he had his daughter [Shermian James Mitchell] and her--at that point it was just, you know, two grandchildren--one grandchild as a matter of fact. The grandson had passed away. And I noticed just how important family was to him. Our eldest granddaughter [Sherine Mitchell] is legally blind, and she went blind at eight. And I just saw how critically important it was for him. And I said, "This is the type of person that I could spend the rest of my life with because our values match." Story_ID: 658195 Speaker 1: When I started to move up the corporate ladder--you know, he worked for Nissan [Nissan Motor Company Ltd.], quality assurance engineer. And looked at me one day and said, "You know, it seems that the organization has got you pegged for doing great things, and you're going to be," you know, this was at Times Mirror [Times Mirror Company], "a, you know, a senior exec [executive]. Someone's got to stay home with the kids." So he chose to stay in his field, in the area, so that I could then make sure I would move through Corporate America. And I think the blessing for that was that Alia [Alia Wilson Stewart], the youngest one, when she graduated from high school [Woodbridge High School, Irvine, California]--and we had a big graduation exercise in the back--you know, ceremony--not ceremony but dinner in the back. And she looked at everyone, and she said this then, and she said it at her college graduation. She says, "You know, in high school," she said, "I," she said, "I struggled sometimes playing ball," because so much was expected of her. She was supposed to be the baller. She says, "But I always knew that I can look up in the stands and there was always some--one person there. I could always depend on that one person." That was Greg [Gregory James]. She says, "It didn't matter where I was, it didn't matter how far, how long it took him to get there--if I was having that moment, I could look up, and he was there." And it carried through, even in college, you know. She was playing, you know, Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] had one of the best basketball teams going. So they were always invited to the dance [NCAA DI Women's College Basketball Tournament]. You know, that sixty-four team dance. And, you know, there was one time I couldn't be there because I was off doing something, and Greg flew from here to Roanoke, Virginia. And we knew she was--they were going to lose, because the first round I think was with Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] or something like that. And we're like--oh, Duke was ranked number one, they were ranked sixteen. He flew all the way, just to make sure that when she looked in the stands, that he would be there. So it's been--for us, it's been, it's been a wonderful, unbelievable experience, just going through the things we've gone through with all three daughters and now grandkids [Sherine Mitchell, Shermika Mitchell Hypolite and Esther Mitchell]. And, you know, just looking at our lives today and, you know, clearly Greg understands that my passion and my love and my heart is in Africa. And I clearly understand that his passion and love in his heart may not be to go to Africa, to work with me jointly. He will go on special assignments. There are times when I say to him, "You know, if I'm doing this, will you go?" He has looked now at Habitat for Humanity and loves doing that. We went to Mexico and built homes. And he's found his niche. He loves that, you know. So it's understanding our passion and our niche, and how we work separately and then work together. So it's been, it's been wonderful for us. Story_ID: 658196 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked that you need to mention before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Anything you haven't asked? (Pause) You know, the, probably the only thing would be the challenges I faced as I went through--the challenges I faced being a single parent and the challenges I faced as an executive. So often, I now counsel people on executive leadership. And what I find is that as African Americans, we have been brought up in a certain way. And that is, you know, I mean I remember growing up, children should be seen and not heard. Respect your elders, don't talk back. So you get that framework and then the framework is when you go into work, do your work, keep your head down, you know, and you'll be rewarded. And then you get into a corporate environment where the expectations are completely different. They expect you to really have that disagreement, professional disagreement. They expect--you know, I say, "I respectfully agree to disagree." They expect you to push, they expect you to, you know, you know, talk back to the boss, you know, if they--you think he's wrong, going down the wrong path. But most importantly, they also want to know who you are as an individual. And I find so often we close ourselves out to that. And a lot of that has to do with the fact that if you come from a blue collar environment where you don't have someone who's got that experience that can sit back and say to you, "By the way, here is how it works," you don't know, getting in- going into a corporate environment. So I was very lucky in that I had mentors along the way. I had Frank Lorenzo from Continental [Continental Airlines], I had Mark Willis from Times Mirror [Times Mirror Company], you know. At News Corp [News Corporation; News Corp], I had mentors as well. But by the time I hit News Corp, I knew and understood what it was to be successful as an exec. So for me, the challenges I look forward--particularly for our bright, you know, dynamic individuals, African American individuals and individuals coming up of color--is to understand that corporate landscape, and to really know that once you are successful technologically, that success can only carry you but so far. And then people are looking for a different set of skills that either you have to develop and nurture along the way--because this is only going to take you but so far. And sometimes those skills were difficult to develop because we've not nurtured them as we grow up. So I see that a lot. And it's one of those things that I--I'm--I work, I really, I work with my kids, I work with my nieces and nephews, I work with people that I know. You know, coaching and grooming has been a part of who I am all my life. So I go back to the people I've worked with and who's worked for me and really try to get them to understand what it's like to be an executive in Corporate America, completely different from what most of them would think of, you know. When I went in to become a corporate board member, you know, Mark Willis said something to me that resonated. He says, "Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson], they know your technical skills, they know you can do this job. They need to know the person." And a lot of times, we won't allow that person to come out because we've told not to, or we're afraid to, you know. So they need to know that person. And that resonated with me. So as I do my coaching and counseling, I say, "They need to know the person. They know you can do the skills, but who are you?" Story_ID: 658197 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, how would I like to be remembered? (Pause) I think--(laughter) (pause) you know, in our home, in our family--you know, the extended family, we call ourselves the group home. And it's got the connotation (laughter) of, you know, all of us together. And not so much in a physical environment but as a whole. A, you know, each individual coming together as a whole. So I think are two ways I'd like to be remembered--for that group home, I hope I have provided and given them the guidance and direction that they need in order for them to be successful in their journey in life. Because to me that's what it's all about, life is that journey. So for them to be successful on that journey we call life. I hope I've built that foundation for them, so that it's solid enough that they've got something to stand on, and they can look back at what I've struggled with because I've had to struggle. You know, I tell people today, you know, as a single parent, I struggled. I remember Pathmark [Pathmark Stores, Inc.], and a thirty-three cents can of food that fed my kids [Meisha Wilson Leonard and Alia Wilson Stewart]. So I hope they don't look at just this piece, and say, "Oh, but--." Look at the whole person and understand and recognize that the journey's what's most important and understanding the impact that that journey has on your life and the life of others is important. I think when I look at folks outside of that group home (laughter), which would probably be the work I'm trying to do now in third world countries--the legacy I'd like to leave is that I've been able to either provide an opportunity for someone or to provide the leadership that an individual will need, so that he or she is clear in the direction they want to go in serving others. To me, life is all about serving others. And I don't--it doesn't matter if you look at it from a business standpoint, a governmental standpoint, a non-profit--how are you going to serve others, so that your success is predicated on their success? So it's serving others, being, being that servant of others, that's key. Story_ID: 658198 Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us about that photo. Speaker 2: So this picture was taken in the year 2000. And it was the year I joined Fox [Fox Entertainment Group] as the senior vice president of diversity development. And there was a reception for me. It was the same year as the Democratic Convention in California [2000 Democratic National Convention, Los Angeles, California]. And in this picture you have the president of Fox, Gail Berman, who sponsored the memorandum. But then you have all of the coalition members, Asian coalition, Latin, Native American coalition and African American coalition. Speaker 1: This picture was taken in Ethiopia with the Mothers of Ethiopia [Mothers with a Heart for Ethiopia, Woodstock, Canada], and I was on my journey with the Jewish Relations Council of New York [Jewish Community Relations Council of New York, New York, New York]. And that was in 2010. Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 2011, and those are my partners, my ForAfrica partners--Dr. Cheryl Williams, Dr. Jack Preus [J.A.O. Preus III], Mitsy Wilson [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson] and the economic ambassador for Namibia. Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1990--I'm sorry, this picture was taken in 2006. And the reason I put it up there, it's all the men in the family, and it was taken at my mom's funeral. It was the only opportunity where we could have all the men. Speaker 2: (Laughter) This, you could tell was taken in 1964 and it is my elementary school [St. Nicholas of Tolentine Elementary School, Bronx, New York], grammar school, graduation. And if you'll notice, I'm the only black person in the picture. Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 2012 at the Rafiki Village [Rafiki Training Village] in Liberia. Yep, that's it. Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 2010, and it is with the Himba tribe in Namibia. You've got the tribal chief and his daughters. Speaker 1: This is my little one, Samuel [ph.], in Namibia. He was abandoned in--I'm sorry, in Liberia. And this was taken in 2012. He was abandoned along with his brother in a garbage dump. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: This picture was taken at my marathon. This was the first marathon that I ran, 26.2 miles. And it was in honor of my mother and my brother-in-law, David Pecaran [ph.]. Speaker 2: What year? Oh, 2000. I was in Africa, in Joburg [Johannesburg, South Africa], and actually Soweto [South Africa]. And there were three brothers who were standing around. And when I started taking pictures, they asked if I would take one of them. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1999. And it is Mark Willis, who was the chairman of Times Mirror [Times Mirror Company], who turned and made me a corporate officer at Times Mirror and my mentor. Speaker 1: That's the cereal killer. Speaker 2: The cereal killer (laughter). Speaker 1: This picture is my mom and my uncle, Uncle Henry [ph.]. And it was taken at my uncle's forty-fifth wedding anniversary, which we celebrated right here in California in this house. Speaker 2: This is the power team, these are all the women. This picture was taken last year in 2011. And it--from left to right, my sister Lorraine [Lorraine Wilson]. I'm on the top row, Mitsy, and then the others in the top row is Lois [ph.], Winnie [ph.], my sister, Pat [Sybil Wilson], my sister, Yvonne [Yvonne Wilson], my sister, Gwen [Gwen Wilson]. We're all sisters. Speaker 1: Awe. This picture was taken in September of 2013. It's my daughter, Meisha [Meisha Wilson Leonard], and my daughter, Alia [Alia Wilson Stewart], and I am in Houston [Texas]. I was coming back to California, and I stopped to give them a hug. Speaker 2: This picture was taken, oh, somebody's wedding, I don't remember. This picture was taken in, don't remember the date. But it is my family. That's Alia, Greg [Gregory James], Meisha and I. We're at a wedding. Speaker 1: I'm not going to give you all the names to these pictures. But we went to my aunt and uncle, Uncle Henry--sixty-fifth wedding anniversary in England. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nice. Speaker 1: And that's the Calif- the United States family, in addition to the English family. Speaker 2: This is the food we eat. You know, you talk about Guyana, you've got plantain, you've got cassava, you've got the rice and you have an accent, and the greens (laughter). Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1968 at the World's Fair--well, '64 [1964] at the World's Fair in New York [New York World's Fair, New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 1: I was in Catholic school [St. Nicholas of Tolentine High School, Bronx, New York] at the time. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: This is probably the only picture I have right now of my brother-in-law, Dave Pecaran, as I told you earlier. It's Dave and my sister Lorraine, and Laura [ph.] and Julia [ph.] are missing, I'm sorry. But Dave was a dad and uncle to Meisha and Alia, prior to Greg taking over the rein (laughter). Speaker 2: So this was taken--I was a News Corp executive[News Corporation; News Corp]. And this is at Colin Powell's HistoryMaker's ['An Evening with Colin Powell']-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, nice. Speaker 2: --in Washington, D.C. where I was asked to do the opening. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh. Speaker 2: This picture is--oh, my buddy, [HistoryMaker] Willis Edwards, God rest his soul. A real mentor to me when I came into the entertainment industry. And this was taken when I was awarded the phoenix award. So that's Willis, who is the president of the Los Angeles [California] chapter of the--the Beverly Hills chapter of the NAACP [Beverly Hills Hollywood NAACP Branch, Los Angeles, California]. What is the (unclear) of the guy? Oh. Speaker 1: That's not Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Okay, well, all right. Speaker 2: And this is my daughter, Meisha and my son-in-law, Darrell [Darrell Leonard (ph.)], the Leonards, at their wedding in March of 2010. Speaker 1: This is myself and Kweisi Mfume, the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and the person who signed the memorandum of understanding with Fox. Speaker 2: This was taken with Mr. Harry Belafonte, and this was at a black summit event where [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte was the speaker. Speaker 1: This was taken in 1996, Randy Ludie [ph.], myself and Bill Hassey. These are two gentlemen that worked with me on leadership development, and we've remained very close professional colleagues ever since. Speaker 2: My mom and me (laughter), and that was when I was awarded the phoenix award. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Pearl [Pearl Richards Wilson]. Speaker 1: And this is my grandma, Amy Lo Hing [Wilson's maternal grandmother, Amy Gibson Lo Hing]. Oh, my god, this was taken even before she came to this country. So it had to be in the 1950s. Speaker 2: And this is the family. So if you look the top row, it's Greg and Mitsy. And the middle row is Alia, and then you have Sherine [Sherine Mitchell], my granddaughter and Meisha. And in the bottom row is Shermika [Shermika Mitchell Hypolite], Miss Esther [Esther Mitchell] and Shermian [Shermian James Mitchell]. Story_ID: 658199 Speaker 1: And that's Mitsy [HistoryMaker H. Mitsy Wilson] and her two girls. It was taken the same time--(unclear). What year was that? Meisha [Meisha Wilson Leonard] and Alia [Alia Wilson Stewart]. Speaker 2: This was taken at the Jewish Community Relations [Jewish Community Relations Council of New York, New York, New York] banquet, where I was awarded the corporate executive of the year. And that's me and Greg [Gregory James]. Speaker 1: Oh! This picture was taken in 2010. And that is [HistoryMaker] Paula Madison, Josie Thomas, Bob Menendez [ph.], and they're celebrating with me as I officially retire from Fox [Fox Entertainment Group]. Speaker 2: Wow, this picture was taken in Guyana. And it has got my uncle Ivan [ph.]--bookmarked by my dad [Clement Wilson]--my uncle Ivan on the left, my dad on the right. And then these are my sisters. So it's--on the top, it's Patsy [Sybil Wilson], Mitsy, Yvonne [Yvonne Wilson] and then my brother [Ivan Wilson]. Then on the bottom it's Yvonne and Patsy, who have attended a wedding. And by the way, my mother made all these outfits. My brother Ivan and Yvonne and Patsy in the uniforms. Speaker 1: Oh, that's grammar school uniform, that's Mitsy. I was in the sixth grade [at St. Nicholas of Tolentine Elementary School, Bronx, New York]. Speaker 2: This, this picture was taken in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana] on the stairs to our home in Lodge Village [Georgetown, Guyana]. I was four at the time, so it is 1954, '53 [1953], actually, because I didn't turn--when I was four I was here. On the top row is Patsy and Yvonne, on the bottom row is Mitsy and Ivan. Speaker 1: The family--this is probably the last Christmas before my dad passed away. It was 1975. No, I'm sorry, it's 1985. And on the top row, it's Mitsy, Ivan, my mother Pearl [Pearl Richards Wilson], Yvonne, and Patsy. And on the bottom row, it's Lorraine [Lorraine Wilson], my dad and Gwen [Gwen Wilson]. Speaker 2: This was my return to Guyana in 2011 after being gone from home for so long. Speaker 1: This was my meeting with Vice President Biden [Joe Biden] in 2010 at Tom Laughlin's house. Speaker 2: This is the family, and we took this picture, you know, as a commemoration to my mom. The top row is my sister Gwen, my sister Lorraine, it's me and my brother Ivan, Patsy and Yvonne, and my mom in the middle. This was taken in 19--in 2004. Speaker 1: I'm not going to mention the names, but this is the immediate family, the cousins, as we venture to England for a visit. And this was the sixtieth wedding anniversary, it wasn't even the--yeah. Speaker 2: This picture is of my cotillion in 1967, where I won my first scholarship. And the reason why this is so important is my mother made the entire dress. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Me and Bill [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] (laughter). This was taken at Rupert Murdoch's retreat, executive leadership retreat. And it was in, what's that golf city up north? Speaker 1: Golf course? Speaker 2: Where do you play golf that-- Speaker 1: Oh, golf. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Golf (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And that was 2008. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Not (unclear). Speaker 2: This is Bill. Speaker 1: This one here is, of course, the Senator Barack Obama who will then be president elect Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. I had an opportunity to do a breakfast with him when he was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and it's compliments of Kerman Maddox. Speaker 2: I need a cover on the inside of this. Speaker 1: So Orange Coast magazine is one of the premier magazines in Orange County [California]. And I was asked on--for their Mother's Day eve- edition to talk about what it means to be a parent and a professional...