 Story_ID: 658858 Speaker 1: Okay, I'll begin by slating. My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole. I will be the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Today is March 6, 2017. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing are Dianne Hudson, Tia Newton and Glenford Nunes. We are on Fisher Island in Florida, and I would like for you please to say and spell your name. Tell us your birthdate, what you do and where you're from. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is [HistoryMaker] Andre Walker, spelled A-N-D-R-E, W-A-L-K-E-R, born October 19, 1956. I am a hairstylist, former personal stylist to Oprah Winfrey for over twenty-five years. I'm also an interior des- decorator. Speaker 1: And where are you from? Speaker 2: I'm from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Excellent. Story_ID: 658859 Speaker 1: So, we begin with family history. We'll talk about both sides of your family, but let's start with your mother. Will you tell me her name, when and where she was born and a bit about her? Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's name is Fannie Mae Walker [Fannie Benson Walker], her maiden name is Benson from Hazlehurst, Mississippi. Her mother's name was Ellen Benson and I don't much more about her background than that. I, I know she--her father was someone we never knew and I don't think she even knew who her father was. Her father was obviously Caucasian. We do know that, and her mother was African American. And have not been able to find out more history than that about my mother. Speaker 1: And when you say he was obviously Caucasian, is that because of how your mother looked? Speaker 2: My, well because of how she looks and also my grandmother also said that he was (unclear), so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, but me as a child never found out how that happened. I don't know if, you know in those days in the, you know, the turn of the century, if, she could've been raped. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: She could have been you know, it could have been many things, so I'm not sure. Speaker 1: And your mother, when was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in 1928 I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, and is she still living? Speaker 2: No, she died in '07 [2007], I mean two- yeah, '07 [2007]. Speaker 1: And what did she do? Speaker 2: She was a housemaker. She was a housemaker and she was involved in church quite a bit also. Speaker 1: What church? Speaker 2: Most recent, Reformation Lutheran church [Lutheran Churches of the Reformation]. Speaker 1: And so most recent, what was her early church? Speaker 2: When I was a kid, up until maybe five, maybe six-ish, we were Baptists and we went to a Baptist church every Sunday with my mom, my father [Woodrow Walker, Sr.] rarely went. But as a child I could--she would complain about certain things that happened in the church and, and eventually changed over to the Lutheran religion, and one of the things I know she used to complain about was being in church all day, and she would say, "I'm gonna go to a church where I know it's an hour long and then we're out of there." Those are like some of the things I remember, but the reason she switched religions I don't really know. Speaker 1: That was after you were gone? Speaker 2: No, that was-- Speaker 1: Oh, wait from five (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when I was-- Speaker 1: --from around five. Speaker 2: --from-- Speaker 1: From around five or six is when she switched? Speaker 2: When she switched-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from Baptist to Lutheran. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I've pretty much been Lutheran since I was about five years old, or maybe-- Speaker 1: And so. Speaker 2: --around then. Speaker 1: And so was this a black Lutheran church? 'Cause that's not a common denomination that we hear. Speaker 2: I--well, we lived--we, when we were Baptists we lived on the North Side of Chicago [Illinois] which in, in a predominately black area, and it was shortly after that when we moved to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], which was a predominately white area that we moved to, was when we started going to-- Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: --Lutheran church. And it was predominately white at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was back in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Story_ID: 658860 Speaker 1: So, there's--I'm gonna go back for a second because there's something that I didn't ask you that is actually our normal first questions. Easy. We call them People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, we'll go there and then we'll go back to your family. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food, first thing that popped in my mind is fried chicken (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's pretty good. Speaker 2: I love fried chicken, but I don't eat it that often, but, you know. Speaker 1: Color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Time of year? Speaker 2: Early fall. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Napa Valley [California]. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: It's a Maya-ism [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou]. When people tell you who they are, believe them (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes (laughter). Story_ID: 658861 Speaker 1: So, I wanna go back to your mother [Fannie Benson Walker]. She was born in the South in '29 [1929], I think you said. Is that what you said? Speaker 2: In '28 [1928] or '29 [1929], yeah. Speaker 1: So, did she tell you anything about growing up in the South and what her experiences were like there? Speaker 2: You know the, you know the, the typical stories about living in the South, of being black and living in the South, I would hear those stories about you had to act and be a certain way. Then you would hear some of the stories about some of the lynchings and you know the really horrid stories (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she witness any of that? Speaker 2: Not--I remember--my father maybe, 'cause my father used to talk about this but, I don't know if she did or not. But she told us more things probably more of the nicer things about you know what kind of dog she might have had as a child or--but she did live in the country you know with my mother, and she was an only child--with her mother [Ellen Benson]. Speaker 1: With her mother (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With her mother, she was an only child and eventually her mother married, married someone and that's where the name Benson came from, whom I've never met before and my mother took that, that person's name. So. Speaker 1: So, back to her being born you know that her father was white. You don't know anything about him, but he wasn't in the picture? Speaker 2: No, he was not in the picture, and. Speaker 1: Um, do you know where she went to school? Speaker 2: I, you know I don't, don't know that, but my mother probably has a high school education, if that maybe. And but she was always, she never did anything professionally, she's always been a house- housemaker. Speaker 1: So, how was she able to take care of you when your, her--well, when she was growing up how was she able to manage? She didn't have Mr. Benson at first, what--did she ever work when she was young? Speaker 2: You--my mother's mother (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: My mother's mother? Speaker 1: Yeah, let, let me make sure I'm not confused as to who's who. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: So, tell--your, your mother grew up in the South, correct? Speaker 2: My mother grew up in the South. Speaker 1: So, when did she leave? Speaker 2: She--when she married my father, Woodrow Wilson Walker [Woodrow Walker, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Named after the president [President Woodrow Wilson] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, and, and, and so that, and how old was she at that point? Speaker 2: They moved to Chicago [Illinois] in the late '40s [1940s] I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was still young? Speaker 2: She was still young. Speaker 1: And her mother, who's the one whose father is white, correct? Your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother--my mother's father is white. Speaker 1: That's what I thought. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your, so then your grandmother, what was her work? Speaker 2: She was also a housekeeper and she also did-- Speaker 1: Housekeeper, okay. Speaker 2: --she did, you know she took care of my mother and she was a housekeeper-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for other people, so. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and, and so in both cases did your mother or your grandmother, did they talk about any of the challenges of growing up in the South? Speaker 2: My grandmother didn't talk very much, so I, it's--I can't say I know a lot about her, but my mother would talk about, you know, just the way it was in the South, you know with segregation and having to you know to go in certain areas because you were black and you know the typical things like water fountains for blacks and so forth, but I don't remember a lot of those things, yeah. Speaker 1: Was there ever--did, did they talk at all about any kind of skin color sensitivity within the neighborhood and the community 'cause you know sometimes that could be an issue. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's interesting especially with my mother being a biracial child, but no, she didn't talk about that and, and she was the only child also. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I don't, I don't know if my grandmother kept her protected, but she did talk about other relatives that she was close to, you know that she would see, but she didn't talk much about her friends and you know kids that she might have played with growing up, so, so I don't know. It--and, and I'm sure there were some issues there at prob- you know, more than likely but she's never talked about--I don't remember her talking about it. Speaker 1: And the town, was it a farming town where she grew up? Speaker 2: Hazlehurst, Mississippi I think is a farming town, yeah. And I think it's--they were sharecroppers and you know, you know that type of living there. Speaker 1: Is, so she--your mother's an only child, were in, in terms of other family members, did her mother have other siblings? Were there, was there family around? Speaker 2: Her mother was also an only child. Speaker 1: Ah, okay so small family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yeah. Story_ID: 658862 Speaker 1: And tell me about your father, please? Speaker 2: My father as I said is Woodrow Wilson Walker [Woodrow Walker, Sr.] and I know he was born in 1918. He-- Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: In Jackson, Mississippi. So, that's where they met, they met in Mississippi. They met probably in Jackson, 'cause I think my mother [Fannie Benson Walker] eventually moved to Jackson from Hazlehurst [Mississippi] and I don't remember what year they got married, but my mother was fairly young, she was probably twenty when they got married. Speaker 1: And what was your father's work? Speaker 2: My father worked for the postal system in Chicago [Illinois], but prior to that he was a teacher in Mississippi. Speaker 1: What did he teach? Speaker 2: He taught elementary school. Speaker 1: So, then he was educated, do you know where he went to school? Speaker 2: I don't know where he went to school, no. Speaker 1: Were other members of his family educated? Speaker 2: No, not really, not really. He had quite a few brothers and one sister. I think he had eight brothers and one sister. Speaker 1: Where did he fall in the birth order? Speaker 2: He was--he's the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the oldest. Speaker 1: And as the oldest, do you know what responsibility he had in the family? A lot of times they have to take care of--help take care of the rest of the kids. Speaker 2: Right, I don't, I don't think he had to do, like he had any monetary responsibilities or any responsibilities as far as you know taking care of the children other than maybe normal things, but no, I, I don't think so. Speaker 1: What did his parents do? Speaker 2: I think they were sharecroppers or-- Speaker 1: So, it's sharecroppers for, for them to have their first son go to college was a big deal. Speaker 2: And you know in those days it's very, it's kind of grayish. I don't know if he even went to college to be a teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because in those days you could teach black schools and not necessarily be with, have a degree so. So, I'm not even sure if he does or did get a degree so. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: But he did teach in schools, elementary schools. Speaker 1: And then upon moving to Chicago he joined the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]? Speaker 2: He moved to Chicago and that was what she did. When you moved to Chicago you become a civil worker, and he worked at the post office and that's what he did you know as long, you know until he died. Well, until he retired. Speaker 1: Well, that was a very good job. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: With good benefits and retirement and everything. Speaker 2: Yeah, he will tell you that too (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) What did--what were his different jobs in the post office? Speaker 2: I think he started out as a mail handler and he ended up as, as a foreman. He was pretty far up in--when he finally retired, so. Story_ID: 658863 Speaker 1: And did your parents move to Chicago [Illinois] as a married couple? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and like I said I think it was in the '40s [1940s], late '40s [1940s] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the '40s [1940s], and so were they the first of--well, your mother [Fannie Benson Walker] of course 'cause she's the only child, but were they the first--was, was your father [Woodrow Walker, Sr.] the first in the family to leave the South? Speaker 2: I don't know that. I know his brothers and his sister all moved to Chicago at some point. Maybe one brother stayed in Mississippi as I can recall, but I, I think most of his siblings moved to Chicago. Speaker 1: Do you have any knowledge of why they choose Chicago? 'Cause you're during the period of the Great Migration which they're a part of that. People choose a lot of different destinations, Chicago clearly was one of the popular ones but did they talk about why Chicago at all? Speaker 2: I think because it was north and you know the opportunities and, and most of their friends and other relatives were moving there also. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, when I think back on it, I, I can think of other relatives that have moved there also like some of their cousins, or my father's cousins and, so there are, there's other relatives that are there. So, I don't know if it was because of a job opportunity other than there were job opportunities there. But that was that. And when I say my mother was a--I said a housemaker but she was a homemaker. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: For, for us not a--she wasn't a housekeeper or-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for other people so, so she never worked. She always was at home with us, so. Story_ID: 658864 Speaker 1: Did they go back home to visit? Did they go back to visit their families? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I have you know kind of vague memories of going back. We would drive back to Mississippi to see my father's [Woodrow Walker, Sr.] parents. Also, at that time my mother's mother [Ellen Benson] had moved to Chicago [Illinois] too. So she was in Chicago at that point when they moved. But we would drive back. I remember as a kid getting in the car you know with the shoe boxes filled with food (laughter), and you'd drive for like two days or however long it would take to get to Mississippi. But, but really vague memories of that you know. I don't really have a lot of like clear memories of really being with my grandparents either, because I didn't see them very often growing up, but, but I remember you know I could remember what it looked like. It was like a little shack that they lived in and it was all on some. Speaker 1: Like stilts? Speaker 2: Like stilts or something and like chickens and things were running underneath. Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: And I think it might have had three rooms in it or something, and I remember my [paternal] grandmother [Bertha Walker] would have lots of canned food (laughter). Speaker 1: That she had canned herself? Speaker 2: Well, canned or bought canned foods also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, like I specifically like canned sausages, those-- Speaker 1: Oh, like those Vienna sausages (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Vienna sausages, I remember she had a huge can of 'em and I loved 'em. So I--you know that was like a clear memory (laughter). Story_ID: 658865 Speaker 1: You mentioned that your father [Woodrow Walker, Sr.] had told you stories about some of the challenges racially growing up in the South. What do you recall him telling you? Speaker 2: How young black men could be lynched for you know small things like looking at a white woman in a certain way, and or just stepping out of line and you know so I think he told us those stories to make sure we still stayed in line even in Chicago [Illinois]. And some of the stories, you know I can't think of anything specifically, but I could think of that they were kind of scary you know for a kid to hear. And but you know he would talk about how he would see you know the lynchings and guys hanging from trees some time and but in, in a--I don't remember in detail, but I think it was done to really make sure you know that my brothers and myself and my, you know the rest of my siblings you know just kind of stayed in line, stayed out of trouble and try not to get in positions like that where you can be hurt, so. Speaker 1: Having heard these stories when, when it came time for you to travel to the South, were you afraid? Speaker 2: Well, my last recogni- remembrance of going to the South I was so young, but as I got older and was traveling on my own to the South, I was--there was always this thing in my mind you--and I remember going to Atlanta [Georgia] as a young man and thinking oh, this is a big city, but it's still--I, I--something about it made me feel like oh, you're still in the South, though, you better be careful. You and even people treated me, you know maybe my--I was very sensitive about it but I felt like people treated me differently too because I was black being in Atlanta. So. Speaker 1: Even though that's the big city in the South. Speaker 2: Even though that is the big city in the South. But I, I, I don't think it was all sensitivity, I did feel some of it, so, you know when I was maybe twenty years old. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 658866 Speaker 1: Now, your father [Woodrow Walker, Sr.] came from a relatively large family, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell me about going back in his family? Speaker 2: I remember visiting some of his brothers, you know their families. Speaker 1: How ma- you said you there were-- Speaker 2: I think there were-- Speaker 1: --eight, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight brothers and one sister, and I remember as a kid that we would go visit them in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause they all lived in Chicago. Speaker 1: They all moved? Speaker 2: Well, most of the ones moved to Chicago, and, and he was close to certain ones and it was like a Sunday thing, we might go to one uncle's house and be with them that Sunday and then the following Sunday we'd go to our Uncle Quit [George Walker, Jr.] you know, who was named, who was the youngest because (laughter)--it's a funny story how he got his name. His name is George, but they call him Quit and I guess in those days when he was born the, the midwife told my grandmother [Bertha Walker] it's time for you to quit (laughter). So, so she named her son, nicknamed him Quit (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) I love the nicknames. Speaker 2: Uncle Quit, yes; Uncle L.C. [L.C. Walker]--I'm trying to remember all their names, but I still don't feel like I was very, very close to any of you know those relatives. It was like our family was pretty close. Speaker 1: Your nuclear family? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Even though many of them were there and it looks like many of 'em worked as, as city employees, but then you have Bernard [Bernard Walker] who was a college professor. What did he teach, do you know? Speaker 2: He teaches philosophy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he's in--that's my brother. That's my younger brother. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, this is your--okay, so-- Speaker 2: Bernard is my younger brother. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so then in terms of the--your, your father's siblings-- Speaker 2: In terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what did, what? Speaker 2: I think they were all civil workers also. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And most of 'em worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. I think they all worked for the post office and one worked for the rapid transit system [Chicago Rapid Transit Company], so. Story_ID: 658867 Speaker 1: You were born in Chicago [Illinois], correct? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: I want you to look back now and think of what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: One of 'em was moving to, to our house that I grew up in, you know where we moved to when I was, I think I was five or six, around the time we changed religions (laughter). Speaker 1: Um-hm, and where did you go? Where was that? Speaker 2: That was in Chicago on the South Side. Speaker 1: And were you living in a house before? Speaker 2: We were living in an apartment before. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there were--at that at that point there was, I think there was me and four other siblings. So, and I was very, I was really young but I shared, I think I shared rooms with my brother [Woodrow Walker, Jr.] at the time, but I remember moving to a house with a backyard, you know grass and you know a neighborhood. It just felt, you know I can remember that. Speaker 1: And what is the, your birth order among your siblings? Speaker 2: I am number six. Speaker 1: Of? Speaker 2: Out of eight. Speaker 1: Wow! Speaker 2: So, another large family. Speaker 1: So, your mother [Fannie Benson Walker] had a job (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or a num- or am I number seven out of nine? Speaker 1: She was taking care of all of you. Speaker 2: I know, she couldn't work. Speaker 1: She (laughter), right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had five sisters and two brothers. So, I was number seven out of nine, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and seven out of nine? Speaker 2: Is that right? That's right? Speaker 1: Five, six, seven. Speaker 2: Five, and yeah. Speaker 1: Maybe eight. Speaker 2: Eight. Speaker 1: Eight. Speaker 2: Five--okay, sorry. Speaker 1: So, they were already born? You're living in an apartment before you moved to this home on the South Side? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 658868 Speaker 1: And so let's go to that home. What are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember as a child in your home and your neighborhood? Speaker 2: I remember playing baseball with you know some of our neighbors, friends and you know, softball. Then there were, where we lived there were a lot of like vacant lots also that were kind of overgrown and we called 'em the forest or something like that. We'd go and play in those areas and then some areas where we lived were, was new development, like houses being built. I remember wandering around and going in some of these homes that were under construction, playing in those. We were pretty much free to you know run around the neighborhood 'cause it was safe. The neighborhood was very safe and we just needed to be home by the time the street lights came on. So, but you know from the time we would wake up in the summertime when we weren't in school, we were outside just playing, doing stuff. Speaker 1: And were you always with siblings? Were there other kids you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With siblings. Speaker 1: --playing with too? Speaker 2: With my siblings or other neighbors who were, who lived either next door or behind us. Speaker 1: And, and is this a black neighborhood? Speaker 2: It is, it was changing when we moved there. It was-- Speaker 1: Changing how? Speaker 2: It was changing from white to, to predominantly black. It was very mixed for a long time and by the time I was in high school, it had become predominantly black, but when we first moved there it, it was a changing, you know, city neighborhood. Speaker 1: So, was--what year about was this when you moved there? Speaker 2: Probably 1959, 1960 'cause I had to be--I was about five years old. Speaker 1: So, this is--well, in some parts of the country, the end of the '50s [1950s], moving into the '60s [1960s] this is when segregation has been just a little bit of an opening and people are able to move, legally able to move into other neighborhoods (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Right. Speaker 1: So, this is the case for your family? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: So, did the neighborhood, was it majority white when, when they moved in? Speaker 2: It was majority white. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And it was majority white, and blacks were moving in and the whites were fleeing to the suburbs. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, and that's what, that's what I meant. It started changing. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, by the time I was in high school, it was predominately black. Speaker 1: Right, right. Did the--what else changed as it became a black neighborhood? Did it remain a safe neighborhood? Did it-- Speaker 2: No, it didn't. I mean it's, it's while I was living there, it was pretty safe, but over a time now it is the hood now, it's, it's you know drugs, and gangs and it's probably not a very safe place to live, but, but then it felt like living in the suburbs to me when I was a kid. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, people kept up their properties well. You know it was, it, it didn't feel like you lived in a city. You felt like you lived in an area that was--you know you had, you had families that had moved in around the same time my family moved in, who were really trying to you know make a better life for their families. So, and I think as those children grew up, those people eventually moved away, and that's when it started really changing for-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the worse. Speaker 1: Where did you go to school? Speaker 2: I went to Kohn Elementary School [Alfred D. Kohn Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which is those days you only went from, you went from first grade and then I went to Lindblom High School [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy High School] on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] of Chicago both schools. Speaker 1: And so Kohn Elementary School which is on the South Side-- Story_ID: 658869 Speaker 1: Kohn Elementary School [Alfred D. Kohn Elementary School ] that you said was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], was that a predominately black school? Speaker 2: Not initially. Speaker 1: So, again, it's the same-- Speaker 2: Yes. As the neighborhood changed, the school changed and I remember being one of maybe two or three black kids in my class and I remember being teased also for being black and, but over time it did, it, it eventually became a, a predominately black school. Speaker 1: What, what--can you describe an experience of being teased for being black and how you reacted to that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, god I can remember a time when there were these two little bullies (laughter), would always call me--I don't remember the names, but some--the N word was always in it somewhere, and one day I decided I said, "I'm gonna get them," (laughter) get them and at the time I was in a--I had to--I was in an afterschool program doing something. I think it was an afterschool reading program that I was taking. And on my way to that class these two little kids came, two little boys came and they said what they wanted, you know one of the things that they always say, and I just went berserk (laughter) and I grabbed one of 'em and had him down on the ground. We were fighting and then you know he, they got up and ran away. I didn't hurt them or anything. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: I was third grade maybe, fourth grade? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, and I remember going to, going to my class after school, being called to the principal's office and I got to the principal's office and my parents [Fannie Benson Walker and Woodrow Walker, Sr.] and one of the two kids--they weren't siblings--but only of their parents showed up and I go down to the office and there's my mom and you know one of their parents and they were like so upset, their parents were that, you know, that I had it out with you know these kids, and I'm sure my mother knew what was going on, she--because she remained quiet about the whole thing and, so told the story to the principal and, and what happened and the principal you know, it's like, "Well, there's no reason to suspend you because you were just protecting yourself," you know so, but you know the parent felt really, you know, secure about coming in and you know, "We're gonna get this boy. We're gonna have him expelled, thrown out of the school," so but, that, that was one experience that I can remember and you know you'd have little ones here and there. Speaker 1: But that was a victory in that the principal stood up for you. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Was this a black principal? Speaker 2: No, no. And I was prepared for the principal to stand up for the kids, but-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --it didn't turn out that way, so. Story_ID: 658870 Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you? Speaker 2: Not real good (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I, I repeated the fifth grade, so but (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And why was that, you weren't paying attention? Speaker 2: I think I wasn't, up to that point I was a good student and I think you know as a kid you start, at that age, you start going through stuff I believe. You know and I don't think it was because I didn't, I couldn't learn, and I think it was just because I wasn't paying attention and, and I remember my teacher thought that I had some sort of like disability and had me seeing like a doctor about it, actually. And a series of doctors for like for you know attention--you know and also for and so she also thought maybe I couldn't see, you know, well and so I needed glasses. So, I was going you know getting all these exams. Speaker 1: 'Cause she was trying-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was getting these exams and you know I had 20/20 vision, so that was fine and you know the other doctor had me like identifying like little ink blots and pictures and things to make sure that you know my mind was fine and, and I passed all those exams and you know went back to class and you know looked nothing, you know, I guess wrong with me (laughter), but I wound up repeating that, that grade. Speaker 1: So, was there some kind of internal shift after you go back to repeat it that set you on a different course? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think at that, you know at that age, I, I think that was--how old are you in fifth grade, you were like. Speaker 1: Nine or ten? Speaker 2: Nine or ten or something, and I think that's when I started to, to realize that I was a little different you know because I, you know I think I had started to realize I was gay at that point, so. Speaker 1: That makes sense, that a lot of kids, figure it--start-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --having a sense of their sexuality by then. Speaker 2: And that's where you know, where my, you know, lack of attention started coming from, feeling a little different and acting out possibly. I mean but I wasn't one of those kids that really was like, you know, acted out and was getting trouble all the time, but, but enough to you know make me repeat the fifth grade. Speaker 1: Were--as, as you were figuring this out internally, were, were you teased at all? Did, did anyone have a sense that, that might be part of your identity? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: So, it's really inside? Speaker 2: Yeah, nobody ever teased me about it so. I don't recall that, it was more being a, you know, black in this white area-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --that I got teased for. Story_ID: 658871 Speaker 1: When did you develop an interest in hair? Speaker 2: Oh, god I always had it. Speaker 1: Yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What, what are your early memories of your interest? Speaker 2: Just remembering looking at different hair textures on people and especially being in a school where it was this diversity. You know there was all kinds of hair and it was just kind of, it was so interesting to me. And I remember the first time I decided to do hair was, you know, messing with my mother's [Fannie Benson Walker] wigs 'cause she used to wear these wiglets, and I think I was probably in seventh or eighth grade at that, at that point when I did that, and so when she realized that I had this talent to do hair, you know throughout high school [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I was doing her wiglets for Sunday church (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what is a wiglet, what's that? Speaker 2: That's what they called them back then, but it was just a hairpiece and it was probably shaped either in a circle, the base was shaped in a circle or an oblong and you would put it on top of your head, you know. It was like you pull all your hair back and you attach this hairpiece you know this bun and it would give you a lot of height and sometimes I would you know, I would have fun with my mother and just put two and three pieces together. You know, so she might have one in the front, on the top and one in the back (laughter), so. Speaker 1: She was styling (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, but so it was interesting because she didn't want me to become a hairstylist either, you know. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: 'Cause she didn't think that it was the sort of profession that black men could make money or a really good living doing. And--but I just persisted that that's what I wanted to do so I kept doing it. Story_ID: 658872 Speaker 1: Now, you went to Lindblom High School [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], isn't that a school you have to test into? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, tell me about that? Speaker 2: When I was in eighth grade--'cause that was the time you had to-- Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that's when you graduated from grammar school back then, now it's middle school, I think. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Lindblom was one of the better, probably the best public high school you could go to on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and it was called Lindblom Tech and you had to do an entrance exam in order to, to, to be accepted. So, it wasn't just a public school that anyone could go to just because they lived in that neighborhood. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It was, it was a little special school. So, so I did, I took the entrance exam and I was able to get in but I think I was a little over my head when I got there 'cause it was really hard for me, really hard. Speaker 1: What was hard about it? Speaker 2: Well, I think part of it was I wasn't really paying attention well, you know. I was really, it was still dealing with who I was at that time and so, I didn't stay on top of things the way that I probably should have, like you're taking algebra and trigonometry, geometry you know (laughter), biology, chemistry, these are all you know, things that you had to take and. Speaker 1: When school gets much harder from junior high or grammar or whatever to high school. Speaker 2: Right, right, but I could have gone to a high school that was in my district where I didn't, wouldn't have to taking all of those types of classes. Those were mandatory. So and you know it, I, I did well for the first couple of years and then I just kind of went downhill from there. So, I never finished, I never finished my senior year. Story_ID: 658873 Speaker 1: When you left, why, what was the occasion for leaving [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I felt an urgency to become a hairdresser faster for some reason. So, I left and I, I thought okay, I'm not doing good here, you know let me just see what else I can do. And I, entered a hairstyling competition for Pivot Point beauty school [Pivot Point International], which my sister-in-law saw it, it was an ad in the newspaper that said, "We're looking for students and we have an amateur competition and part of the winnings is to win your tuition." And so I went and there were, you know, maybe twenty other people competing at the time and there were like I think like maybe three winners and I was one of them. And I don't if you, you probably know Ernest Collins. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: He was one of those people at that competition too, and-- Speaker 1: He was one of the winners? Speaker 2: He was one of the winners. It was him, myself and one other person. I don't remember who the other person was. Speaker 1: And was the other person male? Do you remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so. I don't remember, but I don't think so. Speaker 1: So, what is your mother [Fannie Benson Walker] saying at this point? Now, you are not doing well in high school, you're, you're now pivoting to going to beauty school, and she's worried about you being able to be successful as a man in this industry. Are you getting any pushback? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, really tried to keep me from doing it and you know and especially after entering that competition, knowing that okay, I can do this. It just seemed to, you know, make it even, you know, easier for me to do. But I was getting pushback from her; also from the counselor at the school, and I was--at point I was even going you know just to be at Pivot Point on the weekends, just so I could be in the environment. Speaker 1: So, now Pivot Point, give me a sense of this beauty school in relation to others. Is it, is it popular? Is it well respected in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Pivot Point is really well respected internationally. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they have schools all over the world. Speaker 1: And at that point, was it as well? Speaker 2: And at that point, it was. Now, they've closed their school in Chicago. That recently closed like in the last year, but it was probably the best beauty school you can go to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Chicago, I think they had two schools and one was in the western suburbs and one was in the city. I went to the one in the city. Speaker 1: And so your, your winning this competition, you and the other two people gives you a free scholarship? Speaker 2: It pays for, I think it was three quarters of my tuition, it didn't pay for, for all of it. So, to make up for the remainder of it I worked at the school part time to, to pay for my tuition. So. Speaker 1: And working at the school constituted wor- what? Speaker 2: Working in the administrative offices (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, not doing hair-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --but doing administrative support work? Speaker 2: Just--yeah, like assisting the teachers or assisting the administration and so forth. Story_ID: 658874 Speaker 1: Leading up to Pivot Point [Pivot Point International] you'd been doing your mother's [Fannie Benson Walker] wiglets, what other hairstyling are you doing? Speaker 2: Friends, family. In high school [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] I had like a small list of clients that I would do you know on the weekends. Speaker 1: And were you charging them? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you had a little business going? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was making a little (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And were--did you come to them, did they come to you, how did it work? Speaker 2: I would go to their homes. Speaker 1: What kinds of styles were you doing then? Speaker 2: God, back in those days it was a style called the china doll, where it was like a bowl cut basically, had bangs and you know--I was doing that on everybody, and then what they called layered looks too, like that little feathery layer look (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what years are we talking about? Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], '75 [1975] to '70 [1970]--no, it was before that, it was like '70 [1970], around '70 [1970] to '74 [1974], and '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: So, this is like the snatch back and all that stuff, was it that, those layers that-- Speaker 2: Well, once I got into school I started learning how to do that snatch back that Dorothy Hamill cut, all those kinds of cuts. Speaker 1: Farrah Fawcett and all that? Speaker 2: Farrah Fawcett and-- Speaker 1: But so you before going to school you are cutting people's hair, you're doing the whole thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, before going to Pivot Point. Speaker 1: You taught yourself-- Speaker 2: Pretty much. Speaker 1: --leading up to it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And people trusted you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 658875 Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, then you go to school, what is the curricum- curriculum like at Pivot Point [Pivot Point International]? Speaker 1: Pivot Point is, there's a minimum, I think it's two thousand hours that you have to complete. It's, it's--Chicago [Illinois] has one of the longer programs than other--or Illinois has one of the longer programs than other states. So, it's a little longer than most schools and lot of it is maybe five hundred hours is in the classroom, just learning the technical parts, reading and doing those sort of exams, and I think maybe the remainder hours are spent working in, on the salon floor. The school had a-- Speaker 2: Had its own, has its own salon. Speaker 1: --a practical salon floor that you would work on, and people would come in and you would practice on their hair. Speaker 2: And who are the teachers? Are, are the instructors active stylists, or they're primarily teaching at the school? Who, who makes up the teacher body? Speaker 1: Well, the teachers have to be certified to be teachers, so they're not just regular cosmetologists, they're, they're trained to be teachers. So, there are teachers and then there are the administration and then there are the students, and the students are the ones who are doing the work on the floors with, with the, the patrons who would pay to come in. They paid a minimal fee-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to get their hair done and they'd come in and we'd practice on them. Speaker 2: Now, you're studying hair, but do you have to study other aspects of cosmetology as well? Speaker 1: You studied you know skin, and scalp, you know, bone structure and it's, it's probably more stuff than you need to learn, you know but yeah, it's not just hairstyling you learn especially you know in those days. I don't know how--I know it's not as in depth anymore as it used to be, but in those days, you had a textbook like that (gesture), and you had to, you know there was a lot of technical and physiology, physical things that you had to learn as well. Speaker 2: And what about hair texture--and because there's such a vast array of hair textures if you go across all ethnicities, but even within black hair there's so many. What is, what is Pivot Point teaching, like what kind of hair are they teaching you to do? Speaker 1: Predominately Caucasian hair. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's, you know that's really what they were teaching me to do, but I had a little bit of experience doing my family's hair, so I was able to do you know both types of hair. And periodically they, Pivot Point might bring in like a special teacher to teach a relaxer class. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Like they--I remember they brought in Olive Benson [HistoryMaker Olive Lee Benson], who was from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --was she from Boston [Massachusetts], I believe or Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but she's very well known, yeah. Speaker 1: Somewhere on the East Coast. Speaker 2: Very well known, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, well know hairdresser during the time and she, and I remember--that school I learned to do relaxers from. She did a special class and I was, it wasn't a very popular class 'cause you know most of the other students weren't interested in it, but I remember it was me and maybe two other black students who went to that class and that's where I learned relaxers from. Speaker 2: Which is very technical (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and she was, I mean well you know she's a great, smart, great hairstylist. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 658876 Speaker 1: While at Pivot Point [Pivot Point International] you're learning primarily about doing Caucasian hair, which is primarily from straight to wavy, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: So, you're learning permanents? The permanent wave, is that the kind-- Speaker 2: Permanent waves. Speaker 1: What other kinds of things? Speaker 2: Permanent waves, hair color, hair cutting; hair cutting was great because you know you apply that to any type of hair texture, even if you were just working on Caucasian models, you know the theory behind hair cutting was important, so that was really great for me. Those, you know, those types--oh, you know setting hair, you know styling hair, long hair. It was, I mean there were various things that we needed to learn before graduating. Speaker 1: And in terms of product usage, so this is you're, you're going there, what year did you graduate? Speaker 2: From Pivot Point? In I think '76 [1976], was it '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Or '76 [1976] or '77 [1977], something like that? Speaker 2: Somewhere around there, yeah. Speaker 1: So, at that point there are more hair products on the market than maybe had been ten years prior, but there's still a relatively small breadth of hair products in terms of what you use for setting and even shampoo and conditioners. It was, it was much smaller than it is today, but what kind of products are you learning to use? Speaker 2: You mean on all kinds of hair, or? Speaker 1: Well, just yeah, what you're learning at Pivot Point they--because, you know what is the range of products that you're getting to experiment with? Speaker 2: Usually it was permanent waves, and we would have some relaxers that we would use. Lots of color, lots of different setting lotions and mousses and foams and things like that, but mainly as far as chemical work, it was hair color, permanent waves and you know the relax- the few relaxers that we did in school. Speaker 1: And how long were you in that program? The two thousand hours at, means about how much time? Speaker 2: It took me a couple of years I think to do that. Speaker 1: Whereas, now often it's truncated into about a year, isn't it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 658877 Speaker 1: And when you left there did you go immediately to I. Magnin [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I went as an assistant to Rudy Hooker [ph.] at I. Magnin. Speaker 1: How did that job come to be? Speaker 2: I--there's a hairstylist in Chicago [Illinois] named [HistoryMaker] Leigh Jones-- Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) who's still in Chicago. He and Rudy were friends and, and then I had another friend that I was in school with--oh, god why can't I think of his name right now? He was a friend of Rudy's who introduced us and but anyway we would, I would go down with this friend to Leigh Jones' while I was in school and just sit and watch Leigh work. And I'd just sit in his--'cause we had this private room in his salon, he was really, you know, he was fancy, he was a fancy hairstylist (laughter). And he worked in this beautiful salon right off of Oak Street and you know, here this is, this black man with this, he's got this private room in this white salon where he's doing all his clients and, so I would go and I would just watch how he worked you know, and I would just absorb from him and, and during all that time I would stay friends with him and Rudy and so, so by the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was very generous to let you come and watch. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he really was. He was very generous at that time, but then over--in the future when I became Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] hairstylist, he wasn't very happy about that, 'cause-- Speaker 1: Well, he had done her hair too. Speaker 2: He had done her hair at one point also. So, there was like a rough--I shouldn't say a small rough period, it was a long rough period in our relationship until recently. I ran into him a couple of years ago and we talked and he's like you know, "I respect you, I always have," and you know so we're cool now (laughter). Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: But there was a little, you know there was a little rough period there. Speaker 1: Well, I mean part of the story--we're skipping in time, but that's okay, we'll go back, but what I've read about this was that he was asked to come and help do, get Oprah ready to do her hair for the show, but it has been written that he was not paid for that role. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know that. Speaker 1: And so then he-- Speaker 2: I don't believe that if that's-- Speaker 1: He's quoted as saying that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And thought he should have the role. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I don't--I find that really hard to believe 'cause Oprah pays for everything. She doesn't even like people giving her stuff and so I, I don't--that's, this is the first time I've ever heard that. I, I think it was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was think it was before she was in--this is the very, very beginning based upon what I read. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But in any case. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, he did her hair for a short period and I don't know what happened. There was a--either she didn't like what he was doing, or there was a fallout, I don't know. You know I was never privy to that, so I can't really say, but she stopped using him and she was just started looking for other people. But that was for a very short period too. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Because I met Oprah shortly after she moved to Chicago and she was still doing a local talk show. Speaker 1: Right, so to the point, just to be clear, what was stated was not that she wasn't paying him, it was when she first moved for the other show, for the new show that she came to Chicago for, that whatever that relationship was-- Speaker 2: But he was in Chicago. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was doing her for-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --for 'A.M. Chicago' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, correct. Speaker 2: --which was the local show. Speaker 1: Right, correct. Speaker 2: He--by the time she was doing the national show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], I was pretty much doing it all the time, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly. Story_ID: 658878 Speaker 1: Let's go back to--so it was through Leigh [HistoryMaker Leigh Jones] and you--and the other friend--you met Rudy Hooker [ph.], correct? And became his assistant. Okay, so for context, to come out of beauty school and to land a job at I. Magnin [Chicago, Illinois] is a big deal. I. Magnin was one of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's like-- Speaker 1: --the preeminent-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know exclusive department stores in the country. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Often, it takes a moment before getting to a job like that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: So, you go into this environment, what's it like working at I. Magnin? Speaker 2: Well, Rudy took me in as his assistant and so I was working with him. I was doing all his blow dries. I was doing all of his relaxers, you know whatever he needed me to do and he also had a private room at the I. Magnin salon. Speaker 1: The private room. Speaker 2: So, I don't know if black hairstylists were, you know very fancy in those days, or they just wanted to separate us from the rest of the salon, so but he had his own private room and you know he and I worked in there together and then-- Speaker 1: And you said you did relaxers, so that means some of the clientele was black? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, Rudy's clientele was all black. Speaker 1: All black at I. Magnin, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At I. Magnin his clientele was pretty--well, I shouldn't say all black, it was probably 80 percent black, but I would do all of his relaxers and all of his blow dries, and in those days, that was like the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] where everybody had a you know bouncing and behaving blow dries. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: And so, I would blow dry the hair before he would style it, so. And Leigh on the other hand, Leigh's clientele was extremely mixed. He probably did maybe 30, 40 percent African American clientele, so. Speaker 1: So, then you, so then you're going from Pivot Point [Pivot Point International] where you're primarily learning about doing Caucasian hair, you've obviously done black hair because you did that from your early, from high school [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Is there a learning curve when you're doing this prep work for all black clients, 'cause they're many hair textures within the realm of black clientele? Speaker 2: Right. Well I--that came with experience I guess. It's just you know working with different textures of hair. You've learned to (clears throat) excuse me--you learn to treat those textures you know appropriately, but you know back in those days it was mostly relaxed hair. Speaker 1: Right, sure. Speaker 2: You know so, unless you know you had somebody who just wanted their hair--who had naturally straight hair or curly hair that didn't necessary need a relaxer and you could just blow it out straight. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, but for the most part most people had a relaxer, most African American clients that we worked on were relaxed, and-- Speaker 1: And were you applying the relaxers? Speaker 2: I was licensed at that point. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I was applying the relaxers, I was doing, you know all the blow dries like I said, and I did that for about six months with Rudy, and he was offered a job at Saks Fifth Avenue and he decided to take it and wanted me to go with him to Saks as his assistant, but the I. Magnin Salon wanted me to stay, so they asked me if I would stay, they would give me my chair, my own chair as a stylist, and not as an assistant. So, that's where it started. Speaker 1: So, you stayed. Speaker 2: I stayed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After six months-- Speaker 2: After six months. Speaker 1: --you got your chair. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's great. Story_ID: 658879 Speaker 1: Now, who are your clients? Who, who are the black women who are coming to I. Magnin [Chicago, Illinois] to get their hair done? Speaker 2: They were professional women. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Quite a few professional women. And I had a large clientele from IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] 'cause that was like, at that time that was you know where a lot of professional black women worked, and then I had a lot of you know housewives also who married to professional men, who could afford to, you know, come to I. Magnin 'cause prices were not-- Speaker 1: Yeah, what were the prices like there? Speaker 2: Oh, god maybe fifty dollars for a relaxer, seventy-five for a haircut maybe. You know we're talking about you know, in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] well that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's expensive. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was definitely more than-- Speaker 1: And Chicago [Illinois] has, had for a long time, a pretty thriving black middle and upper middle class, so this is whose coming? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, doctors, lawyers, people in business. You know we had, you know I would do clients that owned Johnson's Products [sic. Johnson Products Company], you know. Pamela Johnson was one of my clients, you know, you know noted African American people were the type of clientele that I would do. And so it was, it was a certain type of clientele and, and that's pretty much how I met Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]. Story_ID: 658880 Speaker 1: You were saying that you met Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] throu- by working at I. Magnin [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I, yes. Speaker 1: How did that happen? Speaker 2: That was--I'll tell you the full story. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: I was watching--I would watch Oprah every morning before going to I. Magnin. Speaker 1: This is on 'A.M. Chicago'? Speaker 2: When she was on, working on 'A.M. Chicago.' And I had to start at ten o'clock and I would always be slightly late 'cause I wanted to see her show. That ended at ten o'clock, so I always missed the latter part of it, and I always thought, you know her hair looked great some days and some days it didn't. And I later found out the days it looked great was when Leigh [HistoryMaker Leigh Jones] was doing it. And, and then whatever was going on between her and Leigh, she was obviously looking for somebody else and she was trying other hairdressers out, and so some days her hair just wasn't you know, it, it didn't look like it had been done professionally at all. So, I decided, you know, I'm gonna send her some flowers and--oh, god I'm, I'm getting confused here 'cause at this point, I think I had my salon and a girl at I. Magnin introduced us. I'm trying to--let me think back on the dates here. Speaker 1: Well, so was it in '80 [1980] that you started your salon? Speaker 2: God, I'm so bad with, you know, dates (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think so, I think--yeah that's what I have. Speaker 2: Okay, no I think I had a salon when I met Oprah. I think I did have my salon when I met Oprah, but when I was at I. Magnin there was a salesperson there that said, "I know Andre [HistoryMaker Andre Walker] when--," okay, I'll tell you the story now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I sent her flowers and I said, "I'm dying to get my hands in your hair," and this is after I had left I. Magnin and had a salon, first salon [Andre Walker Salon, Chicago, Illinois]. And Oprah responded right away, and the reason she responded was because there were different people that when she would ask, "Who does--," she asked, "Who does your hair?" She'd see somebody that she thought had great hair, she said, "Who does your hair?" She said my name kept coming up, and Pam [ph.] the woman that worked at I. Magnin at the time was dressing her and Pam had been telling her that she needed to see me to get her hair done. And so, I guess when I sent her the flowers and then the name she had been--my name had been coming up with all these people. She decided well you know I need to give this guy a call. So and that's--her publicist called me, Alice McGee at the time and said, "Can you come in tomorrow and do Oprah's hair, and we wanna--she wants to try you out?" And I went in that next morning did her hair before her show and then that day they said, "Can you come back tomorrow?" And the next day, "Can you come back?" So, then I kept getting invited back, so from that point on, I was the only, you know there--she wasn't trying other people. She was only using me at that point, so. Speaker 1: And the show was then at what time? What time did you have to get there for 'A.M. Chicago' (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The show was live. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: At nine [o'clock], so it was from--I think it was an hour show at that time. I'm pretty sure it was an hour show, from nine to ten. Speaker 1: So, you were there at seven? Speaker 2: I was there around 7:00, 6:30 or 7:00 you know getting her ready. Speaker 1: And did you stay through the completion of the show? Speaker 2: No, at that point I didn't. In those days, I needed to get back to the salon, so I would go in do her hair, make sure she was fine on set and then I would leave and go and go to the salon and work. Story_ID: 658881 Speaker 1: And where was your salon that you had started? Speaker 2: That salon was on Chicago Avenue which I believe is a parking lot now (laughter). Speaker 1: Uh-oh (laughter). Speaker 2: But it was like Chicago and Dearborn [Street], Chicago and State [Street], that area. Speaker 1: And, so you were at I. Magnin [Chicago, Illinois] for about how long? Speaker 2: Oh, god. Speaker 1: Several years, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was definitely several years. Speaker 1: What happened to make you say that time to go, I wanna start my own salon? Speaker 2: Well, that's what all hairdressers do you know (laughter). You just think, okay, it's time to you know do my own thing and that's when I had a, a partner. Her name was Cheryl Jackson [ph.] at the time and a hairdresser friend and so she and I had this big idea, let's go into business together and-- Speaker 1: But it was named for you, right? The salon (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, I'm--let me backtrack, we, the first salon was called Headlines [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was with Cheryl Jackson (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cheryl Jackson, okay. Speaker 2: And that lasted for maybe a year to two years, possibly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We couldn't afford to keep it going together and then we decided to, to just kind of split up and, and go off, but I still wanted to have my own salon, and so, in order to prepare for, to have my own salon, I worked with Rahni Flowers [HistoryMaker Michael "Rahni" Flowers] who has Van Cleef [Van Cleef Hair Studio] in Chicago [Illinois], and I worked with him for less than a year I think while I was preparing the space on Chicago Avenue, Chicago and Dearborn which was Andre Walker Salon [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 658882 Speaker 1: And so you- you're at Andre Walker Salon [Chicago, Illinois] when you're going in the morning to Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] for 'A.M. Chicago' and then--or, was it when you were there or were you at Headlines [ph.]? Speaker 2: I was at Headlines. So, so I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so it was right away after you left I. Magnin [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And so, talk about the balance of going to do Oprah, and then building your salon and your clientele there? Speaker 2: Well, it was hard to have a balance because when Oprah ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] became a national syndicated show, we were doing live shows and also taped shows, so my time was--she needed, demanded more of my time to be at the show. So, I was working the shows with her until maybe noon or sometimes a little later, and then I would go into the salon after that. And over time, my clients were not very happy with that because a lot of times I would have to cancel their appointments if I'm still at the studio working with Oprah, and then I just kind of lost control of the salon over time because I was hardly over there and my sister who has a--my sister Pam [Pamela Walker] who has a, a cosmetology license, she was pretty much running the salon while I was gone, but I think I may have had that salon for three years before I decided to close it and then just pretty much work with Oprah and, and I went on to work at, I think the Marianne Strokirk Salon [Chicago, Illinois] part time. So, I would pretty much--most of my time was spent working with Oprah on the show and traveling with her in the day time or traveling with her on the weekends and working on the show in the day time, and then the Marianne Strokirk Salon gave me a place to do some of the clients that I still had who weren't really that pissed at me, that wanted to continue to come to me, so. So, at that point is when I decided, I can't have a salon and you know and-- Speaker 1: And it wasn't something you could kind of turn over to your sister? Speaker 2: No, and I needed really to be there to do the hair for the, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 2: --for the clients, you know in order for the salon to make money, so. So, I decided I should just, you know, have Oprah as my main job. And if I can maintain a few clients in a salon I'll do that. And eventually, I couldn't do that anymore, so I stopped doing that and just became full time. Speaker 1: Even, even as Oprah is becoming, you know like blossoming into this international sensation, was it hard for you to step away from your salon which is part of your dream to, to ultimately not have the salon and just work with, with her? Speaker 2: Not--I mean it was, it was a little hard, but it really wasn't extremely because I was enjoying what I was doing working with Oprah and you know the travel and you know the experiences and all of that you know for me at twenty-eight to thirty years old was super exciting, and so, no it wasn't you know, it wasn't that difficult, but it, it was. If I could have held onto it I would have wanted to, but it just, I realized it just wasn't possible. Story_ID: 658883 Speaker 1: So, let's talk about the early days of working with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]. You know we--I, I remember her from being in Baltimore [Maryland] and she was on a show called 'People Are Talking' there and (laughter) and Baltimore wasn't very kind to her actually. So, it was probably a great thing that she moved to Chicago [Illinois], but people used to--in the press--beat her up all the time about her hair. What was this hairstyle, what's that hairstyle? As you pointed out, it was uneven at, before you came on board when Leigh [HistoryMaker Leigh Jones] was doing it and then others. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did you--what did you do to establish consistency? Speaker 2: I think I probably was consistent in a lot of areas, not just in hairstyling. I think part of it was being there, being on time every day. I don't think I ever was, ever missed a day. I don't think I ever, I think for a funeral or something maybe, but I don't think I was ever sick. I don't think so. And so that kind of consistency--I knew when to step back when I needed to step back also you know. As a lot of my peers (laughter), you know want to be in the front and be noticed a lot so, but I knew, I know how to do that. I know how, I knew how to step back and know how to you know--where, you know, be quiet and where to step in, so but I was also good as a hairstylist on the other hand too, so you know and I learned how to work with Oprah also. You know I learned how to be around her. So, I think part of that all of, you know, all of that is what made me become more attractive to her, and she used to say things like, "Boy, I could take you anywhere. I can take you to the White House [Washington, D.C.], I can take you to South Africa," you know (laughter). So, she would say things like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which means a lot. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, so, I think all of that accounts for you know being consistent and being you know why I was good as a hairstylist for her. Speaker 1: And as she is building her career and as you describe going from taping live TV to tape shows, just in terms of the artistry, are you changing her hair style for every show in the same way as the wardrobe is changing and makeup is changing in some ways so that there, there's a difference from show to show, are you doing that? Speaker 2: Sometimes, sometimes we would, depending on what the show was, the show topic but there were periods where she had a certain style, and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --we would keep that style and then maybe let it grow out and change it up, but that was in the beginning, but then as time went on she was doing so many other things, that we needed to change up looks for her. Like if she was doing a cover shoot for a magazine in between shows, I might put a wig on her to give her a different look, or I might pull her hair back to give her something just different, but, but for the show we tried to keep it as--I don't want to say normal, but as everyday as we could without being too, too extremely fashionable. Unless-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) we were doing a show that you know, that would call for it. Story_ID: 658884 Speaker 1: That's a good point. Let's talk about that a bit because part of Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] appeal, even as, you know, she's a black woman, talk show host on TV which in and of itself is unique. But part of her appeal was connecting to every woman, you know kind of beyond race. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And yet, she's a black woman and she has black woman's hair. So, what were you doing to establish every day, every woman sensibility about her hair? Speaker 2: Well, I was trying to keep, even though keeping her somewhat normal, not super fashionable but, keep her up with trend also, keeping her current. Trying to keep her in current styles. So, we would change styles. I mean you can go back over the years and you can see you know, I don't know how many different hairstyles we did. Because I think people were looking at her too as inspiration too. People comment on her hair a lot. People would--you know, there were points where there were even Oprah wigs you know because people liked-- Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: --the look, you know so I saw on, you know in stores, the Oprah look or the Oprah wig. So, people would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you all didn't make those? Speaker 2: No, no we didn't do that. There were wig companies that would, you know, they would name their wigs that so, or if they would name a hairstyle the Oprah style or whatever, but I realized that people were looking at her, so I tried to make sure that she was at the best that she could look you know and you know and if she was inspiration for somebody that was great also. Speaker 1: So, when, when she would have a weave, would you actually put it in or have it put in? Speaker 2: No, we'd have it put in. There were a couple of different people that would do her weaves, Ellin LaVar was one of them (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 2: Of them, Debra Brown is another person. Ellin was in New York [New York]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Debra's in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. So, we--different people would do the weaves. Speaker 1: And would you, art direct it, so you're deciding what the color and texture and all of this? Speaker 2: I would choose the hair, the color and we'd have a conversation about you know how it should go in, what look we're trying to do. And so--and one of the reasons we would do the weaves were for a different look but also as a protective hairstyle also. Because I was doing Oprah's hair sometimes three times a day and you know if you have a relaxer and you're using curling irons and flat irons on relaxed hair you know more than once a day, it can be a problem. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: So, there are times when you've seen Oprah go from here (gesture) to really short hair and that was one of the reasons why, because we were doing it so often and so the weaves and the wigs became you know really important to use over time with her, because she was doing different things and so many things within a day. Speaker 1: And when it comes to wigs, because I know a lot of hairstylists will look far and wide for the right wig, but then also the wig becomes something that you style and cut into its own look. Is this something that you would do? Speaker 2: Sure, absolutely. We would have--all her wigs were custom made. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's a guy named Peter Owen and she met him when she was working on 'The Color Purple' I believe and he did all the wigs for 'The Color Purple' and so he was a fantastic wigmaker. You know he could make the texture look exactly like your own. So, that was one of the things we tried to do is to make sure that it didn't look like a wig. It looked like it was her hair. So, Peter would make all the different wigs, I would cut them and I would style them every day, when or whenever we used them. So, they were all human hair wigs. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, designed to look like Oprah's hair. Speaker 1: And do you, over the time that you were working with Oprah, do you have an assistant, or is it just you? Speaker 2: Just me. Speaker 1: Just you? Speaker 2: Just me. Speaker 1: The whole time? Speaker 2: Always. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Very rare did I have an assistant unless we were doing a shoot that I absolutely could not do alone. I remember doing a cover shoot where we did five (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And when you say cover shoot is for the magazine? Speaker 2: For O Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine]. Speaker 1: For O Magazine? Speaker 2: This particular time I'm talking about we did, you might remember the cover, it was a couple of years ago, a few--more than a couple of years, maybe three, four years ago and it was a fold out and it had like four different looks of Oprah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And then subscribers got a different magazine than the news stand got, so we had to do live five different looks you know in this one day of shooting, so when, when I would do things like that, I absolutely needed an assistant, but for the most part, it was always just me. Speaker 1: And in terms of the wig maintenance, is that something you also had to handle? Speaker 2: Yeah, I maintained. Speaker 1: So, everything, you were in charge of everything with Oprah's hair (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. As far as her hair is concerned, yes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Everything. Story_ID: 658885 Speaker 1: Can you talk about travel? Where are some of the places that you've gone? Speaker 2: I loved India, that's why I'm saying that first 'cause it's such an experience. India, Africa, South Africa, many different islands, Caribbean islands, Mexico--pretty much all over the world, except for like parts of Asia, like China and Japan places like that, but I mean we've been everywhere, Australia, we've been to the White House [Washington, D.C.], we've been to George Lucas' studios in you know Northern California, I mean you name it. Speaker 1: And when you say the White House, how many administrations did you visit? Speaker 2: The Bush [President George Walker Bush] and the Obamas [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. Speaker 1: Okay, not Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]? Speaker 2: I don't know if I've ever gone to the White House with her with Clinton, but I've gone with her for meetings with Clinton to--on other things. Speaker 1: Other things, um-hm. Speaker 2: I don't recall being at the White House for the Clintons. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 658886 Speaker 1: In terms of the hairstyles again, so when Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] at different points along the way has gotten very much involved in working out, you know that's one of the biggest challenges for women with hair, especially black women with hair. So, what kind of styles are you making for her when she's in work out mode? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a tough one, because she was serious about working out and she was serious about having her own hair bouncing and behaving, and we would have a little battle every now and then, but she would always win of course. 'Cause she wanted to wear hair you know just flowing and moving, but me as a hairstylist knows that when you work out that often you have to shampoo because you perspire all of that salt and, from your body begins to eat away at your hair. So, that was one of the times where she went from here, (gesture) long beautiful hair, to hair that eventually became maybe two inches long, so and I think from that she learned, okay, we have to, if I'm gonna work out, I'm gonna do a protective style, maybe put my hair up in--if I'm gonna work out on the level that I'm working out-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I'll do a protective style. Speaker 1: Well, because to, for your hair to burn off, split ends, whatever the things are that happen because of having to heat it so much. Speaker 2: Doing it so often. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And on top of that you're, you're putting heat on hair that has perspiration in it also from salt. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And you're just drying it even more. So, it's like you're just frying the hair. So, there was one, that was one experience that I think she learned from. She doesn't listen to me, but she learned from it. Then we went to doing more protective styles and she would work out regularly but there were times when she would work out, I mean really like super workouts where she'd do it like two times a day and, and that was one of those times. And so when she would go through those period that's when we would do either braids, 'cause there are times when we've done individual braids on her or she'll do a protective style and we do wigs and--or extensions. Story_ID: 658887 Speaker 1: What kind, if any, pushback did she, the show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] receive when she changed up her hairstyles? For example, braids is a very ethnic hairstyle. It makes sense as a protective hairstyle, but also you know in the larger world, it is immediately identified as black. Was there push back ever for these kinds of styles? Speaker 2: Of course, people you know have had their comments about it, you know their opinions and so forth, but in the long run I think it made those types of styles that people considered ethic, or you know whatever you want to call it more and more accepted. Now, people would see Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], this successful black woman wearing her natural hair or her braids or her Afro-centric look or whatever, and it became accepted and you know even in the workplace, 'cause you know were times when black women couldn't wear their natural hair, you know. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Or couldn't get a job because they had natural hair. So, I think it kind of desensitized what you're supposed, what black women are supposed to look like by--and Oprah helped do that. I really believe she helped do that by doing some of those natural looks. Story_ID: 658888 Speaker 1: And then there were occasions when she would talk about hair on the show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']. Were, were you involved at all in, in that content? Speaker 2: Some of the shows I would be involved in as far as doing a makeover, or, or I might consult on something. [HistoryMaker] Dianne Hudson and I became really close friends because she loves hair (laughter), more than-- Speaker 1: And Dianne who started as a producer and ultimately became Speaker 2: The executive producer (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) executive producer for the show. Speaker 2: Yes, loved hair and (clears throat) excuse me. She and I would have conversations all the time about hair. So, a lot of those shows, the content would come from, you know maybe Diane and I having a discussion about hair or Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and I having a discussion or Oprah's experience you know with hair. So, yeah, in that I was probably involved in the content, but I would also do makeovers on the show-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --you know. Quite a few makeovers periodically. Story_ID: 658889 Speaker 1: I wanna talk about hair and weight, 'cause you know one of the things that Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] very openly has talked about over the whole time she'd been on the air is her you know ups and downs with weight. So, for many women hair becomes even more important if your weight is up. You know, what are you gonna do with your hair because there's more of a sensitivity to your physical appearance. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are you, what were you doing with Oprah in terms of supporting her in her physicality as it relates to hair? Speaker 2: Well, one of the mistakes that I know a lot of people do, when they, women that gain a little bit of weight, they go really short. You know for some reason they, they think it makes your face look smaller when your hair is shorter, but I disagree with that and I'll--if you notice, if Oprah--if you see photos of Oprah with, when she was a little larger, her hair got bigger. So, it was in, it was in-- Speaker 1: Proportion? Speaker 2: --proportion to her body, so that was one of the things I did with her and it just, it, it made her look really more proportionate, especially being on TV, because you know TV just kind of accents you know things more, little details and you wind up looking like you have really a small head on TV with a larger body, so. Speaker 1: That's interesting, I mean I think you're right. A lot of women think that shorter hair-- Speaker 2: It makes--a lot of women think shorter hair pulls the face up, which it does in some cases, but not overall, the overall look, it makes, it makes you look a little off balance I think. So, I would always go bigger with her hair. I would go bigger or longer, usually when she was larger. Story_ID: 658890 Speaker 1: So, in terms of--I wanna go back to the content creation because you described talking to [HistoryMaker] Dianne Hudson about hair and the, the kinds of conversations that end up being on the air. I mean one of the things that was so appealing I think about the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] is that many of the topics are every day topics, you know just what the average person is dealing with and as it relates to hair and your very natural involvement in, in some of that storytelling, what are some of the conversations, to the extent that you can talk about it, that you and Oprah are having about hair and, and hairstyle changes or you know you're working with her every day and over many, many years, so how, how are you navigating the evolution of her hair? Speaker 2: The looks really depended upon what she was doing. And that's how I you know came up with some of the different looks, but I remember a conversation that Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and I had 'cause she, she felt like getting, she loved getting hair and makeup but she felt like it was like such a process and I have to do this every day, and when I turn fifty I'm just going to a teeny-weenie afro. That never happened, but (laughter), but eventually she started doing more natural looks from that. So, I think we kind of evolved into a more natural looking Oprah because it would help her not have to go through the long processes of hours in the makeup chair. But she hasn't done that yet, and I think she's sixty-two now (laughter). But we did, one of the looks we did with her, where we did braid outs, twist outs on her, which you know were really accepted really well, people really liked it when we did those kind of looks on her. And--but I--there was never any real like point where other than let's just change a look you know that we needed to like make this statement with her hair. Speaker 1: What would you consider some of the greatest hits to be in terms of looks? What are the highlights? Speaker 2: I love almost every O Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine] cover we've ever done. There might be a couple that--of course, you know you look at some of your work and you just go oh, god, what was I thinking? Why was I doing there? But I loved most of the different looks that we've done for the cover, but as far as her every day, in person looks--when she was, when she did turn fifty, I gave her this kind of spiky bob that kind of flippy, it had bangs and was just to her shoulder and we, I think she sported that for a couple of years. That look was one of my favorites. There was another when it was very short. Short bang--she had long bangs and kind of a short back, almost Halle Berry-ish in a way, 'cause I'd given that same look to Halle-- Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at one time too. That look and then later on, I loved all the natural things we started doing with her (simultaneous). Story_ID: 658891 Speaker 1: You mentioned Halle Berry--so, did--you're working with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] for the show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], but also occasionally you're working with other clients. How did that work? Speaker 2: Halle, I, I met Halle because of Oprah. She was--watched Oprah's hair and she liked what I was doing with it and at the time she was living in Chicago [Illinois], going back and forth to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] to, to work as an actress. So, that's how I started doing her and then I realized that, that was even difficult for me to do, other outside clients especially when they needed to be done. So, I didn't do a lot of celebrity clients because of that. Because, because of their schedules and so forth and with mine, but Halle with her living in Chicago was easy for me to work with and, and she would come to me on a regular basis to get a haircut. She'd fly, if she was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] she'd fly in town to get a, you know, haircut or a relaxer or whatever she needed to have done at that time. And then at one point we decided she--I don't know if you've ever seen, you probably have seen photos of Halle with longer hair. And we decided you know let's just give you a totally different look, because I thought she was so beautiful and you know she could carry off this really short haircut, so that's where that Halle Berry look came from. Speaker 1: And just for context, Hollywood female stars did not wear short hair. Speaker 2: True. Speaker 1: I mean (laughter) it was unorthodox-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to have short hair and the look that you gave her was very short and then that was her Oscar [Academy Awards] winning look? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Correct? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's--yeah. So, yeah she's, she's been able to wear that look and, and be accepted with it for oh, god, I don't know how many years. So, until this year at the Oscars I saw her, she's wearing her hair longer and, she--I thought she looked pretty fabulous because it is kind of full and curly. I know there is a lot of talk about it. Speaker 1: And this year meaning 2017, right? Speaker 2: Two thousand seventeen [2017]. Speaker 1: Where she had a giant like Afro type something. Speaker 2: Like a giant curly Afro. Speaker 1: Curly, right. Speaker 2: And I think there would--I think what happened is that there were just a few photos where it was the positioning of her and her--it just was off, because I've seen some photos of her from that same night. Speaker 1: I have too, they were nice. Speaker 2: And she looked pretty fabulous. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 658892 Speaker 1: Even though you weren't working with many celebrities, you get to create a signature look that becomes iconic for Halle Berry, that's pretty good. Speaker 2: Right, yeah that's been my life too (laughter). It's like little things like that. Speaker 1: Now, as the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] grows, I mean it's winning all kids of awards, but also this includes winning awards for hairstyling. So, you win, I mean back to back a bunch of Academy Awards for hairstyling for the show, right? I guess this is starting in '89 [1989]? Speaker 2: In, I think, I think it was '89 [1989]. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, so Emmys [Emmy Award] as well as-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I started getting, I got seven Emmys over you know a course of maybe ten years. Speaker 1: And what does that mean? Give us context for winning an Emmy for, for hairstyling (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For hairstyling? There are categories on TV where you are eligible to enter to, to win an Emmy as a hairstylist. There's daytime and then there's primetime Emmys, but they're all Emmys. So, I was in the daytime Emmy category. So, I would be up against other shows that were in daytime, be it a talk show or I have a couple of times Pee-wee Herman beat me. I don't--it was that kind of show, so whatever's on daytime is what you're up against, and primetime is a different category. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, for probably more than ten years I was nominated but I got--out of the years I was there, until Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] decided to take herself out of the Emmys that's when I stopped-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --entering you know myself for an Emmy also. Speaker 1: Why, why did that happen? Speaker 2: Oprah took herself out of the Emmys because she felt that the show was different from other things that were in that category. I think when you talk to Dianne [HistoryMaker Dianne Hudson], the executive producer, she can tell you a little bit more on that, but she did take herself out from entering at some point and I don't remember at what point that is from that point until the time the show ended. So, and then, and around time I did as well, I just--and most of the team. Story_ID: 658893 Speaker 1: Some of the people on her team still entered, like some of the technical people, like the lighting and--they still entered and they continue to win year after year too (laughter), you know 'cause it was one of the best teams on TV (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually I'm glad you mentioned that because you know the whole look of the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] was different. You know the staging, the, for her hair, makeup, wardrobe. After a while the content shifted dramatically from what daytime TV was, but also lighting. So, in most TV shows the principals are white. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, the lighting is completely different. Speaker 1: Exactly, yeah. Speaker 2: And for, even more for makeup but, but for the whole look it becomes very different when now you're lighting--the principal character is brown. Speaker 1: Right. We were known for having the best lighting in TV. Speaker 2: Yes. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Because black guests would come on and feel very comfortable that they're gonna look good, because the light's gonna be sufficient and for most people who don't know you, for darker skin you need a little bit more light, because you can go into a shadow or a certain color can wash you out or whatever. But because the show was lit for Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], it was lit for both lighter skin and darker skin. So. Speaker 2: But it's more warmly lit too. Speaker 1: It's warmly lit. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, it was, it was really well planned and thought out. Tara [Tara Denise]--what's Tara's last name? Oh god I can't think of Tara's last name, and I worked with her for I don't know how many years, but she was responsible for the lighting. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So. Story_ID: 658894 Speaker 1: So, for--I want you to give me context, for a hairdresser--so, starting with, not just with you, but just in general. For a hairdresser for television, entry level, back then in the beginning when you first started, what would an entry, what would entry level fees be like for hair? Speaker 2: You know I'm trying to remember how I got--I think I was paid by the show and by the day when I started and I, I don't remember what that fee was, but that went on for a while and it, it may have been like two hundred dollars for a day, three hundred dollars. Speaker 1: So, kind of like an editorial rate. Speaker 2: Yeah, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For, for the day. Speaker 2: And then when Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] decided that she wanted me to be her full time person, then I went to a salary, like a yearly salary and over time, it, it, it changed. So, it probably would not be what the average hairstylist would get for TV because I was doing so many other things. Speaker 1: Right, I was gonna ask you because you're traveling. Speaker 2: Tra- exactly (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're doing special events. You're doing the magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine], all of those become part of expanding a salary, correct? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And now, Oprah's known for paying her staff well. Would you agree that that--that was true? Speaker 2: Yeah, she paid me very well, yeah. Story_ID: 658895 Speaker 1: So I wanna move to another thing. When in 1997 you write a book, 'Andre Talks Hair!' [Andre Walker and Teresa Wiltz] So--or you publish a book, and so you--how long did it take for you to make this book? Speaker 2: About less than a year I think. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I wrote it with a ghost writer, Teresa Wiltz, and-- Speaker 1: Who's a great writer from The Washington Post. Speaker 2: She's, yeah, she's great. I sat down with her for probably a year, it may have been a little longer, but I, I think it was maybe a year. And we would meet a few times a week and that's what I did, we just talked hair, and she would just record everything that I would say. She would interview me pretty much kind of like what we're doing now, but about hair, and, and so that's how I wrote the book with her. Speaker 1: So, is that a dream of yours, to write a book? Speaker 2: I always thought at some point I would write a book, and that time seemed like it was just the time to do it. And, and then I think it was easy for me to get a book deal too, because at that time Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] was like the queen of books too (laughter). Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: So, you know everybody wanted to be you know, sanc- wanted their book sanctioned by Oprah, you know so, so I-- Speaker 1: Did you, did you have to get her blessing before you decided to do it? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I got her blessing. She wrote the forward to it also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I think you know her blessing and, and at the time made it easier for me to get a book deal so. Story_ID: 658896 Speaker 1: And so you get this deal with Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.], one of the biggest publishers in the states. Your--the cover features many women of many different hairstyles and ethnicities, so what's, what's the gist of the book ['Andre Talks Hair!' Andre Walker and Teresa Wiltz]? Speaker 2: The gist was to teach people how to learn and deal with their own hair. And from that book came the classification system that everyone uses now. It's the Andre Walker hair classification system [Andre Walker Hair Typing System], and so what I wanted to do is talk about hair, not in racial descriptions, but in textural descriptions, and as you know we all have different hair no matter what race we are, but I think up to that point, the only time what we were talking about hair was oh, she's got black hair, or she's got--that's how hair was described. She's got Puerto Rican hair, she's got Asian hair. So, and it was--which is not true and accurate. So, I thought I'm going to talk about all the different hair types and show the different hair types and show them in categories, and so that's how I came up with 1A, the 1B (laughter), the Andre Walker hair classification system, so that's why on the cover you see a rainbow of people. Speaker 1: And your classifications, describe a couple of them so we understand what is, what do 1A and 1B mean for example? Speaker 2: Okay, for me to talk about hair and describe it in the book, I needed to put it in a category. So, I gave each basic texture a category. Say 1 are people with straight hair, straight to just a little bit of a bend or wave. Two being the next texture up meaning a wavier texture, hair that has a little bit more texture to it, a little wave type, and then there are the subtypes within that; 2A and B and C. Then there are type three which is a curlier texture, so you go from this nice--you go from straight to a wave, to a, a curl. So, that's type 3 and type 4 is hair that's really highly textured, that's kinky, that has a coily pattern, really tight coil or a zig zag pattern or hair that shrinks a lot. So, those are the four categories. So, within each of those categories were sub-texts, so, you could be a type 4 with a looser coil than someone with a type 4B or 4C coil, that could be a little tighter. Speaker 1: And as you create this classification, what, what is the intention of that? So, you identify what type of hair it is and then what do you do with that information? Speaker 2: The intention was to teach you how to go and buy products, you know what to use on your hair. If you were a type 3 and you wanted to relax your hair, it gave you information on how to relax your hair. How, what to use, what type of styling products you might need. How you should use hot tools or whatever. So, each type I talked about what you, what you need to do to have the best and the healthiest hair possible. And so unbeknownst to me, the hair typing chart system came out of that. It became something of a sensation on the Internet too, where I heard people starting to describe their hair as, "Well, I have type 1A," or, "I have type 4B," or whatever and I'm like, "Oh, you read my book so you know my--." And it's like, "Oh, no I didn't know you had a book," and so, it, it got a life on its own, and so that's what it's known as now, the hair typing system. Speaker 1: And how did the book do? Speaker 2: The book did okay, it didn't sell really incredibly well like I thought it would, but it did okay. It, it's out of print now. Speaker 1: Well, it was published in '97 [1997]. Speaker 2: Yes. But you can still buy copies of it on Amazon [Amazon.com], you know some older copies. It did okay. I, I probably did well with my advancement too, so. Speaker 1: So, you're not mad (laughter). Speaker 2: So I'm not mad (laughter). Story_ID: 658897 Speaker 1: Talk about the--there's, there's another project you worked -on, 'A Rural Wisconsin Road Leads to Calm and Tranquility for Busy Chicagoans' [Elaine Markoutsas]. This is you and David Simmons, yes? Speaker 2: David, my partner-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --of twenty years, yeah. Speaker 1: Talk about this. Speaker 2: Wisconsin or David? Speaker 1: Well, so let's talk about the, the project and it includes talking about David. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, yeah. Speaker 2: Sounds like you have a story from a local magazine that we just did a story in (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, this Traditional Homes [sic. Traditional Home]--well, let's see. Speaker 2: Oh, that's Traditional Homes. Speaker 1: Well, let's see, Ellen [sic. Elaine Markoutas], Ellen--this is in 2007. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think it's a, I think it's about your home-- Speaker 2: In Wisconsin. Speaker 1: --and your life together, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know I'm a Chicagoan and people in Chicago [Illinois] either go to Wisconsin or Indiana or Michigan on the weekends to get away. And one of my dreams was always to have a country house in--'cause I'm not of a lake person. I like going on the lake, but I didn't, I don't have to be on the lake. I like seeing like rolling hills or, or land. So, I was able to purchase some land in Wisconsin and built a house on it, David and I shortly after we met. It's been twenty, I think we met twenty-one years ago now. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: I think that's how long it is, and the house is seventeen years old now. So, we, we moved into it in 2000, but I'd always had this dream to have this house in the country and so, we built this--I think it's magnificent but (laughter)--this wonderful house that we live in. I live in it full time now. It used to be our weekend place because you know having the schedule that I had, I've, it just always felt good to me to go there and just kind of like reenergize. Even to this day I still feel that kind of energy in the house. But even more so it was extremely important to me 'cause I just go there every and just every--just decompress and. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: And I felt healed again, but the house, David and I are interior decorators also, that's another thing that I-- Speaker 1: Is that what he started out doing? Speaker 2: We kind of started doing it together. He had this knack--I remember meeting him when I went to his apartment for the first time. He lived in New York [New York]. I was like, "Oh, your apartment is so nice. Who did this?" He was like, "Nobody did this. I did this myself." So, from that, you know, that was like something we were both interested in is interiors, art and so forth. We started, we started working on prints, pretty much how I started doing hair. We started working on friend's homes and apartments. And so at some point we thought okay, one of us has got to get a degree in this. And I know it's not gonna be me 'cause I can't do it, (laughter) I'm on the road so David decided to go to school. He went to Harrington [Harrington College of Design, Chicago, Illinois] and so and then we formed our business, Walker Simmons Designs [Walker Simmons Design, LLC], and-- Speaker 1: When did you do that? Speaker 2: We formed that twelve years ago I think--it's been and, and we always treated it like it was just something fun for us to do, you know. And we would do our friends (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, about 2005? Speaker 2: Around there, yeah. And we, it was around the time, we had done a house for Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] also, and she, one of her houses in Santa Barbara [California], and she published it in, she had O at Home magazine at the time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she published it in that, and from that we got a lot of attention. And so we just started, we started doing it. And so now we work, we're, we're not a huge design firm. We have, we usually have a project going all time. Right now, we're working on finishing a house and we just started on another house. So, we kind of work like that. We're not like a design company that has ten projects going at one time. Story_ID: 658898 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to--so, so you say you met David [David Simmons] twenty years ago and I wanna go back a little bit even further for a moment because in, early in your story you were telling me you know when you're kind of figuring out who you are and when you were in school when you were young, that was a challenge for you. When did you come of age as a gay man and how did your family respond to that? Speaker 2: I was about twenty-one or twenty-two I think when I--don't know if I really came out, but that's when my parents found out that I was gay because of my then partner. And I later found out that they, somehow they found out--no, my sister told 'em. That's how they found out, my sister Pam [Pamela Walker] told them because she knew, and she knew you know-- Speaker 1: You had told her (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) we, would--I would confide in--certain things with her and my mother [Fannie Benson Walker] asked her about it and she told my mother, "Yeah, he's gay, yeah, he has a boyfriend." And, I didn't know that. She didn't tell me that she had told them either. So, a year probably went by before my mother eventually asked me about it, so I really didn't come out. I was basically-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) You were outed. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was outed, so. Speaker 1: And how did she react? Speaker 2: She told me that she blames my father [Woodrow Walker, Sr.] because she says that she told him that he hadn't been around enough and he didn't spend enough time with his children, especially his boys. I mean she didn't know anything about gay, so that's what--anybody being gay. Speaker 1: And this was around what year? Speaker 2: This was in the seven- '70s [1970s] I think, '80s [1980s] maybe, and she didn't know very much about, although she did have a friend who I thought was gay and I'm pretty sure he was gay and, and this was in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s]. So, this is a good friend of hers, and she would always make little remarks about him having a little sugar or being you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --kind of sweet, or you know. But I think that she knew that he was, but he was never out to her, but he was her friend and I would see him you know all the time. Well, you know until I became a teenager maybe, and so that was, I think that was her only experience with what the gay life was, so, and so it wasn't really a negative one because she had a friend you know who she liked and, so but she thought the reason I became gay was because my father didn't spend enough (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause she didn't understand. Speaker 2: She didn't know, and so then he blamed her for being too, you know too soft, and you know too spoiling or whatever. So they went back and forth with each other for about a year and then she pretty much asked me about it. Speaker 1: Oh, so that whole back and forth was between them before you were even (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was between then and she told me about it. She told that, that's what had happened within that year of time. Speaker 1: And then did, did your father also accept that you were gay? Speaker 2: He never talked to me about it. He knew it, he was very respectful, though. He was respectful of my friends, and you know partners, but it was hard for him to acknowledge it I think. Speaker 1: Well, you know, I mean in the black community-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --many people are very conservative (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Being born in 1918, as a black man, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, for you having parents who are born so long ago and having different understanding of what it is to have a gay son, was it, was it tough for you? Speaker 2: Say that--repeat that. Speaker 1: So, was it tough for you with your parents being of a different era and not necessarily knowing how to be welcoming of you being a gay man? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't tough for me. I mean like a lot of my friends, my mother loved my friends, you know she would, she liked to hang out with us sometimes too, so. And like I said my father was respectful. He didn't, wasn't judgmental of them or you know or didn't want me--but then you have to understand too that I was an adult by the time they knew this also, so--but even you know as being an adult, I still maintained a relationship with my family after-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --them finding out that I was gay. Story_ID: 658899 Speaker 1: Well, and then for you, your becoming an adult is at just about the same time as the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic hits. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And working in the industry I remember so many people who were part of the creative world one day, and were gone the next day (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: In your community of peers and friends, did you lose a lot of people? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. It was just a very scary time, and because I was in my twenties-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know around Rudy [Rudy Hooker (ph.)], my--the hairdresser that I worked for, I assisted, died of AIDS and so I was very close and friendly with him for a long time. So, I would you know there--I'd--I had friends who had many friends that died, but I didn't have a lot friends, but Rudy was one my friends that I remember, and then there was-- Speaker 1: And that was your first job out of-- Speaker 2: That was my first job. Speaker 1: --college. Speaker 2: Yes, that was huge (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After, out of Pivot Point [Pivot Point International]. Speaker 2: Yes, and then I remember there was producer that I worked with also. Rizzo [ph.] was his name, and who also had AIDS and, and died. So, it was, it was around us and it was very scary for a long time and, but like I said I, I didn't have a lot of close friends that were really affected that way by it, but I did know in the community, you know people were like, just, it wasn't unusual to hear that this person died, that person died, so. Story_ID: 658900 Speaker 1: How did you and your partner meet? Speaker 2: We were in New Y- I was in New York [New York] working and he lived there at the time and I went out to a bar with a friend of mine who lived in New York. He's like, "We're gonna go to this bar tonight." I'm like, "Okay, let's go." And then he met David [David Simmons] at the bar, he was really interested in David and David was like, "Not interested in you at all." And (laughter), and I really wasn't that interested either but--at the time I was like you two, you know have your fun, or whatever. And David and I wound up exchanging numbers and so that's pretty much how we met, and. Speaker 1: And then so, he was in New York? Speaker 2: He lived in New York then and then he lived--after we met he lived in New York for probably another year and a half and then he moved, he--the weird thing is that he lived in Chicago [Illinois] prior to that. He's originally from Texas. He had lived in Chicago for maybe ten years prior to moving to New York. He thought okay, I'm gonna move to New York 'cause I wanna do something different and bigger, I wanna move and try that. We never met in Chicago the entire time he lived in Chicago, and then three months after he moved to New York is when he met me, and about a year and a half, maybe, maybe two years at the most, he moved back to Chicago and we've been living together ever since, so. Speaker 1: Well, and with your schedule, I mean this, this is even though you're living together, for, during the most of the time of 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' a lot of times you were on the road, right? Speaker 2: Right, and the, one of the good things about meeting someone when you're into your profession and you're already on the--being on the road doesn't work for a lot of people-- Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in a relationship, so David doesn't know anything different. He met while I was doing that so, that's how he knows me. I think it would have been different had we been together then all of a sudden I got this job where I was traveling you know most of the time so, but now that I'm not traveling most of the time, he looks at me sometimes like-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --why don't you go on the road, why don't you go somewhere (laughter). Story_ID: 658901 Speaker 1: As the years progress we're back at the show, 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' as the years progress, how are you keeping your job fresh, your role as doing different hairstyles for Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], 'cause you know it's a long run? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, anybody who's in a job for a long time, that's one of the challenges, how do you keep it fresh? What are you doing? Speaker 2: Well, it got really tough towards the last I'd say five years that I worked with her, because you feel like you've done everything you could possibly do. One thing that gave me inspiration and that would keep me a little fresh so to speak, was some of the meetings that I would have before we would do a cover shoot for O Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine], working with Adam Glassman, the creative director. Speaker 1: Who's really talented, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's--and he comes up with ideas, so you're like okay, that sounds good, let's do that. So, so he helped keep it, keep things you know just kind of fresh and current with me because you know after doing it for twenty-five years, it's like what can I do next? You know, and being a creative person, you're, you want to do something next, but then you feel like oh, god, I've already done it. So, we would, we would inspire each other, working with him or working with Reggie Wells when-- Speaker 1: Makeup artist. Speaker 2: --when he was doing the makeup with Oprah. We'd have these little powwows before we'd do a shoot and, and come up with the different looks that we would, so. But then it got to the point where I felt okay I'm just really, I, I think I've done this job. I don't think I can do it anymore and, and that's why I decided to retire after thirty years and I thought you know Oprah did retire from her show in twenty-five years, I can make it thirty years that I retire from working with her and make it a big round number. Speaker 1: So, you retired after 'The Oprah Winfrey Show' closed (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I continued to work with her for an additional-- Speaker 1: 'Cause the show closed in 2011? Speaker 2: Two thousand eleven [2011] and I retired in May of 2015. Speaker 1: So, then you moved with her to the Oprah Winfrey Network? Speaker 2: I, I worked with her on everything she did up until May 30, 2015 (laughter). Speaker 1: How difficult was that to say it's time? Speaker 2: It was very difficult because I knew it was time at the end of the show. I knew at-- Speaker 1: At 2011? Speaker 2: Two thousand eleven [2011], okay, it's time for you to move on. And I, I, just couldn't do it. I wasn't you know mentally ready to do it, I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even though you were already doing your design business [Walker Simmons Design, LLC] and? Speaker 2: (Nods head) And I'd started with our hair care line [The Gold System] at that point also. [HistoryMaker] Dianne Hudson and me and-- Speaker 1: That was in '13 [2013]? Well, how far in advance did you start before it launched? Speaker 2: It launched in '13 [2013], but we had been working on it you know while I was still, while the show was still going on. So, and it was too new to really feel like, okay, it's time where I can just, just totally jump into doing that, and so I stayed on, I thought okay, I'll stay on for a year, maybe a couple of more years. And then Oprah started having some you know, the network wasn't doing as great as she thought it was going to be doing, and things started going in different directions than she thought and I felt like okay, is not the right time to jump out of here-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --either. You know so, so I had been thinking about doing it ever since the show had finished and one day we were in Seattle [Washington] and I don't know, I had this come to Jesus moment. It was like you know people say God spoke to me (laughter), and I remember being in my hotel room and it was like so clear to me that it's time to finish (Crying). Speaker 1: It's all right, it's okay, it's thirty years. All right. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: It's all right. Speaker 2: Breathe! (Laughter) Maybe if I laugh, I'll stop crying--okay. Whenever I talk about it, I always cry, but (unclear). So, I had this moment and it was so real that said it's time for you to do this. Let me just take a break for one minute. Speaker 1: Sure, okay. Story_ID: 658902 Speaker 1: Okay, I was in Seattle [Washington] and I had this moment where it was just so real, it was like God was speaking to me. So, it's like it's time to do this, it's time to move on. And it's so interesting 'cause I was there working with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], and we had done something. I think this was when she was working, getting her tea together with Starbucks [Starbucks Corporation], that's why we were in Seattle and then we had to work in Santa Barbara [California]. So, we left there and went to Santa Barbara the next day and we were doing some stuff that she--for her and out nowhere she turns to me, but prior to that I had decided okay, when we get back to Chicago [Illinois] on Monday, I'm gonna sit down and talk to her and tell her that I'm gonna start helping you find somebody else and I'm gonna move on. So, we're at her house in Santa Barbara getting ready for whatever it is we're you know doing that day. Out of nowhere she just goes, "Are you ever planning to retire?" (Laughter) And it was just I'm like oh, god this is making it easier for me now, 'cause I can just tell her right now. I said, "As a matter of fact I just decided yesterday that I wanted to talk to you about this on Monday and yes, I am retiring." And Gayle was in the room also, Gayle King her friend, and Gayle's like, "Oh, you're just joking, you're not gonna do that, you're just talking right now." And Oprah said, "I know he's telling you the truth right now. He's real and if I had to tell you this Gayle, you wouldn't believe me. I'm so glad you're here right now to see it." And she said, "I get it, I understand it. You've done this, you've done it the best you can do it, and you just can't do it anymore. So, I get it, I understand." And that's how it happened, it was, it--so, I was--up to that point I was thinking okay, now how am I gonna bring it up? How am I gonna say I need to talk to you about something? Can we sit down in your office and have this conversation. It just organically, just happened. So, that I know was meant to be. It was truly meant to be. Speaker 2: And from that point how much longer did you work for her? Speaker 1: It took me another year, I think to find somebody, 'cause I wasn't gonna leave (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was about to say, so you found her replacement, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I wasn't gonna leave until I helped find somebody to replace me. So, I went through quite a few people and Johnny Wright, the first lady's [Michelle Obama] hairstylist, after about eight months of not being successful finding anybody, I called him. I said, "Do you know anybody that can, you know I'm gonna retire soon," and he's like, "I wish you could hold out another twenty months, 'cause I would love to do it," (laughter) 'cause he knew the, you know, the Obamas would be out of the White House by then and I said but, "No, I can't hold on for another twenty months." So, he recommended me his friends, Nicole Mangrum, who I interviewed, and she lived in Chicago. She still lives in Chicago so was convenient, and so I would have her just kind of follow me when we'd go on you know, trips and work. So, we got to the point where Oprah was pretty comfortable with her and I felt like she could do the job, and, and I transitioned, transitioned out on May 30, or 31st of 2015. Story_ID: 658903 Speaker 1: So, as we were talking about that moment when you realized it was time to go, you know I wanna talk about the relationship. Because for just even the average woman and her hairdresser, this is a very close relationship. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which, when there's a parting, it's often emotional like a marriage. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, what you described made it as easy as it could possibly be, but you know talk about what, what is the relationship that you and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] have? Speaker 2: Now, or? Speaker 1: And have had, yeah, and has it changed? Speaker 2: Well, it--the trust has, has been a very trusting relationship, but it's, it's of course, it's changed because I'm not there every day, and you know Oprah is, I mean she is somewhere doing something every minute of the day, so, so it's not like I see her like I normally do. I, since I quit, I think I've seen her once, but I talk to her on the phone you know periodically. A couple of weeks ago she FaceTimed me. David [David Simmons] and I were having dinner and all of a sudden, this FaceTime picture of her comes up on the iPad. But we text, and so if there's something she needs or she'll just you know just say hi or whatever. So, we're in touch that way but I haven't really seen her much. But I feel like if I ever need anything, if I you know need to call her for something, I could do that and she's there. I know I had a, a dog that died last year and to me my dogs are like my children. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she found out that it had happened and like that same night was like on the phone with me you know just kind of like--'cause I was just a mess then you know and you know but you know situations like that I know you know she's gonna be there for me, if I need her for anything. Speaker 1: So, even at for thirty years she was your boss, do you feel like she's also your friend? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think so. I mean you can't help but, you know it feels, you feel like it's, you're part of a family you know, 'cause you've been together for that long and now it feels like it's part of a family that lives in another city maybe, you know so. Story_ID: 658904 Speaker 1: I'd like to talk about your, your hair care system. And if you'd tell me, you know, how you developed the idea and what it has become, what it is. Speaker 2: Well, it, it came about because [HistoryMaker] Dianne Hudson you know who you know is the exe- who was the executive producer of the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] and I had become very good friends also, and over the years we, we had many, many hair discussions, to the point of she and I talked Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] into opening a spa at Harpo Studios [Chicago, Illinois] for all the employees. Speaker 1: Nice! Speaker 2: (Laughter) And so we got--you know because they worked--well, I shouldn't say they--we all worked like crazy hours and but especially the producers, they were you know sometimes there all night if they had a show the next day. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, you didn't have time to get out and go get your hair done, or whatever so, we had a full spa built in at the salon, but anyway that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was that? Speaker 2: That was around 2007 maybe, '08 [2008] you know, somewhere around there and you come down get your hair done, get a massage, you'd get anything you wanted, it was, we had a spa for it, and we had great people working in there also, people who worked in spas and salons in Chicago [Illinois]. They would come in maybe once or twice a week and, so we had really great people working. So, anyway Dianne and I were always interested in hair and beauty and we decided to do The Gold System and--because we realized that there are a lot of products out, but when we formulated The Gold System there weren't many products for natural hair, especially for hair that needed moisture and hold and specific things. So, what I was doing was mixing up products making what I call hair cocktails and I would mix all these little components together to get one styling leave-in that I would use on Oprah or myself or whoever and so I thought you know why don't we come up with the product that would take care of that. Because up to that point we already designed a line and we tried to design a line that was for all hair types, and I realized that I was a real expert on textured hair and I thought let's just focus on what I know and what I do best, and let that be our, what we call The Gold System. So, what I did was took all those little hair cocktails and made them into leave in stylers and formulated a great conditioner and a great shampoo so we'd have a system that is made to be worked together with all the products with that and we'd use it based upon the hair typing system [Andre Walker Hair Typing System] also. So, there are products that you would use for Type 1, 2, but mainly for the Type 3 and 4, because that's where you have-- Speaker 1: The curlier hair (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the curlier hair and the more textured hair. Story_ID: 658905 Speaker 1: So, you launched [The Gold System] in 2013? Speaker 2: We launched big time in Target [Target Corporation] (laughter), you know it's-- Speaker 1: Which is a huge roll out. Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we were online up to that point. Target, Target--we were on AndreWalker.com--AndreWalkerHair.com. So, we were selling there, and but we were trying to get a good retailer, and we went and met with Target and they liked us a lot and put us in--initially, they put us in I think seven hundred stores and then they had this big idea to put us in all the stores. Speaker 1: And all means what, how many stores? Speaker 2: I think it's 1,850 stores. Speaker 1: So, you know coming from an idea, your, your hair cocktails, even seven hundred stores is a lot, but 1,850 stores means that you have to produce a huge amount of inventory quickly, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you all are partners on this, but all you also seeking outside funding in order to, to fund this project? Speaker 2: We were seeking outside funding, but (laughter), did we achieve outside funding? No. Speaker 1: So, you self funded together? Speaker 2: So, we self funded. And Dianne [HistoryMaker Dianne Hudson] is a majority funder in the, in the company. Speaker 1: And, so this roll out to 1,850 stores, was it successful? Speaker 2: No, not totally successful. They thought that we were going to be able to sell to you know people that lived in you know South Dakota, or you know Sioux City, Iowa and that really isn't our market. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We're more of an urban market, and so when they realized that oh, this is not working in those areas 'cause those people were not buying the product the way we thought they would, let's bring the numbers down again, so they brought, they're back down to seven hundred stores and mainly-- Speaker 1: Which is mainly urban? Speaker 2: Yes, and we just did that this year, the beginning of this year. Speaker 1: Could the product be moved to the product that was sent to the places that wouldn't use it? Speaker 2: Target doesn't do that. Target just discounts it and sells it. They don't have time for that (laughter). Speaker 1: But that would--I mean, in terms of doing the research. Speaker 2: You would think that, but I think some of theirs was based upon okay, this is Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] hairstylist. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he has appeal to, you know, lots of people. But I don't think that was the case, so. So, I think where we are now are in places where we really should be and along with the Target we're in, (clears throat) we're in Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.] which-- Speaker 1: Which is one of the biggest sales platforms today (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we just did our official Andre Walker Hair site. Speaker 1: On Amazon? Speaker 2: On Amazon, about a month ago and-- Speaker 1: And so a month ago is meaning like January of 2017? Speaker 2: Yes, and although we--it's been sold on there for a long time 'cause you know how Amazon people-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --put on their sites-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and sell it. But we have an official site now and our rep at Amazon says that we're doing extremely well in the short time that we've been there, so, so that's a good thing. We just launched in Sally [Sally Beauty Supply LLC]. This just, like just now I was out this weekend and visiting some of the Sally stores here to see if it was on the shelves yet, and it's not on the shelves yet, although it's supposed to be. Speaker 1: How many Sally stores are there? Speaker 2: They're testing us in two hundred and--around two hundred some stores for ninety days and-- Speaker 1: And do they do promotion for that? Speaker 2: No, you do your promotions. Speaker 1: You do your own promotion. Speaker 2: So, we're doing a lot of online things. We'll probably do some TV ads, and Targets the same way. When we, when we went into Target, Target has promotions but you have to buy into the promotions. So, it's not like they'll promote you. So we did all of our promotions, radio, TV whatever we could to really boost sales. So, we're, you know those are our outlets and we're also in the UK [United Kingdom]. We just launched in the UK in the fall of last year at Spell Beauty. Story_ID: 658906 Speaker 1: So, what is the vision for the product line [The Gold System]? Speaker 2: The vision is for it to be well recognized and well bought and we wanted it to be accessible to many people also. Speaker 1: 'Cause the price point is pretty accessible. Speaker 2: It is, although there are people that think it's really expensive also, but we consider ourselves masstige we're like in the middle of prestige and mass, so we're-- Speaker 1: Masstige. Speaker 2: --so, we're in the middle there. Speaker 1: In terms, having launched in 2013, now it's 2017 is it, that, that's not a long time, but is it profitable yet? Speaker 2: Everything we make goes back into the business, so. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, no, in answer to your question, no. We continue to put whatever we make, we invest more into the business. Speaker 1: And in, in terms of the business, how many years out are you looking for it to become profitable? Speaker 2: Well, we said five, so I think we have another year or two before we feel like it should be profitable. We thought when we launched, okay in five years from now, we will be where we want. And, you know it's always changing you know, and something great will happen or we might have a setback so it's, it's always something which is typical in most businesses too, but I think we've had, and have some great opportunities, probably better than most businesses like ours, so. Speaker 1: Do you do a lot of traveling for the business? Speaker 2: Lately we do, maybe once a month in a different city we'll do a promotion. As I was telling you earlier, we do what's called Andre's Chair, where we let people enter online to get their hair--they win an opportunity to get their hair done by me. So, that's one way. Speaker 1: And that's done on site at like a mall or something? Speaker 2: It's done in a salon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I might, if it's somebody I know with a salon or we'll rent a salon and then, then we'll film it and then we'll put it back up online and it's part of our social [social media]. Speaker 1: So, right now you've got your product line, your designing, you're also living full time in the rural-- Speaker 2: Areas of Wisconsin (laughter). Speaker 1: --areas of Wisconsin, so like there, there feels like there's a semi retirement sense, although you're really busy? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well there is a, that is in the plan, at some point, Dianne [HistoryMaker Dianne Hudson] and I would like to sell the business, once we get it to a point, we'd like to be able to sell it and you know maybe still work in it doing something, but that is the plan, so to get the company to that level and then sell it. One of the things we're looking at is to do an infomercial and-- Speaker 1: And those can be very profitable. Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's one of the things that-- Speaker 1: Is that an expensive pursuit to, to do? Speaker 2: No, not unless the, the company that put the--if you can find an infomercial producer to do it, like a Guthy-Renker or someone like that, then it's not, they take on the expense of it, so. Speaker 1: But, then you have to pay for the airtime, or no? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: All of it, they do the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you become, you become like a partner with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because a lot of those are effective. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, they are. They've been really effective for a lot brands and we feel like Dianne with her experience in TV and her background in producing and she's got some really great ideas for a really modern, edgy infomercial. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, that's in our plans, so. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 658907 Speaker 1: Andre [HistoryMaker Andre Walker], when you look back at your career, you know thirty years with Oprah and now having a new life in your business, as you look at your whole career, what is the legacy that you believe that you are leaving? Speaker 2: (Pause) I guess legacy means that you've been able to touch somebody's life in some sort of way or, or helped their life in some sort of way? You know, with that in mind, I hope I've been able to help people with their hair for one, (laughter) and I hope I've been kind and you know have been a good friend to people also. But I think legacy could be so many things, but, but if, if you were to look at me as a professional, I hope that what I did as a professional and--has been able to help people even you know manage their hair and understand their hair even more and also helped them feel better and look, you know feel better about themselves and even look better so. Speaker 1: Having been part of, you know one of the most historic runs in television working with Oprah Winfrey to create that kind of new paradigm in TV, what do you feel your role was in that? Speaker 2: My role was to help her look good, feel good, be able to depend on me for whatever was needed and just basically support, just real support and also to make her look the best that she could look. Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 658908 Speaker 1: When you think of young people, especially young African Americans who might be interested in getting involved in hairstyling today, 2017, when there are a whole lot of people who wanna do it, you know the, the, there, we do have the Internet and blogging, so for some there's a sense that there's more openness but still a lot of anonymity, what advice would you have to offer to young folks, young folks of color today? Speaker 2: Well, it's definitely a different time, the business is different, the process is different, but what's not different is the desire to do it. So, as long as you have a great desire, great passion, you know as you see I did, but I was you know a teenager, if you have that kind of passion you can do it, regardless of whatever the situation is. And that's what I tell people you know whenever they say, "Well how can I become a celebrity hairdresser?" I said I didn't start out to become a celebrity hairdresser, you know. I just wanted to do hair, I wanted, I was passionate about it, I just--that's all I wanted to do. And you know so if you have that passion, if you have that in your heart with anything, that's the most important thing you know, regardless of the time. Because now breaking into the business is totally different from when I did, so but if you have that passion and you do it the best you can do it, you're gonna break into it and do it well. Speaker 1: Do you think it's important to have formal training? Speaker 2: Yes and no. I think as far as being able to regulate things you do need formal training, 'cause everybody can be out there just you know making mistakes on peoples' heads, you know without some kind of training, but real passion doesn't come from real training you know. It, it's just you know talent is something you might have, and we were talking this just yesterday, you know being able--if you have a talent in you that you don't even know you have. If you can tap into that somehow, you learn how to do that. You learn to do whatever it takes to do it. Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think you've covered my life, my goodness! Thank you for doing this. Speaker 1: Of course (simultaneous)! Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I feel really honored-- Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: --that you guys asked me to do this. Speaker 1: Well, thank you, it's been great! Thank you very much. Speaker 2: And it's been a pleasure to do it also. I was a little nervous about it at first, but. Speaker 1: You did great. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Thank you...