 Story_ID: 627545 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure. Clarice Anita Dibble Walker [HistoryMaker Clarice Dibble Walker], C-L-A-R-I-C-E, D-I-B-B-L-E, W-A-L-K-E-R. Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell the Annetta [sic.]? How, how do you spell your middle name? Speaker 2: Anita? Speaker 1: Anita, yeah. Speaker 2: A-N-I-T-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, good 'cause we had it spelled differently on the (laughter)--I'm glad you spelled it. All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 31st, 1936, Tuskegee Institute, Alabama [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a social worker. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And a professor and that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're, you're a professor emeritus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the graduate School of Social Work [Howard University School of Social Work, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April 30th, 2012. Oh, May 1st, that's right, May 1st. Speaker 1: All right, 2012. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the ples- at the present time? Speaker 2: At the present time, we're at my home, which is 9101 Crosby Road, Silver Spring, Maryland. Story_ID: 627546 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: A favorite food? Yes, salmon. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Color? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes, blue. Speaker 1: A, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I guess it's at the beach, wherever a beach is. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, let's move it, meaning to move quickly and that may be a result of my having four children and trying to get everything going, so I'm always saying, "Let's move it." Story_ID: 627547 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] side, and we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Helen, H-E-L-E-N, Anita, A-N-I-T-A, Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R, Dibble, D-I-B-B-L-E [Helen Taylor Dibble]. Speaker 1: And what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth was October 14th--no, I'm sorry, October 15th, 1901. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history? Speaker 2: Well, I can tr- on her father's side, her father [Robert Robinson Taylor] came from North Carolina and was the son of a person who was in the building trades and he grew up in North Carolina, and he went to public schools there. And then he went to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology [Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for college. And he was the first African American to graduate with a degree in architecture from MIT. I believe he was also the first American--African American to graduate from the whole university, not just in architecture. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, there's another part of that story, too, isn't it that the--he, he was the son of, of a white--wealthy white person [Henry Taylor], the, the builder? Isn't that true? Speaker 2: Of the building trades? Speaker 1: Yes. Wasn't he white? Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've heard that story, but I don't have any confirmation of it. But, I know that he was in the building trades. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's interesting 'cause, 'cause other people in the family think he was white (laughter). Speaker 2: Think he was white? Speaker 1: Yes, other people that we've interviewed. But that--but that's-- Speaker 2: Oh, well that may be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that's-- Speaker 2: --true and I just-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: You know, I've heard it back and forth because, you know, we hear that in history and yet I, I haven't had any real confirmation of that, and I have been to Wilmington [North Carolina] and been to the museum there and the major structure that's in the midst of Wilmington that his father was supposed to have had a great hand in building, but I, I don't have any confirmation of that one way or another. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's a good attitude to have actually as a-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --as a historian to have it proved fir- you know, be able to prove it first, so that's, that's good. So, just--it's interesting that you have a different take on it. Okay. All right. So--but he was--he was the first African American to graduate from MIT and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --are there any stories about--did he have any trouble being the first African American to graduate from MIT? Did they--did anyone try to stop him or did anyone help him? Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure he must've gotten a lot of help because I don't think he would've been able to make it in that environment without it, but I don't have any real sense of what kind of help he had or what were the barriers that he experienced, and I'm sure being the first African American on that campus, that he must've experienced some issues related to who he was and why he was there, but I don't have any real confirmation of it. Speaker 1: Okay. There are--there are no stories passed down in the family about what life was like for him as a--as the only black student on campus? Speaker 2: Well, there have been some stories about isolation, and there was someone at MIT who did some work on his life there, and I don't know what he uncovered. But, you know, there are stories in the family that he had difficulty, but I've never heard that he had any academic difficulty, and I don't know whether they're talking about social difficulty or what kind of difficulty, being away from home a long way, going to MIT from Wilmington, a southern man. So, I don't know of those stories. Story_ID: 627548 Speaker 1: Do you have an- can you give us an idea about when your--about what time period your grand- your [maternal] grandfather was born? I mean, it would have to be in 1880s, I guess, right? Or 1880s or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah, yeah, it was. Speaker 1: Eighteen seventies [1870s] or '80s [1880s]. Speaker 2: Earlier-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I would think, yes. Speaker 1: Even earlier than that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Because Tuskegee [Tuskegee State Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] was founded in 1881. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that's right. And, you know, he went there at Booker T. Washington's request, so he was going there, you know, in the early years of the founding of Tuskegee. Speaker 1: Okay. I know Tuskegee has recently honored his memory with a building, right? Speaker 2: That's right, yes. And we were very, very pleased about that. And as you know, our family went for the dedication of the building that was named for him in Tuskegee, the Robert R. Taylor School of Architecture [Robert R. Taylor School of Architecture and Construction Science], and there was seventy-five of us and that included our family, our nuclear family as well as children, grandchildren, so it was quite an occasion for us in April of 2000 [sic. 2010]. Speaker 1: Okay. And I--and I believe your, your uncle, Robert Rochon Taylor, was also an, an architect. Speaker 2: No, he was not an architect. Speaker 1: Oh, all right. Speaker 2: There is that story out there that he was an architect. In fact, I think he's listed in one of the books on African American architects, but he was not an architect. He had not gone to the school of architecture, but he was very much in the housing industry, and actually was chairman of the housing authority for the City of, of Chicago [Chicago Housing Authority]. Speaker 1: Right. Now, he's the Robert Taylor that the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] are named for. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. Well, now, any, any other history about your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, she was one of five children. Four of those children were born to her mother who was Beatrice Rochon [Beatrice Rochon Taylor], and her mother died very early when the children were very young. And her father, Robert Taylor [Robert Robinson Taylor], subsequently married again and married Nellie Chesnutt [Nellie Chesnutt Taylor], and they had one child, Henry Taylor. But just to go back a bit, my mother's siblings were Robert Taylor, the Taylor that you just mentioned who have gone to Chicago [Illinois], and Edward Victor Taylor [Edward Taylor]--Robert Taylor was Robert Rochon Taylor, Edward Victor Taylor, Helen, my mother, who was Helen Anita Taylor [Helen Taylor Dibble], and her sister, Beatrice who was Beatrice Taylor [Beatrice Taylor Robinson] and subsequently became Robinson after her marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, I think I mentioned that in his second marriage, his son, Henry Taylor-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was born, so that was the five. Story_ID: 627549 Speaker 1: And did your mother [Helen Taylor Dibble] grow up on the Tuskegee campus [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]? Speaker 2: She grew up on the Tuskegee campus, yes, she certainly did. And she grew up with friends who remained lifelong friends. She used to tell us many stories, for example, about Benjamin O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.], who you know was a general in the [U.S.] Army in the Second World War [World War II, WWII], I think? But, anyway, she grew up with Benjamin Davis and I can remember her telling stories when we were growing up. She would say, "You know, you children are always late," and she said, "my playmate when he knew it was time for dinner, he could be getting ready to hit a home run in baseball," (laughter), "and he would drop the bat and go home to dinner." She always used that story because she said that he--well, of course, his father had been in the Army as well, but she was using that as an example for us in terms of how we should pay strict attention to time. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, this, this, this is B.O. Davis, Jr.-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --that she went to school with-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --whose father was also in the [U.S.] military. Speaker 2: That's right, his father-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --General Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.], was in the military. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And I think, you know, I would just introduce what Tuskegee means to so many people. Because--this is skipping over time, but when my mother was sick here--in fact, she died here, Benjamin and Agatha Davis [Agatha Scott Davis] were regular visitors to her during her illness. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, they were lifelong friends. Speaker 1: Yeah, lifelong associations. And she was a--your mother was on campus when George Washington Carver was teaching? Speaker 2: She certainly was and she was a very, very close friend of George Washington Carver's. My father [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] was his physician. His laboratory was next door to the school that we went to nursery school in. So, very often, we had the good fortune of spending a little time with Dr. Carver while we were waiting for our mother who was running late frequently (laughter) to pick us up. But, we also had the privilege of taking those long walks out in the woods and picking up things from the ground and having him explain what it meant and it was a very fortunate experience. Speaker 1: So, not only did your mother know him well, but, but you, you knew him as a child, too? Speaker 2: I did. But I was a very young child, but I certainly did. And I remember vividly even though I was a young child, I remember his funeral in the chapel of Tuskegee and he was a very close friend and confidant of Henry Ford. And one of the things that I remember was seeing his coffin just covered with red roses that had been sent from Henry Ford. Speaker 1: Okay. Who else was on the campus in those days--I mean, when, when your mother was growing up? Does she have any stories about-- Speaker 2: Well, the Logans were on the campus. Mr. Logan [Warren Logan] was the treasurer. And, again, I would say that you'll probably hear over and over how Tuskegee fostered such deep relationships. Well, his granddaughter, Adele [Adele Logan Alexander], is a friend of ours. She lives here in Washington [D.C.] and is married to Clifford Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.]. But, these are people who have had roots there. And something about Tuskegee means you keep the ties. You may never see them for several years or whatever, but you know them and you keep up with what they're doing and so forth. Lionel Richie has just titled his record, 'Tuskegee,' and I'm sure some of that has to do with the ties of Tuskegee that are lifelong. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, that's, that's interesting that Lionel Richie, the, the singer-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --he, he grew up on the campus of Tuskegee as well, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. His mother [Alberta Foster Richie] was my fourth grade teacher and his grandmother [Adelaide Brown Foster] was my church choir director, so long term relationships. Story_ID: 627550 Speaker 1: Where did your mother [Helen Taylor Dibble] go to college? Did she go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], too? Speaker 2: My mother went to Fisk. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. And I believe she went when she was sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not absolutely sure of that, but I think she did. Speaker 1: Now, what was her field of study? Speaker 2: Music. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a pianist. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she, did she teach music in the schools at all or did she--how did she use it? Speaker 2: Well, she did not teach music because she married my father [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.]. She did--when she finished college, she actually went to Denver, Colorado, and became the secretary for the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]--I think it was the YWCA, yeah, must've been. Now, I don't know whether it was secretary, but she worked for the YWCA and spent time in Denver. And then she returned to Tuskegee [Alabama] where she met my father who had come there I think at the bequest of Dr. John A. Kenney [John A. Kenney, Sr.]. Story_ID: 627551 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side. Then, then, we'll put them together. We'll do, do it like that, okay? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Eugene Heriot, H-E-R-I-O-T, Dibble, Jr. [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 14th--now I can't come up with the year, 18 something, eighteen ninety something. I can get that for you. Speaker 1: All right. And where was he born? Speaker 2: Camden, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well, I traced them back to his parents [Sallie Lee Dibble and Eugene H. Dibble, Sr.], but there are others I think in the family who have gone further on that. But, he was--let's see, he was the second child in a family of six. His brother--no, his sister was the first born who was Josephine Dibble [Josephine Dibble Murphy] and became Murphy, was her name. He was the second, Eugene Heriot Dibble, named for his father. His sister, Ellie [Ellie Dibble Palmer], was the third. And then his brother, Andrew [Andrew Dibble], was the fourth. Who am I missing? Did I say Harold, H.L. [Harold Dibble]? Speaker 1: No, unh-uh. Speaker 2: Okay, I should've said H.L. before Andrew. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then a sister, Jimmie [James Lawrence Dibble]. She was female but she was named James Lawrence-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Dibble (laughter). Speaker 1: Is there a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that six? Speaker 1: --reason for that? Yeah. Speaker 2: She was named for a favorite brother or something who didn't have a child or--I don't know. I can't remember the full story, but she was named for a favorite brother, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting. Now, is there a, a story behind the name Heriot, H-E-R-I-O-T? Speaker 2: Heriot. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Is there a--what kind of--is that a French name or? Speaker 2: I don't know, but there are people who have that last name who they knew, the Heriots, and I think they were in South Carolina. I'm not sure whether they actually lived in Camden. Story_ID: 627552 Speaker 1: The Dibble side of the family, some of his [Dibble Walker's father, Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] relatives in, in recent years have spent an enormous amount of time tracing that whole history of the South Carolina family. Speaker 2: Do you remember any of the highlights of their search, you know, of their searches? Are there any highlights that you remember about-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --their-- Speaker 1: That they have traced-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it all the way back to Sierra Leone and they have taken particular characters in the family and looked at it, their relationship. In fact, there's a book--there are two books I think now that they've written on the family and the roots of the family, and every two years, that family has organized, the Dibble side of our family, to keeping in touch with the written material as well as we have family reunions every two years in different places. That family member's name who organizes all of that is Elsie Goins [Elsie Taylor Goins] in Columbia, South Carolina, and her family. Speaker 2: How do you spell Elsie? Speaker 1: E-L-S-I-E, G-O-I-N-S. Speaker 2: Elsie Goins. And do you recall the name of the books at all that she's written? Speaker 1: Yes, I have them here. I have to tell you in a minute (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. But we know the-- Speaker 1: I'll have to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) author is Elsie Goins, right? Is, is she--is she the-- Speaker 1: Elsie Goins. Speaker 2: --author? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's the-- Speaker 1: But she uses another literature name, E. something. E. Louise, I think. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, E. Louise. Speaker 2: All right. Just E. Louise, not E. Louise Goins, Goins? Just-- Speaker 1: No, she just--I think-- Speaker 2: --E. Louise? Speaker 1: E. Louise. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: But her name is Elsie Goins and she has children and I think one of her sons has helped her in this endeavor, William, Will Goins [William Moreau Goins]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she has a daughter, Felicia [Felicia Goins Finney], who's a dentist living in Columbia, South Carolina. And she has a son, Wendell [Wendell Goins], who's a surgeon in the--in North Carolina. Story_ID: 627553 Speaker 1: So your father [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] grew up in Camden, South Carolina? Speaker 2: In Camden, uh-huh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. So, what do you know about his growing up, about his formative years? Speaker 2: Well, his parents [Sallie Lee Dibble and Eugene H. Dibble, Sr.] had a grocery store and I think they prided themselves on the quality of, of food that they carried in the grocery store. And he frequently has talked about, or he did talk about, how people from the north would come to South Carolina who had homes in Ca- in the Camden area, and they would cater to that trade as well as just neighbors who lived in Camden. But, they had a successful store, grocery store. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is interesting. Like--so, they were catering to, to people who came down for the winter, I guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --to spend their time-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Camden? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it's kind of a vacation or, or, or getaway or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I don't-- Speaker 1: --area? Speaker 2: --quite what it was. I've never quite understood it because Camden, you know, when I go there--I used to go--we used to go in the summer, I, I never saw anything about Camden that would be enticing to me. You know, there was no beach, there were (laughter)--no place to have winter sports or anything like that. But, I think that there was something going on in the town that was attractive to certain people who would come and spend time, not necessarily have their homes in Camden other than a second home. But, it was obviously a trade that came frequently. And I do know that--I don't know much about sports like polo and things like that. I seem to remember hearing that, that that was one of the areas that attracted people to Camden. But, I don't really know much about that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --other than the fact that he had a grocery business. Story_ID: 627554 Speaker 1: You had a story about your [paternal] uncle in what a--H.L. [Harold Dibble]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Camden [South Carolina]. What was the story that you know? Speaker 2: The story that I know is that there was some point in time in which he had spoken to someone and the person did not think he had addressed him appropriately, and my understanding was this was someone white, and he threatened him and that the family was very concerned about his safety. And I think, although I'm not absolutely sure, they ultimately sent him somewhere else for a period of time because of that threat. Speaker 1: Okay. But, but you were saying most of the, the, the patrons that your, your--I guess, your grandfather's [Eugene H. Dibble, Sr.] store catered to were from the North that would come to the South? Speaker 2: Appeared to be, yeah, yes. They, they tended to have a client base that they provided the kinds of foods and things that they would want to have and they would come and shop there. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, now, did your, your father [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] have a--well, I, I know he became a doctor, so I know he went to school somewhere, but did, did he go to school in Camden? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. And I believe he went to Mather Academy [Camden, South Carolina] and I don't know why I haven't gotten absolute certainty on this because I don't know whether Mather was there, but I assume it was. That was an academy for black children. Speaker 1: That's M-A-T-H-E-R? Speaker 2: M-A-T-H-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But that's something that I need to check because I, I think he went there. I know that his, his sister's [Ellie Dibble Palmer] children all went there who lived in Sumter, South Carolina. They moved from Camden to Sumter, his sister did, but that's another story. But, all of their children and many children in other parts of South Carolina came and went to Mather Academy, black children. Speaker 1: Okay. You imagine--it sounds like it may have been named for Cotton Mather, the, the-- Speaker 2: It may have been. I don't know. Speaker 1: He was a reverend in the, I think--I think a Methodist church in the South [sic.]. Speaker 2: They were Methodist. They were Methodist. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: His family was definitely Methodist. Speaker 1: That's probably the connection, yeah. Okay. So, so your father--now, now where did he go to college? Speaker 2: Where did he go to college? He went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. And I think he, he went on to Howard to get his-- Speaker 2: Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Howard-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --medical school. And--okay, so, when he graduated, was, was he assigned then to the John Andrew hospital [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital] in Tuskegee [Alabama]? Is that how he got to Tuskegee? Speaker 2: I don't think it was right when he graduated. I think he did an internship somewhere else and then went there to Tuskegee. I was just trying to connect up the time because he went to Tuskegee during the time that my mother [Helen Taylor Dibble] had gone to Colorado, to Denver, and I remember them telling the story that her friends all called her and said, "You need to come back here and meet someone" (laughter), and so that's how that all came together. Speaker 1: So, that's the story of how they met? The friends called and said-- Speaker 2: Friends called and said, "You need to come back and meet this person who's come here." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that, I guess, was when Dr. John Kenney [John A. Kenney, Sr.] was there. Story_ID: 627555 Speaker 1: But, I did want to get back a little bit to his [Dibble Walker's father, Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] family. His sister, Josephine [Josephine Dibble Murphy], went to Atlanta [Georgia], and I don't know the circumstances of her going there, whether she went there to college or not, I don't know. But, she went there and she married Harry Murphy [Harry Murphy, Sr.], who was in the printing business. Speaker 2: Now, these are the Murphys that are the founders of the Afro-American newspaper [Afro-American Newspapers] in-- Speaker 1: No, I don't think so. Speaker 2: No? Not those Murphys? Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, I--but you may have a connection I don't--I have not made. But, they were in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 2: Oh, Atlanta. Okay, these are Atlanta Murphys. Speaker 1: These are Atlanta Murphys (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. I'm, I'm--that's, that's my mistake. Speaker 1: Uh-huh and he had a printing business and his wife's name was Josephine. They had four children--wait a minute, let me get this straight, four children, yes. The oldest was Doris Murphy [Doris Murphy Coates], Mabel Murphy [Mabel Murphy Smythe Haith], Sarah Murphy [Sarah Murphy Palmore] and the youngest was Harry Murphy [Harry Murphy, Jr.]. One boy, three girls. Doris I think married a Coates, his na- his last name was Coates, and I'm not quite sure when she moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but she ended up in Philadelphia. But, Mabel, her sister, married Hugh Smythe [Hugh H. Smythe], S-M-Y-T-H [sic.], and Mabel and Hugh were in the diplomatic world. Hugh was an ambassador, Mabel was an ambassador, to different countries, and they spent a good deal of time traveling abor- abroad. And Hugh also was a professor at Brooklyn College in New York [Brooklyn, New York] and Mabel eventually came back to live here in Washington [D.C.] after he died. Speaker 2: Now, do, do you remember what president was serving when they were ambassadors? Speaker 1: I don't. But, I can-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --figure it out. Speaker 2: Okay. You think it would be Eisenhower [sic. President Lyndon Baines Johnson and President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] or? Speaker 1: Eisenhower was president when? Speaker 2: Right after the war--well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right after the war. Speaker 2: Yeah, '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: Fifties [1950s], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It could've been. It could've been. I was trying to think, was there any political connection that I could come up with in terms of who might have appointed them, but I don't really know what their politics were. Speaker 2: Okay, Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], Truman [President Harry S. Truman] or Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]. I guess it had to be in that realm, I guess, but I don't-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it would've been them. But, I, I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I can find out. Speaker 2: All right. Okay. Speaker 1: But, anyway, there was Mabel--oh Doris, she married someone in Philadelphia. Speaker 2: You said--you said-- Speaker 1: Doris Coates-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was her name. Then, there was Sarah who was one of the WACs. She went into the [U.S.] military in World War II [WWII]. It's interesting because I have a friend who has a friend who is writing a story on females in the [U.S.] Armed Forces, but she was one. And I think she became a major, so-- Speaker 2: Now, the WACs for those who don't, don't know, that's the Women's Army Corps, correct? Is that, that right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, the Women's Army Corps, um-hm. And I think she attained the rank of mayor--major. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think. Story_ID: 627556 Speaker 1: And then there was Harry Murphy [Harry Murphy, Jr.] who was their [Josephine Dibble Murphy and Harry Murphy, Sr.] son, and he had some experience at the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] for a brief moment. I don't know what it was, but he ultimately moved to New York [New York] and lived in New York. Speaker 2: Okay. So, do you think he--was he trying to attend the University of Mississippi or? Speaker 1: I've heard that he was (laughter). I'm just not sure of what happened. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: But there was something about his attempt to go. Speaker 2: Okay. Now you have a lot--plenty of members of your family are light complexioned. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Would it, would it be possible that he was trying to pass-- Speaker 1: He would've been able to. Speaker 2: --pass as a white man (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He would've been able to. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: But I don't know what happened on that. Speaker 2: Okay. So just leave a question mark behind that, but, but something is there probably for a historian to look into, wouldn't you say? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. So that's the Murphy family and I'm trying to do my father's [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.]--Ellie [Ellie Dibble Palmer] was his sister-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --who stayed all of her life in South Carolina. She married Edmund Palmer [Edmund Palmer, Sr.] and they had four boys. They lived in Sumter [South Carolina]. He had a funeral home there [Palmer Memorial Chapel], and Sumter is about thirty miles from Camden [South Carolina], and all of her boys went to this same Mather Academy [Camden, South Carolina] from Sumter and they would come and stay with their grandmother [Sallie Lee Dibble] and aunt who was unmarried and had lived with her mother the whole time she was alive. So, that's my father's side. Oh, Ellie--there was Andrew Dibble, who was a physician also. And I think he came to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. It would've been either Howard or Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. And he lived ultimately in Louisville, Kentucky, which is where he died. And then his sister, Jimmie. Her name was James Lawrence Dibble. She was a teacher in Camden and lived with her mother the entire time and took care of her mother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Her--she took care of her mother and that family also had property in Camden, which they kept for many, many, many years. Story_ID: 627557 Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories from his side of the family that go--that, that go all the way back to slavery times? Any stories about that, what they were doing in those days? Speaker 2: What they were doing? You know, I can't--well, there are stories with Elsie Goins' [Elsie Taylor Goins] books, I mean, and they tell stories a lot, you know, at these family reunions. She knows more of that than I do, but the stories we tended to hear were more about discrimination as it existed during their lifetime and the kinds of barriers to integrated living, which of course we knew very well living in Alabama. But, it's--it was interesting in terms of that generation, and that's the only one I know is my father's generation in, in South Carolina, and his siblings, that that generation experienced the hostilities of segregation, but also they lived so close to people, that there were also strong ties with the white community. It, it--it's an interesting dynamic because to some extent, we experienced that in Tuskegee [Alabama]. Skipping over, just as an example of that, we went away to school, as you know. All of us did, to high school, not to whole--the--all of high school. We went away the--to our junior year in high school. So, we were young being away from home, but I can remember our parents [Helen Taylor Dibble and Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] always saying to us if we needed anything, we could call Mr. Parker [J. Allen Parker], who was the head of the bank in Tuskegee [Alabama Exchange Bank], and it was true. So it was--it was a respectful relationship to some extent in spite of the hostilities of segregation and I don't know how you frame that to--when we went downtown in Tuskegee to shop, you know, it was fine. They knew all of us, knew us by name. I mean, and that was true for a lot of people there. But there was just this barrier and there was no social interaction other than at the place of business. Speaker 1: So, the business as far as it goes went smoothly you're saying but there's a social distance? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 627558 Speaker 1: Now, in, in Tuskegee [Alabama], did they practice--did they have a, a equal measure of discrimination for all black people or did they give black people that were lighter privileges? Or did it--did it make any difference? Or if you had property, did you get more privilege than someone who didn't, you know, in a bank or a store or somewhere? Speaker 2: No, they were courteous, but there was no social interaction in terms of anything else. I mean, their school was their school. We didn't go there. Their swimming pools were their swimming pools. We didn't go there. We went to our schools and our gyms and things. Speaker 1: I guess I'm asking if you were downtown Tuskegee on a Saturday, I mean, would black people have to get off the sidewalk or were, were they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no. Speaker 1: --enforcing those kind of rules or? Speaker 2: Oh, no. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: So, the interaction wasn't the--wasn't, wasn't as extreme as some other places. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. There was not a hostile environment. It was a segregated environment. I mean, you--as, as, as we used to say, when we'd go north and people would say to us, "How can you live in the South?" This was other black people. "How can you stand it?" (Laughter) And we used to tell them, "Well at least we know where we stand," (laughter), "openly." That was--you know, and it was very telling. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's--what you're describing is pretty much what would go on in Chicago [Illinois] or Dayton [Ohio] or any place else in those days, you know, where they would have the same kind of separation of people in actuality. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: 'Cause, I mean, even if you look at some of the schools in Chicago, they were all black. So, we always thought, you know, at least they--we would deal with the reality of the situation. Story_ID: 627559 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your--so, your father and mother [Helen Taylor Dibble] meet at Tuskegee's campus [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and this is what--about, about what year did they get married? Speaker 2: (Pause) Nineteen twenty- oh, I don't know. I have to get back on the exact date. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my--it must've been about '25 [1925], 1925. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. That's close. Speaker 2: 'Cause my sister [Helen Dibble Cannady] was born in '27 [1927]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they took that trip before she was born I'm sure. You know, they took a trip around the world with Robert (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now tell us about that. No, tell us about that. Speaker 2: --with Robert Russa Moton-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who was the president of Tuskegee. And he had encountered a lot, requiring very hard work, stringent activities, and the board of trustees offered him a trip to other parts of the world by ship and they wanted him to take his family because he had had such a rough--whatever. He had been ill and he said that he would not go unless his physician went, and it was at that time that he was planning to get married, and he said, well he really couldn't go at this time. Anyway, they were--they were sending Dr. Moton and his family. He had a daughter, Catherine [Catherine Moton Patterson]. Is that it, just Catherine Patterson? Catherine Moton. Anyway, they all ended up going. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he--so your, your, your father, Dr. Eugene Dibble [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.], went along to be the physician to-- Speaker 2: He was a physician (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Robert Russa Moton-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: --and got a all expense paid trip around the world (laughter). Speaker 2: I guess. I don't know what happened with the expenses (laughter). I'm sure it must have been something because he was young and had just started-- Speaker 1: So this-- Speaker 2: --in practice. Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is like a--this is a--sounds like a pretty good honeymoon to me, a trip around the world. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with one patient (laughter). Speaker 2: With one patient. Speaker 1: Or his family, you could say the whole family, but, still, that's--so, are there any stories about that trip? I mean, they, they went by boat, right, on a liner? Speaker 2: They went by the--yeah, they did. And he also had the opportunity to go and visit hospitals and see new procedures and all of that and spent a lot of time doing that. Story_ID: 627560 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about his trip that he tells, I mean? Speaker 2: Well, the--som- a lot of the stories, of course, were tales that they had never been exposed to in terms of the kinds of services on a boat trip that--and going that distance, the kinds of accommodations. We heard a lot about the kinds of hospitals they had and surgeries they did and customs of the different countries that they shared. But, it was quite a trip. And Dr. Moton [Robert Russa Moton] had his children, his daughter, Catherine [Catherine Moton Patterson], anyway and his wife [Jennie Booth Moton]. Speaker 1: Now, this would make--this would make your father [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] and mother [Helen Taylor Dibble] two of the best traveled black people in the United States, if not the best, you know, other than the Motons. I--you know, the--I don't think it was a regular thing for black people to take world trips, you know, around the world, so this is a--this is really important. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And periodically, I remember I was at the School of Social Work [Howard University School of Social Work, Washington, D.C.] and somebody was doing some research on something and they pulled up something on that trip and gave it to me in relation to some work that was done while they were there. But, it was quite an experience. Speaker 1: So this trip--and, and people can look it up, but it's somewhere between 1925 and 1927, that they took this trip, right? Speaker 2: It would have to be, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Twenty-five [1925], yeah, more towards the '25 [1925]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because Helen [Helen Dibble Cannady], my sister, was born in '27 [1927], and so it wouldn't have been then. I mean, it was before then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She wouldn't have left a baby at home (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a--so anyway, that's a--this is a--quite a--do you know what countries they went to at all? I mean, just a survey of any of-- Speaker 2: The Far East I know. Speaker 1: Okay. So they did go to China (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Far East. Yeah. Japan I know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I can get that. Speaker 1: I suppose they went to Europe I would think, but-- Speaker 2: No, they--I don't think they-- Speaker 1: They didn't? Speaker 2: --went to Europe. I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, I may be wrong. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was-- Speaker 2: I just heard most about the Far East. Speaker 1: Philippines? Speaker 2: They may have gone there. Story_ID: 627561 Speaker 1: So your father [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.], he went on to become like a, a mentor to many black physicians like Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] and others. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They would come--what, what was--describe the, the annual gathering he held at John Andrews hospital [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 2: It was called the John A. Andrew clinic and they--the group of people who would come became the John A. Andrew Clinical Society. And as you may or may not know, medical resources in the South were very limited for black people. People would come from all around the counties to get care, and one of the things that they decided was to not only have a teaching clinic in terms of verbal teaching, but they would open it up for an opportunity for people who had unusual problems, who needed surgery and whatever. And they would have physicians who came from all over the country to spend that week and sometimes it was in lectures and sometimes it was on the operating table, operating on somebody. Speaker 1: Okay. You say people with unusual medical issues would come there during this period of time? Speaker 2: Could, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And they would receive I guess some sort of pioneering procedure or something? Speaker 2: Not necessarily pioneering as much as, you know, a specialist. You know, in those days, you didn't have specialists as much as we have now. You know, you went to a doctor and the doctor had to do everything. But what they would do is if there were unusual problems that they were aware of, they would then seek out people who had that expertise to provide--it was usually surgery, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And these doctors met for a week, usually in April. Story_ID: 627562 Speaker 1: These doctors that would be specialists and it didn't matter what race they were, right? So, white doctors can (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right. White, black, whoever, yes. They would send out an announcement of the John A. Andrew Clinical Society and everyone was invited who would come. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, there was a dearth of, of healthcare and, you know, I remember my father worked seven days a week the entire time I was growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were saying off camera here that, that you were treated at one of the--on, on one of the weeks where they, they, they brought in a physician from St. Louis [Missouri] who-- Speaker 2: No, no. I went to St. Louis. Speaker 1: Oh, you went to St. Louis? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to St. Louis. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. But this was a doctor that had been involved in the John Andrew clinic? Speaker 2: I don't know whether he had or not. I don't think he had, actually. I think they were just trying to find out--find a resource for my care and they took--I was trying to think. I don't think my father even went. I think my mother [Helen Taylor Dibble] took me. Speaker 1: Okay. And you had a lip op- operation, was it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What, what was the problem? Speaker 2: I had a cleft lip-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I was born. Speaker 1: All right. So, you were a baby at this time? Speaker 2: I was a baby, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. But I must've gone back a couple of times because I know one of the times my mother took me to Chicago [Illinois] because our Chicago family always talk about that trip, when we came and, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the, the situation--so, so, this--what your father was doing, what Dr. Dibble [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] was doing was bringing in specialists so that black physicians could, could learn some of the specialties I guess or how to treat some of the problems. Speaker 2: Well, it was for black physicians to have an ongoing, what we call today, continuing education experience. But, the second part of it was that in that part of the country, it was overwhelming for black patients to get care and to provide the physicians who could render the care 'cause it was a limited number of people in Tuskegee [Alabama]. And so this was one way of doing what they called service and education. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And just as the patient got service, the physician may not have had any experience in the particular area that this physician had come to teach about, and so it was that kind of--and then they had meetings just like you do at a regular conference. Speaker 1: So correct me if I'm wrong, but the, the, the black physicians were largely general practitioners because they couldn't be assigned a specialty in a hospital because there, there were no hospitals to really assign them to, right? I mean, the hospitals wouldn't bring them on. Speaker 2: Well, there were limited hospitals and I'm sure black physicians had difficulty getting away from the--I mean, to, to go into other hospitals, but the hospitals were Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.], Homer G. Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital] in St. Louis, Harlem Hospital in New York [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: There was Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] in-- Speaker 2: Provident, yeah. But in other words, we could name them and that didn't mean you had them located in every state at all. Speaker 1: Yeah, Grady Memorial [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Grady, um-hm, um-hm. So, it was, it was not an easy time. And my father worked seven days a week, every week, every week. You know, he'd take a couple of breaks, but-- Speaker 1: So, did you see him very much when you were growing up, you know, with him working like that? Speaker 2: Well, yes because, for example, in Tuskegee, we--everybody used to go home for lunch at twelve o'clock in the day (laughter). I still can't figure out how they did that. But, we used to have a meal at twelve o'clock and, and in Tuskegee, you'd see all the cars going home to eat and then go back. But, we didn't see a lot of him except that we lived in such a small community that we were always interacting in some way. You know, whether we had to take something up there to him or he had to get something or he wanted something for a patient, I mean, it was all very interwoven in terms of your work life and your family life and your social life even. Story_ID: 627563 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Let's see. I don't know that I ever even thought of that. Let's see. (Pause) I'm trying to think. I guess the earliest memories that I think of about family life was we used to always take a ride on Sunday and that ride was usually--the destination was to see some patient who was ill. And on those Sundays, we would ride out and we would usually stay in the car, if there was an outside to play around and the biggest thing after that was going to get an ice cream cone. That was our Sunday (laughter). And I remember those very well because so much of life had to be integrated, you know. That was his [Dibble Walker's father, Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] way of taking us out, but it was also his way of seeing his patients, going out to see what was going on and treating them. And we would play outside. You know, we'd get out of the car and play out in the yard and when he was done, we would get back in and, you know, maybe just take a ride around the community (laughter). That was a big thing there, taking a ride. Story_ID: 627564 Speaker 1: Your father [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.], sounds like he was under a lot of pressure, being one of the few physicians around that area. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: You know, and he--and he felt obligation to serve. Speaker 2: That's right. That's very true. In fact, when we left Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], at the dedication for the Taylor building [Robert R. Taylor School of Architecture and Construction Science], we were not coming back to Washington [D.C.], we were going somewhere else, and so we went another route, and going that route, I remember I used to work in the record room to help--when I say work, I would help them with records, you know, 'cause there was so many people coming and from so many different places, and I remember those little towns that I used to, you know, write down the town where someone was coming from, and I couldn't imagine that people had come that far. Because we would go through those towns and I would say I never knew this town was that far from Tuskegee [Alabama] because people were always coming in from great distances that I had no appreciation for as a child. But, it was quite something. And as I said, that was just last year when we went down to that event and we went a different route 'cause we drove. Speaker 1: When you were growing up then, your, your mother [Helen Taylor Dibble], did she basically serve as a house- housewife or did she work outside of the home at all? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. She worked. She worked, though (laughter), she definitely worked. Now, she was at home with us and very active in the community. She was always organizing children's activities for us and they had a strong belief in busy children, happy (laughter) children. And they did work very hard. You know, we didn't have places to go. You know, they'd have to organize a teen center so we could have teenage dances on Friday nights, supervised by parents. There was a lot of parent supervision (laughter) in that town, a lot of it. And--but she was very active, very active. Story_ID: 627565 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' [Helen Taylor Dibble and Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] talents and their dispositions, their habits, their looks, who, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I don't think I look like either one, particularly. You know, people in the South always say, "Come here. Aren't you So and So?" And, you know, you--I--I'd say, "Yeah, I am." "I could tell by your looks" (laughter). I never thought I looked like anybody other than me. But, I don't, I don't think necessarily that any of us with the exception of my brother, Bobby [Robert Dibble], who by the way lives across the street from me, who I think looks very much like my mother's brother, Rob Taylor [Robert Rochon Taylor]. But, the rest of them, I don't, I don't think we look alike to each other as siblings and I don't think we necessarily look alike, our parents. I don't know. Speaker 1: What about your disposition and, you know, interests? Speaker 2: Well, I think my disposition is probably a lot like my dad's, but I don't know. I think they both instilled a lot in me and--but I think I tend to be more like my dad. Story_ID: 627566 Speaker 1: What were--you've explained some of this already, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Of growing up? Food. We had a lot of food (laughter). Looks like we were always eating. And that's not really true except we ate three meals a day. You know, now, you don't do that. We don't do it. And if we do, they're not meals at home. So, meals, mealtime is something that I always think about in Tuskegee [Alabama]. And remember, we're talking about a town where everybody usually drove home for lunch, for that twelve to one [o'clock]. So, you'd see people moving and going home to lunch and going back to work. I think work, work and community, and by community, I mean that we were always with people, with our friends, with students, with the people who worked on the grounds, the people who worked in the stores and the drugstore where we'd get sodas. Those were all familiar people and familiar places. We were big people people. And by big people, I mean we did a lot of interaction with neighbors and friends and students. And you have to remember that there's a lot of action going on on a campus and we lived right in front of the girls dormitory, down a hill. Our house was there and up the hill was the girls dormitory. So, there's a lot of action going. You know, we could see the girls courting. You know, we learned a lot about courting just watching the students (laughter). We were in chapel every Sunday. Students marched to chapel. Cleanliness was huge in (laughter) Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. You know, when I say cleanliness, you just didn't see paper on the grounds. You'd see those students in those white uniform tops and navy blue skirts and the boys--and they had a line of march- you may know this, I don't know, to chapel every Sunday. And the band played and the students marched, and we sat on the hill every Sunday watching the march to chapel. So, we were just very involved in the life of the town. Story_ID: 627567 Speaker 1: Were there still people around who remembered Booker T. Washington when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. And then, you know, we had his daughter who lived there, Portia, Portia Pittman [Portia Washington Pittman]. And then, you know, his brothers had children there. So, definitely the Washington family was well known. And you saw them a lot because his daughter-in-law [Edith Meriwether Washington]--I'm trying to think of what brother she was married to [Ernest Davidson Washington]--anyway, she started a candy shop [Washington Candy Company]. She made candy, the most delicious candy you'd ever want to eat, and so they lived right there on the ca- I mean, right outside the gates of the campus [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Now, did she have a specialty in terms of the, the candy she made? Was it made with local ingredients or, or like pecans or something? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she used pecans and chocolate, just delicious candy, yeah, indigenous to Tuskegee [Alabama]. In fact, her daughter tried to continue it, Margaret [Margaret Washington Clifford]. She moved to Atlanta [Georgia], though, but ultimately after Mrs. Washington died, it faded away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think her daughter, though, did try to do something with the recipes. I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Now, the campus from what I understand, you know, was host to many dignitaries and celebrities. Do, do you remember some of those people coming to campus? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. When they would come to campus, they would usually speak at the--at the chapel and--do you know anything about that ritual, the campus marching and--for example, when the trustees came, they would all stand right in front of George Washington Carver's lab [laboratory], I mean the building, to watch this parade and there were just many influential people in the country who would come who were on the trustee board. I'm trying to think. I know one of the families was, of course, the family who gave the hospital, who were the Masons of Massachusetts. Speaker 1: I think--yeah, I--'cause I thought, yeah, John Andrew [John Albion Andrew] was the governor of Massachusetts during the Civil War, I believe, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That commissioned the 54th Massachusetts [54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment]. He's even depicted in the movie 'Glory.' Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: So that's the John Andrew of John Andrew hospital [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And Mrs. Mason continued to be very interested in that hospital until she died. There are letters and files somewhere that she wrote with regularity and continued her interest. I think one of the Rockefellers came down, too. I don't know which one it was. But that was kind of a tradition among black colleges [HBCUs]. I'm thinking about they tended to give a lot to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], (cough) but the role was primarily trustee. Speaker 1: I know the buildings on campus were--had--some were part of the Carnegie-- Speaker 2: Carnegie. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Carnegie building--libraries [Carnegie Library], and Rosenwald Fund [Julius Rosenwald Fund]-- Speaker 2: Funds. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They're still doing-- Speaker 1: From Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) something now with Rosenwald. Speaker 1: Yeah. I know now there's-- Speaker 2: And interesting, the housing project in Chicago [Illinois] that Robert Taylor [Robert Rochon Taylor] managed was a Rosenwald. My husband [George H. Walker III] grew up in the Rosenwald [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: That's, that's the Rosenwald building on 47th [Street] and South Park [sic.], I think? Speaker 2: That's where he was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. In fact, they used to have a re- a reunion of the residents of the Rosenwald. We've been to them. (Cough) But, I think they stopped 'cause the generation now has moved beyond. Story_ID: 627568 Speaker 1: Now where did you--so, I take it you went to school on campus [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], right? Was it the campus-- Speaker 2: I did. I went to the nursery school first. Speaker 1: Did, did, did it have a name? I mean, what was the name of it? Or did they have a-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether--I don't think they had a n- we just called it the nursery school. But then the next school was the Chambliss Children's House [Chambliss Children's House School, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went there 'til sixth grade, through fifth grade, I guess. And then a Catholic high--a Catholic school had opened there in Tuskegee [Alabama] run by the Dominican nuns, and some of my friends were going there and I wanted to go, and my parents [Helen Taylor Dibble and Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] decided to let me go, so I went there and graduated from eighth grade. Speaker 1: So, so what was the name of that one? Speaker 2: St. Joseph's [St. Joseph Catholic School, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: St. Joseph's? Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. But up 'til then, I had been in the Chambliss Children's House. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so you finished-- Speaker 2: In fact-- Speaker 1: You finished the eighth grade, okay. Speaker 2: One of the things I wanted to show you was the report card that was given at the Chambliss Children's House. You have never seen so many entries (laughter) into a report card that had lots to do with academic skills, but tons to do with cleanliness, neatness, respect for teachers. I mean, it's, it's an amazing report card. I will try to locate it and send it to you to see. Speaker 1: So, so these are categories that you're, you're rated on, I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Cleanliness, neatness-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: The punctuality. Speaker 2: All of that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And all those. Speaker 2: All of that, yeah. Now, I don't know whether that was customary in all schools during that era, but I have been amazed. I mean, I was amazed when I saw that report card. Speaker 1: Children today really aren't graded like that, I guess. Speaker 2: No, at least I haven't seen any and I have grandchildren who have been coming through the schools, but I've never seen anything on that--in that regard. Story_ID: 627569 Speaker 1: Well, did you like school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: I liked spelling, you know, 'cause we had those spelling bees and I thought that was a lot of fun. And I loved to read. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the other thing I liked a lot about the school was they incorporated music. Speaker 1: Now, this is in Chambliss? Speaker 2: Chambliss Children's House [Chambliss Children's House School, Tuskegee, Alabama], um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: So, was, was it music beyond what a normal school would have, I mean most schools would have in terms of-- Speaker 2: I think probably so. Now, I don't know whether I'm judging that based on the schools in my era as much as whether I'm judging it based on the schools that I've seen my grandchildren go into and my own children. My children don't have near the love for music that we all did and I attribute that to having been exposed to it all the time there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and the significance of music. Speaker 1: What, what, what kind of music would you--were, were you exposed to? Speaker 2: Well, we were big on the spirituals. You know, that was very important that we all knew the spirituals. And then of course the national, you know, the patriotic songs, we were big on that, 'This Is My Country,' and occasionally hymns, but not, not often except, you know, Christmastime and that, but they were more the kind of patriotic songs. Speaker 1: Now, did, did Paul Robeson ever come to campus when you were there? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: I'm just asking because he was just a musical ambassador (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --and so-- Speaker 2: Indeed. And there was another one, too, who had been at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] with my mother [Helen Taylor Dibble], Roland Hayes. He came. Speaker 1: Okay. I suppose--I don't know now-- Speaker 2: Oh, but William L. Dawson [William Levi Dawson] was fabulous. I mean, he really was. And that's what I mean by living in a community with people who had unusual talents and also--I'm glad you mentioned William Dawson because in later years, every Sunday evening, he and his wife [Cecile Nicholson Dawson] came to our house, every Sunday evening about 5:30, 6:00. 'Cause, you know, there, we used to have our dinner in the middle of the day at twelve o'clock. But, it was a joy to hear him talk about music. And we took music lessons, which is another thing up in--there was a music building at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and they had music lessons for children. Story_ID: 627570 Speaker 1: What I was saying is that when the trustees and others who were philanthropists would come to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], the music was always very important. It was important to the Tuskegee community, but the guests and the visitors just had not heard music like they heard in that chapel, and several of the students were identified and received opportunities to move on into music careers through their interests, and that was always good to see. Speaker 2: So, the trustees were, were almost like talent scouts in some sense. If they recognized the talent of somebody-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: --it could launch their career. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Did Marian Anderson ever come to the campus while you were there? Speaker 1: I'm almost sure she did, but I don't know why I go back and forth on that, whether I know she did or whether I think she did. That--but you're raising another--I'm pretty sure she did--another issue, and that is that there was an entertainment committee in Tuskegee and we had artists from all over who would come as a part of the entertainment series, they called it, pianists, vocalists, poets, and that's, that's what it was called, the entertainment series. And we had movies, too, in the gymnasium on Saturday nights. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. That was for students, but people in the community could go. Speaker 2: Okay. So, so that was the black--that was the movie theater for the black community, I guess, of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Tuskegee [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Well, you know, we couldn't go downtown. Oh, we had a theater downtown [Macon Theatre, Tuskegee, Alabama]. We were separated by a wall. There was the white theater, the black theater next door. Story_ID: 627571 Speaker 1: So you, you finished eighth grade at St. Joseph's [St. Joseph Catholic School, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 2: St. Joseph's, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any special teachers in--either at Chambliss [Chambliss Children's House School, Tuskegee, Alabama] or at St. Joseph's that, that are, are particularly important for your, your growth and development? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, there was a nun, Sister Norena [ph.], was her name, that I was always impressed with. She was very smart. She was compassionate, but she did something that I always just used to cringe when she would do it. Some kid would be out of order or something and she would say, "I'm so disappointed in you. I'm gonna take the punishment this time and you'll take it the next time," and she would hit herself in the hand as hard as she could. I was horrified. But at the same time, I had so much respect for her because she, she never did hit a child. That was always her threat. But, that was--she was a teacher that I thought that we all just flourished in her classroom. Speaker 1: Now, during that era, was it--was it--I'm gonna ask an obvious question here, but was it common for people to spank their children and, and render corporal punishment at school and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Now, I never saw it other than that instance, but I don't ever remember seeing her hit a child. She would hit herself and tell you, "You're gonna--I'm gonna take it this time and you're going to next time," but I didn't hear her--see her do it. Speaker 1: No, I'm, I'm asking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --that in general-- Speaker 2: But others-- Speaker 1: --in the community-- Speaker 2: --others-- Speaker 1: --was that, was, was that common? Was corporal punishment the common way of dealing with problems with discipline of children? Speaker 2: Parents. I don't know about teachers. I never, I never heard that or experienced it, and I knew several schools there. There was a school called Lewis Adams [Lewis Adams Elementary School, Tuskegee, Alabama], which was out in the community and then there was the Children's House, which was on the campus [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and then there was high school [Tuskegee Institute High School, Tuskegee, Alabama]. But, I never heard of any corporal punishment, really. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And I don't--you know, and I had brothers [HistoryMaker Eugene H. Dibble, III and Robert Dibble]. They would--I would've known if they had experienced it and I don't think so. No, I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I thought I'd ask because--yeah, it's kind of important. I, I--some people think that that's the only way to discipline a child and they--you know, they, they argue that even today and so I just wanted to-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) make sure that that's on the record. Story_ID: 627572 Speaker 1: So after the eighth grade, now, you, you went to Tuskegee's high school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was it called? Speaker 2: Tuskegee Institute High School [Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: I think so (laughter) even though it really wasn't the institute's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, you know, we had those segregated schools so we had--there was public money in the school. The, the whites had a school downtown, in the town of Tuskegee [Alabama] and ours was out near the campus out on Franklin Road. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was high school like? Speaker 2: High school was good. We had some good teachers. Did you ever know Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette]? Sam's sister was my math teacher, Lyda Yette [Lyda McKeldin]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was terrific. Speaker 1: Yeah, Sam Yette is a black journalist who was one of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --pioneer black journalists of-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --the country, right, taught at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: That's right, he taught at Howard. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And he was on the, I guess it's public relations of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] before he came here. They were from Chattanooga, Tex- Tennessee [sic.], I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, his, his sister, Lyda Yette-- Speaker 2: His sister, she was terrific. She knew math, she really did. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a match teacher, okay. Speaker 2: And then--there, there was some really excellent teachers there. I'm thinking about a Mr. Poole [O.H. Poole] who was our biology teacher, and he was great. He had us dissecting everything and (laughter) all that, but a strict disciplinarian, too. He had that role at the school and I remember statements that he made. You know, we'd have movies at school sometimes and the lights would go off, and this is high school, so you know the students were starting to move around, and he would snap the light on and he would stand up and he'd say, "What's done in the dark will be brought to the light" (laughter). That was his statement, but I've never forgotten that. But that, too, is what I remember so much about Tuskegee in terms of the values. There were always--there was an effort, I should say, to inculcate that in young people. And you'd see it in the schools as well as in the college. Story_ID: 627573 Speaker 1: So you were at Tuskegee high school [Tuskegee Institute High School, Tuskegee, Alabama] for-- Speaker 2: Two years, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for two years and then you--now, you had a, a--you went on to boarding school, right? Speaker 2: Boarding school. Speaker 1: In? Speaker 2: Northfield [Northfield School for Girls; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's-- Speaker 2: East Northfield, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And far away from home. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rode on the coach train all the way up. Speaker 1: Now, your sister [Helen Dibble Cannady], she's--she was a little older than you, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. She took me to Northfield, but she was on her way to college when I went. She was entering her first year of college. But she had gone to two years of Northfield, too. Speaker 1: Okay. What did she say--were you looking forward to going? Speaker 2: I was but I was a little scared about going. I, I wasn't quite as independent as some of the others and she took me up there, and I remember we went to this spot on the campus and I cried because she was leaving, but it was fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were--there were difficult times, though. I remember there was a girl there that I had decided I was gonna room with. Now, Northfield did assign you to black students--I mean, blacks together, and I was going to room with this girl the next year that had become a friend of mine, and her parents said she couldn't room with a black girl. So, I called my parents [Helen Taylor Dibble and Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] and I was just so upset and she was too and she wanted to fight it and she wanted to do this and that, and my parents said, "You can't room with her either." I said, "Well, why?" They said, "Because she's too young to alienate herself from her parents and she's dependent on her parents." She said--they said, "You be good friends, but that's all because now we won't let you room with her." And they were probably right 'cause she really wanted to just, let's do this in spite of and we were fifteen then, so--but, you didn't encounter those kinds of situations. Speaker 1: So, in, in general, was, was, was there--I mean, did you feel like welcome on campus? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I did feel welcome, but I, I knew, I knew there was a core of discomfort among some people and it particularly manifested itself in incidents like that with parents, you know. The kids were doing fine, but then a parent could express concern and problems and that became somewhat problematic. Story_ID: 627574 Speaker 1: How many other black students were on--I mean, how many students were there altogether and, and how many were black? Speaker 2: Oh, well I think there were five hundred in the school [Northfield School for Girls; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts]. I would say maybe thirty-five--I wanna say thirty-five to fifty, but I don't think it was that many unless I'm also thinking about the boys who were at Mount Hermon [Mount Hermon School for Boys; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Well, that's more than I would've thought, you know, to tell the truth. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: Yes. I mean, I, I have no idea, but I, I would've thought there would be less. But, so they--there were--there--so, there was a little community of African Americans there that--yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, but, I take it people had--didn't restrict their activities to just their own race, I guess, in terms of-- Speaker 2: No. No. There was, you know--and there at the school, we had to affiliate in different ways because we had our courses, of course, and different courses with students, but we also had jobs to do every, every day, and you were assigned. My assignment was, the first year I had bathrooms. Then another semester, I had pots. I had to clean those deep pots, you know, the (laughter) big pots they use for--and then the third assignment I had was monitoring the bed check, which meant that when you got up in the morning, you had to pull your sheets, you know, totally out, I mean, and tight and under the mattress and leave the bed open while you went to breakfast. Then you had to come back and make it up. But we had students who went down to check to make sure that it was (laughter) straight. So, I had that job my third year. And then my fourth--I mean third semester. My fourth semester, I worked in the office of the headmistress. So, I worked my way up a little bit. Speaker 1: Okay. Did some people get stuck in the pot cleaning job or the, the--what was it? Speaker 2: Sometimes, but they tried to rotate it. They tried. Story_ID: 627575 Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you started-- Speaker 2: Northfield [Northfield School for Girls; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Fifteen. Speaker 1: Fifteen? So, this is 1951, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: I think that's right, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Nineteen fifty-one [1951] and this is, I guess, the last year [sic.] of the Truman administration [President Harry S. Truman]. Do you remember anything about--I mean, what, what, what are your memories concerning the, the war [World War II, WWII]? I mean, when you were back in Tuskegee [Alabama], did you--did you know the Tuskegee Airmen on, on--I, I guess you'd have to, right? Speaker 2: Very well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I just last Sunday went to a book party that the granddaughter [Karen Hudson Freeman] of Paul Williams [Paul R. Williams], you know the architect, has written a book about her grandfather ['Paul R. Williams: Classic Hollywood Style'], the architect to the stars, and she was here. When she came in, I remembered her father was one of the Tuskegee Airmen and spent his entire free time at our house, and that was just last Sunday, El Hudson [sic. Elbert T. Hudson]. But, we got to know the Tuskegee Airmen very well. They were in our house for dinner every Sunday. I mean, not all of them (laughter), but different segments of them would come for dinner because so many of them, not all, but a number of them had never been south and either parents or friends of parents or somebody would write people that they knew in Tuskegee and asked them to help them with it, so that was an interesting time. Now, my sister, Helen [Helen Dibble Cannady], was around their age and there's sort of a family joke that when all of these men were coming to Tuskegee, my parents [Helen Taylor Dibble and Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.], that's when they decided to send her to prep (laughter) school away 'cause there was so many coming in. But, it was--it was a wonderful experience to get to know so many of those young men. Speaker 1: All right. Did, did you see the recent movie about the Tuskegee Airmen ['Red Tails']? Speaker 2: I haven't seen it. I was away. My brother went, though, 'cause he's--how--did you see it? Speaker 1: I saw it and I, I was kind of disappointed that they started in Italy. They didn't even start on the campus [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. They (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, really? Speaker 1: Yeah, they didn't talk about their training, they just had them in action, you know, from the very beginning. So, they kind of missed a lot of the story. I was telling my-- Speaker 2: Of the story. Speaker 1: --daughter that, you know--yeah. So, at any rate, they were a big part of growing up, I guess? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you would've been-- Speaker 2: I was the youngest. So, that was forty--what? Forty-fou- '43 [1943]? Forty-four [1944]? Speaker 1: Yeah, forty--yeah, something like that, '43 [1943] or so. You would've been just-- Speaker 2: Thirty-six [1936] to '43 [1943]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Seven. Speaker 1: Yeah, seven years old. Speaker 2: Eight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was a, a, a time with all of the tragedy of it that we met many, many friends. Story_ID: 627576 Speaker 1: Okay, so, in, in high school, the latter two years of high school, you adjusted fairly well at Northfield [Northfield School for Girls; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts], I guess, and you were able to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I got over my homesickness and, yeah, my senior year, I really enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Okay. You didn't--now, did you--are there any particular teachers that kind of stand out there? Speaker 2: Well, actually, the one that really stands out for me--I had some excellent teachers, was the choir director, Raymond [Albert R. Raymond]--no, I'll tell you a name in, in a minute--Mr. Raymond--was his last name Raymond? Anyway, he had a wonderful music program and I think that I took to that because of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and music being so important to us there. But, I loved it and I sang. We had different levels of choirs. There were everybody and then there was a, a--I just thought of it--sanctuary, which was kind of the second level choir and then I didn't make the (unclear), which was the highest level, which had a smaller group, but really very talented. I wasn't very talented. I was talented--I mean, I could sing 'cause I grew up in Tuskegee [Alabama], but I would--didn't have a great voice, but I loved music and I enjoyed him a lot. Story_ID: 627577 Speaker 1: What kind of counseling did you get at Northfield [Northfield School for Girls; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts] in terms of college? Speaker 2: College counseling? A lot. They spent a lot of time on trying to help you decide what kind of college you wanted to--and helping you with the application process and that sort of thing. Speaker 1: And, and you decided to go to Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I think so, okay. Now, why did you decide Sarah Lawrence? Speaker 2: Well, I found out about Sarah Lawrence from my mother [Helen Taylor Dibble] who had met the president of Sarah Lawrence [Harold Taylor], and I liked the smallness of Sarah Lawrence and I liked the, the academics. I liked the idea of having an opportunity to have a separate class individually with a professor, which is what we did. We not--and we had very small classes there. And in that context, you also had an opportunity to meet every week, sometimes twice a week with someone who was your professor in the in--so you had an individual class and then you had an overall don, a person who guided you through the academic process in trying to help you find out what you're interested in and that sort of thing, and I liked it a lot. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a lot different from state universities-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, of today. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so-- Speaker 2: And I still look back on it because they had interviewed me recently for something there and one of the things that I said was how much I appreciated this professor who was by the name of Engler [Robert Engler], who had recently died, as a matter of fact, but I worked with him on the Emmett Till case, and I was interested because just recently, you know, with this case in Florida. Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They have been bringing up-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Emmett Till. And so I remembered all the conference work that I did with the debating and so forth. Speaker 1: Now, now you mean--what do you mean worked on the case? What, what did you all do? Speaker 2: Not worked on the case in Mississippi, the analysis of the case and why it had happened and how could it have happened in a society that allowed this child to be killed with no justice and that whole-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is--Emmett Till was killed in, what, nineteen fifty-- Speaker 2: Fifty--was it '55 [1955] or '56 [1956]? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think--yeah, '55 [1955]-- Speaker 2: Somewhere there. Speaker 1: --I think it would have to be. Yeah, it was prior to the civil--to Montgomery Bus Boycott. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, it had to be '54 [1954] or '55 [1955]? Speaker 2: Maybe '54 [sic. 1955]? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Maybe I did that in my second year, I don't know. Speaker 1: Well, maybe if it's--yeah, but--so, he analyzed the case in class then, I guess, right, and? Speaker 2: Had me analyze it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, there, you have classes, but you also have a separate class, individual class with you professor once a week, so it was in that class that I was doing it individually and then I presented it to the class. Speaker 1: Do you remember the Jet magazine photo of Emmett Till from those day? Speaker 2: I do vaguely. It was horrible. It was a horrible case. Story_ID: 627578 Speaker 1: You grew up in a era where lynching had tailed off a little bit. It wasn't as bad as, as it had been. Before 1930, it was like really just unbelievable, you know, but it had tailed off some in the '30s [1930s]. So, did, did you hear those kind of stories in the South when you were growing up? Did--or were you kind of sheltered from that? Speaker 2: We were somewhat sheltered, but we also heard the stories of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] marching there and the kind of response that the school [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] was making to it and we, we were not sheltered from hearing about it. And, and always, there was that kind of fear. I'm not saying that we experienced daily fear, but we knew people there who did experience serious problems, I mean, just going downtown to--I mean, down to--well, downtown, but also to go to Montgomery, which is where you had to go for bigger shopping. There were incidents. I mean, we knew we had to go to Dean Drug Store, you know, Dean's drugstore in Montgomery, Alabama? You--you're not--I mean, but that was the place. You go to Montgomery and you'd spend the day because you're trying to get everything you need, but you had no place to eat, and the one place we could go was Dean's drugstore, which was a black drugstore not far from black town. You know, you were always having to make accommodations and you'd have to wonder what happened to people who couldn't make accommodations, who just needed to live, you know, with where they are and being able to do things where they are, but that's growing up in a segregated society. Story_ID: 627579 Speaker 1: At Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York] then, what field did you decide to go into as a result of-- Speaker 2: I tended to do most of my work in political science and psychology. Speaker 1: Okay. Does Sarah Lawrence require you to declare a major or? Speaker 2: Not in the same way that most liberal arts colleges do. You have much more freedom, much more academic freedom. Story_ID: 627580 Speaker 1: So, you graduated from Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York] and--now, is there anything about Sarah Lawrence that we, we haven't talked about, anything? Now, you had the class where you had to--you went over Emmett Till. Let's see. What, what else was going on there that you--we need to mention before we move on? Speaker 2: Well, I also sort of got an--began an interest in early childhood education, too, which is something they were very strong on and had an early childhood program there at the college. And I don't know whether you know [HistoryMaker] Barbara Bowman who's--Barbara had gone to Sarah Lawrence and, of course, her area is early childhood education and-- Speaker 1: Now, now that's your cousin, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Speaker 1: That's your first cousin. Speaker 2: My first cousin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. And she was one of the executives in the Erikson Institute [Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: She's the daughter of Robert-- Speaker 2: Robert-- Speaker 1: --Rochon Taylor [Robert Rochon Taylor]. Speaker 2: Taylor, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: There were two daughters, Lauranita [HistoryMaker Lauranita Dugas] and Barbara. Lauranita went to Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now--oh, what was your social life like in college? Now, now you're at a all-girls college, Sarah Lawrence, but there was a--you interacted with one--with students from-- Speaker 2: From all different places (laughter), you know, all around. There were some at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Middlebury [Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont], Boston [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]. I mean, so you had to go away or they came down, so. Speaker 1: Now, did, did you join a sorority? Speaker 2: No, we didn't have any sororities. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Is it still that way now? Speaker 2: Still that way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. And I never joined a sorority after I left either. I did join The Links [The Links, Incorporated]. Story_ID: 627581 Speaker 1: So, you graduated in--from Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York] in, what's it-- Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957]. Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so you went--did you go immediately to graduate school afterwards? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: I went to Columbia [Columbia University]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is where you go to Columbia in New York City [New York, New York] and so what was your major? Speaker 2: I went into psychiatric social work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I did a field placement first year in public welfare in New York City, which was very different. I learned to go all over the Bronx [New York] and everywhere. And my field placement was the first year in the department of welfare [City of New York Department of Welfare; City of New York Department of Social Services], so that meant I was in the home visiting and working with people who were on welfare. And then my second year, I was at the Columbia University Presbyterian Hospital [Columbia Presbyterian Hospital; New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] in the Department of Psychiatry. Speaker 1: Now, were these--I mean, was it hard to adjust to New York City and, and the, the--you know, the, the real deep urban problems of New York City all at once? 'Cause you, you grew up in Tuskegee [Alabama] in a family like atmosphere, you go to New England to bucolic colleges (laughter), and then you go--you--all, all of the sudden you're in-- Speaker 2: In New York City. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, although I had--you know, I knew a little bit about New York City because we'd go from Bronxville [New York] into New York on the train and we'd go back and forth a lot 'cause it was a short trip. But it, it was very much--it was different for me when I went to Columbia and had my field placement in public housing. And by public housing, I was really trying to work with people who didn't have jobs and, of course, being in New York making home visits is very different in the sense that you may be going to twelve, fifteen story walkup buildings. So, it was difficult but I enjoyed it. And--I shouldn't say I enjoyed it, but I, I learned a lot about the people. I became friends with some of them. And when I say friends, I don't mean I was--I was friends in the sense of they viewed me as being a person that wanted to help. Sometimes they didn't want my help because it meant they'd have to go back to work and that sometimes was problematic. But, I learned a lot. It was a totally new experience as you point out, you know, being in this big city after I'd been in small towns and so forth. But, I, I enjoyed my work very much and I learned a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you have--were there any particular instructors or people you met along the way in the, the department of welfare that guided you? Speaker 2: Yes and I'm--well, I had that first year in, in public welfare and then the second year--right now, I can't think of the names of my two people who were supervising me, but in the second year, I was in the Department of Psychiatry at--they've changed the name of the hospital, but it's the big Columbia University hospital. And I learned a lot and I enjoyed being in an interdisciplinary area because we worked a lot with different disciplines in the hospital. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, of course, I was familiar with hospitals since I'd (laughter) grown up in one practically [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama], but this was a much, much bigger place. Story_ID: 627582 Speaker 1: What was the mood in New York City [New York, New York] amongst poor people in those days? Speaker 2: Among poor people? I think it, it was a way of life for some. And when I say a way of life, I'm thinking about one family that I worked with that had six children and he was an able bodied person to work, but couldn't for whatever psychological reason or whatever, and it was one of the hardest things I'd ever had to deal with because no matter how hard I tried with jobs and--he would figure out a way not to have to deal with it, and that was an experience, a first experience for me because I had not encountered people who for whatever reason can't work, and I say can't as opposed to don't want to. But, what I learned from that, though, was that I had good skills with people because in spite of the differences in our values in terms of what he would do versus what I would do, we could work together and talk about it. And, you know, I finally came to the decision that he was probably better off at home. They had a wonderful family life. You'd go there, they were enjoying having coffee and the children. The problem was that they didn't send these kids to school. You know, they kept them home sometimes just to be home. So--and this was a white family. And it was difficult, but I did establish a good relationship with him. I never did get him to work and the alternative was to help his wife get a job, which that was the good part of it, but I really learned a lot with that experience in terms of continuing that profession in my field. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So he never did--but in those days the laws were set up with--they, they still received (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact I would--can you just turn that off a minute? Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: So what areas did you work in Harlem--I mean, in, in New York. Did you work in Harlem [New York, New York] or Brooklyn [New York] or? Speaker 1: Harlem and the Bronx [New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. I didn't--I didn't work in Brooklyn at all. Speaker 2: Okay. So, the gentleman you were talking about that had the trouble finding work, he, he was in the Bronx (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was in the Bronx in a high rise at that--it was about sixteen stories. I had to walk up to visit him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I had to visit twice a week. Speaker 2: Okay. Well--okay, so, so you, you got your master's degree in 1959, right [from Columbia University, New York, New York]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And did you go to work--you, you were working with the department of welfare [City of New York Department of Welfare; City of New York Department of Social Services], you know, as a student, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, for the first year of my placement. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Then, the second year, I went to the University of Col- I mean, Columbia University [sic. Columbia Presbyterian Hospital; New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] Department of Psychiatry [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I worked in the--that was my field placement the second year. I wasn't working for pay. I was working for education. Story_ID: 627583 Speaker 1: So, when you were--when you were on the verge of graduation, with your master's [from Columbia University, New York, New York], did you have a job lined up? Speaker 2: I didn't have one lined up, but I did get one because I married after that in '59 [1959] to-- Speaker 1: Well--yeah, well, tell us about that. Tell us about getting married. Speaker 2: I married William Holmes who was at Mount Hermon [Mount Hermon School for Boys; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts] when I was at Northfield [Northfield School for Girls; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts], and our parents had been friends, our mothers had been friends, and he was at McGill University in the school of dentistry [McGill University Faculty of Dentistry, Montreal, Canada] there after having gone to Middlebury College in Vermont [Middlebury, Vermont]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were married for two years and then divorced and I had one child--we had one child. Speaker 1: Okay. Then--okay, so you weren't working while you were married? Is that what you're-- Speaker 2: I was working, yes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --while I was married-- Speaker 1: You were, okay. Speaker 2: --in Montreal [Canada] at Montreal General Hospital-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in psychiatry there. Speaker 1: So, this is about 1960 I guess or? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. So-- Speaker 2: And we had a daughter, Ann [Ann Walker Marchant], in '60 [1960], and subsequently, we separated and divorced. And I came back to Tuskegee [Alabama] and stayed for a few months. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--this is nineteen sixty-- Speaker 2: About '61 [1961] now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 2: Sixty--yeah. And in '62 [1962], I came back to Tuskegee, and after a few months, I went to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now what--did, did you have a job lined up in Chicago or? Speaker 2: I didn't have one lined up but I got one as soon as I got there. Well, my sister [HistoryMaker Ann Dibble Jordan] and brother [HistoryMaker Eugene H. Dibble, III] were living there, so I was okay without one 'cause I stayed at their (laughter) house for a few weeks. But I got--I got a job at the University of Chicago in the Department of Psychiatry [University of Chicago Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, Chicago, Illinois] there. Story_ID: 627584 Speaker 1: All right. So, you're at the University of Chicago in the Department of Psychiatry [University of Chicago Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, Chicago, Illinois]. Now, what, what kind of work did you do there? Speaker 2: In, in Chica- in, in the Department of Psychiatry? Well, it was clinical work, working with patients there, working with residents in psychiatry, but primarily working with patients in, in the hospital. I mean, they weren't all in the hospital. We had an outpatient clinic as well as some patients who were hospitalized. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, you were there--now, is it--are there any stories about that period of time? Speaker 2: Well, during that period of time, you know, I had a lot of family there living there and then I met my current husband, George Walker [George H. Walker III]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And when I came there, my sister [HistoryMaker Ann Dibble Jordan] and his sister were very good friends and had tried to get us to meet and neither one of us would because we didn't want sisters, you know, doing that. But, we met at a drugstore there (laughter) and talked and started dating, and so the rest is history. Speaker 1: So, you hit it off anyway despite your sisters (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, because he certainly wasn't going to hook up with anybody his sister was trying to introduce him to. So, anyway, all of that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you live in Chicago [Illinois] a long time? Speaker 2: We lived in Chicago-- Speaker 1: So, this is 1962 or '3 [1963] right, by now? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963] or? Story_ID: 627585 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did anybody in your family participate in the March on Washington in '63 [1963] or did you or anyone else? Speaker 2: I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I participated in the marches against the superintendent of schools in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I used to push my little one [Ann Walker Marchant] in a stroller. We would march every time they had one. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's Benjamin Willis [Benjamin C. Willis], right? Speaker 2: Willis, that's the name. Speaker 1: Yes. And the black community was upset because of the overcrowding of the schools-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and the housing segregation. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. And they had those marches and we'd assemble out in the park downtown [Grant Park, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Describe for people what the crisis was because some people don't understand why you'd be marching. What was the crisis in the schools in terms of the--and, and the same crisis I guess Lorraine Hansberry was writing about, 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun'], overcrowding of the black community. Speaker 2: Overcrowded and, and feeling that they were not getting a fair share of education and that you had a group who were being denied the same quality of education that white students were having. And I think the data that was presented was very well founded in terms of there was reason to be protesting. You know, it wasn't just kind of an emotional reaction, but there was clear data around the inequities in the education of black children. Speaker 1: Now, can you describe, what, what is a Willis Wagon? I've heard that term. Remember those? Speaker 2: When you said it, I remembered, but I'm trying to think what it was about. Speaker 1: I, I think they were like temporary units or something that they-- Speaker 2: For the schools? Speaker 1: Yeah, to catch the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of overcrowding? Speaker 1: Yeah, the overflow. Speaker 2: But that they weren't regular school buildings? That sounds like it, yeah. But there were just so many. I mean, you wonder how they could've allowed it to have happened so long, and particularly in a city like Chicago that has so many resources I think. But, that was a terrible time. You know what I think about in contrast, I think about Chicago when it shouldn't have been that way because I think Chicago is one of the best cities in this country in this sense, that people live in Chicago. They have picnics in the park, they don't have to go to the country or--they cook in the park, they can swim at the beach, there are just so many amenities in Chicago that are natural resources, which is different, I think. But, you know, I'm always struck by that when I go back to Chicago now. You see people playing in the park and, and they don't have to pay money. You know, here [Washington, D.C.], we have to pay for most things we do in recreation ways and-- Speaker 1: You know, Lake--you don't have Lake Michigan. Speaker 2: No (laughter), certainly don't, just the Potomac [Potomac River]. But, that's digressing a little bit, but I think that Chicago did win that battle. Speaker 1: So, so you--well, were you there when things changed or, or did you move before they did? Speaker 2: They were beginning to change, but we moved here in '65 [1965]. Story_ID: 627586 Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now did, did either of you get a job in, in D.C.? Is that why you moved to D.C.? Speaker 1: We moved here because my husband had been working at the Merchandise Mart in Chicago [Illinois] in the early years of computer technology developing programming and that sort of thing, and the person who had been head of the work that he was doing took a job here in Washington and he asked George [George H. Walker III] to come with him. Speaker 2: Okay. So, what year is this? Do you have any idea? Speaker 1: I have to think back a minute and see, sixty--I wanna say '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: Okay. It's around 1964. Speaker 1: I should know that. Speaker 2: Is that when the Johnson election [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was taking place? Were you here around that time when Johnson ran for president for the first time? Speaker 1: I think we did, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, that was the only time he ran, actually, that one time. Speaker 1: Yeah, '64 [1964]. Let's see, it was either '63 [1963] or '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I can tell because Ann [Dibble Walker's daughter, Ann Walker Marchant] had gone to one year of the lab school nursery school when we came here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think that's right. I need to check on that, though, (laughter) to make sure. Speaker 2: Okay, but it was after the March on Washington-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and that--okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, March on Washington was in August of '63 [1963], so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it was, was it--was it around the time that the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated, November of '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: It was right around that time. Speaker 2: Okay, so Washington, D.C. So this is-- Speaker 1: And this is for someone who had lived all of his life in Chicago [Illinois] with the exception of when he went to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and then he was in the [U.S.] Army over in Germany, and then came back to Chicago, so. Story_ID: 627587 Speaker 1: Now, did you start teaching at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] right away or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. I came here and went to volunteer at Head Start. Head Start was just becoming a big program for children, and I went to the United Planning Organization [Washington, D.C.], which is UPO, which is--was called one of the poverty, you know, agencies in this--to volunteer and they asked me if I would--I did that for a little while and they asked me if I would take a job. And so I did at the United Planning Organization. And then subsequently, they wanted to spin off Head Start as a separate, what they call delegate agency, and it was Capital Head Start [Capital Head Start, Inc., Washington, D.C.]. And so I went to do that and subsequently I became the director of Capital Head Start. Speaker 1: About, about, about what year do you become director do you think? So, you get here around '63 [1963]-- Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Probably '64 [1964] or early '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: So, it didn't take long I see (laughter), about a year or so then? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I can tell 'cause when I was director, I was pregnant with my last son, my fourth son [Cyrus Walker], and I really had to work right up until the time he was born 'cause there was so many things. It was a new program and trying to get it started, but that's where I was at Head Start. Speaker 1: Okay. So, 1965, you're, you're the, the, the director of Capital Head Start and--okay. Head Start--tell us something about Head Start 'cause Head Start was a program that emerged out of the Johnson administration [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, yes. Speaker 1: And was a-- Speaker 2: Out of OEO, Office of Economic Opportunity, yeah. Well, it was a program that was designed for children below an economic development--I mean, an economic level. Ninety percent of the children had to be within that economic group and 10 percent, meaning under income, under income for a family to live comfortably. I shouldn't say comfortably, but a family. They had specific economic criteria and there could be 10 percent of the children who were over the income criteria. But, it was to be a comprehensive program for children between ages three and five, three and six, I should say, that included health, nutrition, cognitive development, and parent involvement. Story_ID: 627588 Speaker 1: So you're at Capital Head Start [Capital Head Start, Inc., Washington, D.C.]. You're a director in 1965. Now, now, you were telling us about Head Start and the components of Head Start, and what was--so, you offered health, nutrition, cognitive development, and parental involvement, their involvement. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Nutrition, did you have? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, health, nutrition, cognitive development, and parental involvement. In 1965, was it difficult to get parental involvement? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. I found that parents, once they had the opportunity were very interested in being involved, and one of the imp- significant things about Head Start was you had to have a parent advisory committee and that was extremely useful in terms of empowering parents not only as parents of their children, but as colleagues, if not the boss, of the people who were running the Head Start program, you know, because they structured it in such a way that the parent advisory council was given responsibilities and rules to operate by like a board, and they felt empowered not only in terms of what they were doing with their children, but also how they could influence the programs that were designed for their children. So, I think that that was the good part about Head Start as well as what it did for children. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, how, how long did you work for Head Start? Speaker 2: I think I was there three to four years. Speaker 1: Okay. So, until, until about 1969, you say? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were--did Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] come later? I mean, did--were you--after you left Head Start? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was recruited from Head Start to Howard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 627589 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this one. Now, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968], you--while you were still working with Head Start [Capital Head Start, Inc., Washington, D.C.], and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh-- Speaker 1: --so, and you were in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] when the riots hit and all that, right? Speaker 2: I was right on 14th Street if you know Washington. My office was at 14th between R [Street] and S [Street]. And if you can remember that 14th Street, it goes up a hill, you know, when you go beyond U Street and it's a high hill. I came outside of my office and I saw the crowds with the fires coming down the hill when that happened. Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you hear about it on the radio before you heard the--saw the fire? Speaker 2: Staff person came in and told me 'cause I was in the office, what was happening. Speaker 1: So, was the eruption like immediate or did people just start-- Speaker 2: It was just sort of a movement, you know, gathering, and getting the word that this had happened, and so people began to congregate, and somehow they got these torches and it was quite and--quite terrible. And, of course, the sirens and, of course, we had to make sure that all of our kids would--getting home and, you know, we had to really mobilize in terms of emer- emergency action and get word to parents. And, of course, we were little qualified and, and equipped to do it because, you know, we didn't have direct contact with all the parents that quickly and we're operating all over Washington with these centers, so it was difficult. Speaker 1: Now, did they all get back that night? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Did you get all your children back that night? Speaker 2: We did get them back, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, we did. But, you know, they were always usually in the center in their neighborhood, so that made a big difference. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I--now, that, that area has gone through gentrification now and stuff and when you look, look at it now, it's not even the same. Speaker 2: Not the same place at all, not at all. And you wonder what's gonna happen to people. Of course, that 14th Street corridor is quite something and the cost of housing, and what you're seeing is what happens to people who just can't stay. It's not good. Story_ID: 627590 Speaker 1: Tell us about Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and how, how you got the offer to go to Howard. Speaker 2: The dean at the time asked me to apply and invited me to talk about the possibility of a position at Howard, and I felt good about that. At the same time, I really wanted to stay with Head Start [Capital Head Start, Inc., Washington, D.C.], but for me, it was a real opportunity because I needed less hours in a job and Head Start required a lot more. And by required, it req- I felt it required more of my time to be there, and I had very young children then. I had had a baby [Cyrus Walker] while I was at Head Start (laughter). And I laugh because I stayed so long. I mean, I was staying right up until the time the baby was to be born. My staff had a bet on when (laughter), when the baby would come, whether I'd be in the office or at home, so it was fun. But, I also by this time, this was my fourth child and I felt I needed to have more flexibility than I had at Head Start. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, you, you go to Howard University and you, you, you teach in the department of social work (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Social work [Howard University School of Social Work, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, who else was there? Who were the other professors there and what was the department like then? Speaker 2: Well, Mark Battle [Marcus G. Battle] was there, Mary Day was there, Harriette McAdoo [Harriette Pipes McAdoo] was there, Ruth Adams was there. Did I mention the McAdoos? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Mark Battle. Speaker 1: Yeah, Battle, Day, the McAdoos. Speaker 2: Brin Hawkins came in later, Alvis Adair [Alvis V. Adair]. A group came in from University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] sort of together, the McAdoos, and Alvis Adair, and Larry Gary, Lawrence Gary [Lawrence E. Gary], Dr. Smith [ph.]. I think that's about it, Eva Stewart [Eva M. Stewart]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, so what, what courses did you teach? Speaker 2: I taught direct practice. Speaker 1: Now, what, what, what is the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And clinical practice. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Clinical practice. Speaker 1: Kind of explain what these are for the uninitiated, so (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Clinical practice means work directly with the individual small group or family as opposed to a macro level of social work, which might be doing community organizing and that sort of thing, that's just more direct work with the individual, small group and family-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which can involve therapeutic strategies and policy issues. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you do that kind of direct work, I would assume that the person would have a--would have to have a strong or need a strong background in psychology or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to be able to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right, yeah. That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, so your experience in psychiatry-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and psychology-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --were important, I guess. Speaker 2: Very important, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. And as I said, I had worked in psychiatry in Montreal [Montreal General Hospital, Montreal, Canada] and at Columbia University [New York, New York], so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at, at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], too. Story_ID: 627591 Speaker 1: What were the key concepts you were trying to relate to your students in terms of that, of working with--in a clinical situation with the individual families and-- Speaker 2: Well, I think first of all, relationship and how you establish relationships with people, and particularly people who are in need of something. And that can mean, you may want to work with someone individually or you may want to work with someone in a group, and therapeutic strategies for achieving the goals that the individual wants as well as what you see as a need for the person, and you can work either at the individual level or the group level, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how are you--did you have any outstanding students that you, you know, can't--won't get in trouble for naming or (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I had many outstanding students. I would certainly name one that I always think of who is a person by the name of Sharon James [ph.], who I subsequently had the privilege of working with when I went to the Commission on Social Services, but there were a number of outstanding students at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] who have gone on to do many things. It's interesting, though. Many have moved from doing work at the individual level to doing a lot of community development kind of work, which is interesting. Story_ID: 627592 Speaker 1: Having, you know, served on Howard's campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for so long and having been raised on Tuskegee's campus [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I know there--you experienced them in different ways, you know, as a little kid on one hand and then as a professor on the other. But, what--do you, you see any major--what's the major difference between say Howard and Tuskegee? Or what are the similarities between Howard and Tuskegee? Speaker 2: Well, I think there are similarities in a way, first of all, I guess, with both Tuskegee and Howard, there's a nurturing about those institutions, I think, that is very obvious. Now, I don't discount that from Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York] because, you know, we had nurturing, too, in that we had small classes and lots of interaction with faculty members and so forth, but I think at, at Howard and Tuskegee, there is a much closer relationship in terms of experience that have been common experiences, not necessarily all having the same, but both schools having a mission that is easily embraced and incorporated just as soon as you come on campus, which I think is unique and probably based on the common struggle. Speaker 1: Now, when you came to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], there was a--I think it was--was, was Walter Washington the, the mayor (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mayor. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. And then at, at Howard, [HistoryMaker] James Cheek-- Speaker 2: James Cheek. Speaker 1: Yeah, is president, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, he--did he follow Mar- Mordecai Johnson? Speaker 1: Cheek? No, that was Nabrit, I think. Speaker 2: Nabrit. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] was there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --before. Speaker 1: So, Cheek hadn't started yet when you--when you came over. Speaker 2: I think he had. Speaker 1: Had he? Okay. All right. Speaker 2: I think so. I have to look that up to be sure, but I--I'm sure it was Cheek who was there when I started. Story_ID: 627593 Speaker 1: So--now, you did other things, too, other than just teach. So, what, what were some of your other activities? Speaker 2: Well, I have--I've been a member of the board of the National Black Child Development Institute [NBCDI] and have chaired that board for a number of years. I'm no longer there. But, I worked with that organization, particularly in relation to foster care and did some research on African American children and foster care in five cities: New York [New York], Detroit [Michigan], Miami [Florida], Seattle [Washington]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Did I say Detroit? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. I think that's right. I have to check again. Speaker 1: Yeah. What, what were your findings? I mean, findings after studying, you know, foster care in these cities? Speaker 2: How terrible it is and also that there are disproportionate numbers of African American children in foster care. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is this something that--I've often thought, and I guess it's just me, but I'm--you know, I thought that a lot of studies and sociology reveal things we already know (laughter). Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right. That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: They do. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, I, I don't know if it's just because I was raised in a black community or you were raised in a black community, we--some things, we seem to already know, but then we do a study, a study is done and-- Speaker 2: To confirm it. Speaker 1: --it, it confirms what we already know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, I-- Speaker 2: But I think the issue is with the study, you can pinpoint practices that will continue to exacerbate the situation as opposed to doing something about it. Like, when you go and look at the records in terms of children who have never had any kind of intervention around their problem. I mean, if I have a child and I see a child is dyslexic, for example, I'm gonna do something about that. These kids just get it noted in the record and that's it. And you can see that over and over and over in their records, and that's just one little example. If a kid hasn't had a health exam, how do you know the problem isn't because the kid can't see? And that's what you see in the records. Because you say, well, where's a record saying this child's eyes have been checked? And you see that over and over and over again. Speaker 1: So, now, is it--you think the, the problem is--well, it's probably a number of things I guess, but, what, parental involvement, the lack of follow through by agencies involved or? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, if a child is in foster care, that agency is in loco parentis and so they are to be the parent of the child. So, it's--when you do the research, you can document the fact, nothing has been done about this child. There's no record of any efforts to handle the problem that the child has and, to me, that's the difference. You know, if my child has a vision problem, I'm gonna deal with it. Some of the foster parents are unable to deal with it for whatever reason. It could be financial, it could be educational or whatever, but it seems to me that's why the foster care system is there, so that they can step in and ensure that a parent gets help to deal with some of this. But--so, when you say we know this problems happen and you don't need the research to let us know, we continue to need the research to keep telling people, you're not doing it. Story_ID: 627594 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today as a social work practitioner and teacher? Speaker 2: Well, my concerns are that we have vulnerable populations on both ends of the age spectrum, children and seniors. We have people in between who have their own issues and problems that they're not able to function as they should be able to or could. My concern still is that we don't--we have lots of services. We know a lot about changing things. We know a lot about educating people in different ways, but the vulnerable population, and I see children in foster care as a part of the vulnerable population, as well as children whose parents haven't been educated either to compete with those children who are getting so much. And I think we have to find ways to close the gap between those who have so much and those through no fault of their own have so little. One of the things that I've been very involved in in recent years is of the beginning of the first urban boarding school in Washington for children, not foster children, but these are just children whose parents want to have a boarding experience for their kids. And this is a public charter school called the SEED School [SEED School of Washington, D.C., Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, is it--is it in--it's not in operation yet, I guess, but it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: It's--it is in operation, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: We're in our fifth year. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the SEED School. Speaker 2: SEED public charter school. Speaker 1: Okay. And the students come from, from the inner city of Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: They can come--yeah, as long as their citi- residents of Washington and we take children by lottery. So, any parent who has an interest in their child coming can come and be a part of the lottery. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do they have to have a interested parent, you know-- Speaker 2: To get them there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with the application to get in, in the school? Speaker 2: That's usually the case because we don't have any authority to take a child in because this is a parental choice and as I said, it's, it's financed by public money. So, the important thing is to provide information for parents to know that they can apply as long as they're residents of the district. And we have another school--I'm--I work with the one in Washington, but there's another one now that started in Baltimore [SEED School of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland] and that's another great option, and I think that that's what we have to have, options. Speaker 1: Well, how's the--what--what's this--what's the level of success that has been achieved so far? Speaker 2: Well, you know, we're just doing that measurement, but it's looking good. It's looking good. It'll take time, but it's looking good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's for children who are college bound. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a college prep. Speaker 1: Do, do you think such a thing would work for children who are not necessarily college bound, who are maybe the foster children and that sort of thing, in such a facility? Speaker 2: Yeah, we want them to be college bound and I think they could be. But I think that takes another strategy and I think that some people are looking at it now in terms of whether that's an option for foster children. Story_ID: 627595 Speaker 1: Now you, you taught at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] until, what time was it? I mean, what year? 'Cause you're, you're a professor emeritus now, so (laughter), so you taught there, what-- Speaker 2: Two thousand--I think 2002 or 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Something like that. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: A long time (laughter). Speaker 1: Is there a highlight of your career at Howard that, that stands out that you--or, or what's the most memorable thing about it? Speaker 2: At Howard? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, I have thoroughly enjoyed teaching and the students and I have thoroughly enjoyed my colleagues, the recognition. I was elected to the board of trustees at Howard while I was there for a period of time. I think Howard has tremendous--has a tremendous reputation and has potential for doing great things. They have already done great things in terms of training professionals, training undergraduates, and I think they will continue. I'm sure they will. It has a strong alumni group and people from all over the country and the parts of the world, other parts of the world have been to Howard. Story_ID: 627596 Speaker 1: Well, go, go ahead and tell us about that, the, the 9/11 [September 11, 2001] victims of (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was just gonna say that volunteer life has been a very big part of my life, and I have worked on numerous boards here in the city and I will tell you that another experience that we haven't talked about is the fact that, before I get to 9/11, is that I went on loan from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to be the commissioner of social services in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what year is this? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I'll think about it. I'll tell you in a minute. I was at Howard and there was a lawsuit brought against the District of Columbia called LaShawn v. the District of Columbia [sic.], and it was filed by the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union], and the lawsuit, the plaintiffs asked me to serve as an expert witness in their case in the courts of the district, which I did, and I testified against the District of Columbia, and the lawsuit was won. Subsequently, the mayor of the district called me and said since I had been so vehement about the problems of the system, would I accept a job of commissioner of social services? Speaker 1: Now, who was the mayor at that-- Speaker 2: Sharon Pratt Kelly [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I did that. And I went to, to this--to the child welfare division even though I had responsibilities for other services in the commission [Commission on Social Services], and it was really worse than I imagined it would be. But, we worked on it, worked on it, and worked on it, and it's still in progress, a work in progress. But, I did do that for three years. And while I was there, I was contacted by Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation], the corporation Leland Brendsel [Leland C. Brendsel], who said that they were interested in working with us and what could they do. And we established a partnership with Freddie Mac. The agency was in total disarray. They not only contributed funding for us, but actually put staff in the commission in order to help us just find out where children were, who they were, who their parents were, and so we established a terrific partnership with Freddie Mac, the Freddie Mac Foundation. And when I left the commission, they asked me to join the board of the Freddie Mac Foundation, and I have served on that board ever since. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so how long--how long have you been on the board of Freddie, Freddie Mac Foundation? Do, do you know or do you have a-- Speaker 2: Since I left the commission-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which must've been ten years now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that's about two- 2002, I guess or so, about the time you retired from Howard, I guess, just about, yeah. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --that has continued. Story_ID: 627597 Speaker 1: Tell us about the 9/11 commission. Speaker 2: Oh. I'm on the Community Foundation board [Community Foundation of the National Capital Region; Greater Washington Community Foundation, Washington, D.C.] as well and when 9/11 [September 11, 2001] occurred, the commun- board of the community--I wasn't on the board then--the board of the Community Foundation asked to be the source of distributing money that had been donated philanthropically for the victims of 9/11 and we established a distribution committee [Survivors' Fund Governance Board, Distributions Committee], and that distribution committee was charged with looking at all of the problems that families were experiencing, having been the victims of someone who was killed or injured in the 9/11 episode. It's not an episode, tragedy. And we--I chaired that distribution committee, which met every week and sometimes two and three times a week, looking at every individual or family who had been impacted by the--by 9/11. Speaker 1: So, how, how many (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 1: --families were, were involved? I know you had the, the, the passengers on the plane. Then, you had-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all sort of people-- Speaker 2: Passengers-- Speaker 1: --who worked on the-- Speaker 2: --as well as the people who worked at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and then people who were in New York [New York], although New York had its own fund there, but people--for example, the day of 9/11, I was on my way to New York City to a meeting of an organization, Prevent Child Abuse America. We were having a meeting and a dinner that night, and I went up on the train. When I arrived at Union Station, there's a little shop in Union Station--Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York] that I'll usually go and get stockings or something like that. And I went in and the woman said, "Do you know what's happened?" And I said, "No." And she said, "The Pentagon has just been bombed," and she called her daughter or somebody who worked over at the UN [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York]. Well, when I came out of the station, there was just smoke, sirens, everything, walked to my hotel and, of course, it was bedlam there. And that was an experience, and I couldn't get out of New York for three days, four days. But it was tragic, tragic, tragic. Speaker 1: So, you were right in the thick of it on the--on 9/11. Speaker 2: Before nine one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah--one-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, here in--back, back in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you're trying to make sure there's an equitable distribution of the-- Speaker 2: Distribution-- Speaker 1: --of the money collected. Speaker 2: --of money and based on need as opposed to anything else. And we met for months, year, two years. So, that was quite an experience. Story_ID: 627598 Speaker 1: I have to ask you this question, too. It's such a--it involves your father's history and legacy. In '74 [1974], there was information about the Tuskegee syphilis experiment [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male] that took place at John Andrew hospital [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama]. What's the--what, what--what's your take on that and, and how does it affect, you know, your family history? Your father [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.] served so many years, you know, working seven days a week and that sort of thing and, and people wonder like how could he not have known about this or why didn't somebody know? That--that's the question people ask. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I can't imagine it in the sense of blame and I can't imagine it in the sense of the people who were impacted by it. I heard my brother [Robert Dibble] say, who's a physician, that it was unimaginable to him as well but the question he, he still has--is how did it happen? Why did it happen? And his view of it is that this was a health system so overwhelmed that there was an effort to get whatever help they could get and this project was presented as some health--I don't know how to say it, as a potential for getting help to people, and that's, that's all I can imagine. But, I do know that with my father, he worked seven days a week, fourteen, sixteen hours a day, and I can only believe that what was done was done in hopes of getting help for people. Speaker 1: That would be consistent with what he did the rest of his life. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was a man who worked seven days a week, many hours a day, and as I said, when I was going down from this--when we went to the Taylor program [for the Robert R. Taylor School of Architecture and Construction Science, Tuskegee, Alabama], we drove down in an area that--I mean, a direction I had never been in. We were going down to Florida and I kept seeing these towns and I was telling you at the beginning, when I would register people there, helping out in terms of the registries, I'd see people who were coming from all places in Alabama. I couldn't imagine how far people would come there for help, for healthcare. I mean, it must've been the only place they could turn to 'cause it would take us three hours to be in the city that we were going through and I said, "They'd come all the way up to Tuskegee [Alabama]?" So, he had an enormous responsibility and I'm saying that only because that's all I can think about. He was a man who was dedicated to his profession and to the care of people, and certainly dedicated, as he called it, the man farthest down. That was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --his commitment. Story_ID: 627599 Speaker 1: Tell us something about, about your family today. You have children that are grown and doing things and tell us a little bit about them. Speaker 2: Well, I have four children, Ann [Ann Walker Marchant], Carolyn [Carolyn Walker Niles], George [George H. Walker IV], and Cyrus [Cyrus Walker]. Ann lives here in Washington [D.C.] and has a firm [The Walker Marchant Group LLC]. She's in--has a public relations firm and has done well. She went to Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York] and subsequently, she worked with the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], and then after that, she started a public relations business and that's what she's doing here in Washington. And then my daughter, Carolyn, lived three doors up from us in this neighborhood and last year, her husband [Mark Niles] was appointed dean of the law school out in Seattle [Seattle University School of Law, Seattle, Washington], so she has moved to Seattle [Washington] and we miss her a lot because she was right here in the neighborhood and our grandchildren are there. There are two of them, Max [ph.] and Grace [ph.]. Then, George is my third child who's here in Washington, shares an office with his father [George H. Walker III]. They have separate offices, but they're adjoining, and he is in business in airports all over the country. And then Cyrus is living in--he's our youngest, has two children, two daughters, he lives in New York [New York] and has an insurance business there. So, that's our children. Story_ID: 627600 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. At, at this juncture in your life, and you're still volunteering, what would you consider to be your legacy at this juncture? Speaker 2: My legacy? Well, certainly I would say my children are my legacy and that they're all kind of upstanding citizens and are making it well and our grandchildren. And I didn't men--I mentioned a couple children, but I'll mention the grandchildren's names. Rebecca [Rebecca Marchant] is one, Grace [ph.] and Max [ph.] are two, and Alexandra [ph.] and George V [George H. Walker V] are another, and then Maya [ph.] and Sarah [ph.], so those are my seven grandchildren. Story_ID: 627601 Speaker 1: And when you look back on everything you've done, is there any major thing you would do differently if you could redo it? Speaker 2: I--I'm sure there's several things that I would do differently, but I must say I am very--I have a lot of satisfaction from what I've been able to do, and satisfaction in seeing my children, upstanding citizens and working and pursuing their interests, and hopefully I have instilled in them a sense of community spirit and care about people and their situations. And I, you know, hope that they will in some way contribute to their communities. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, I'm very fortunate in that I've got great children. Story_ID: 627602 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked about that we need to address before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think so at the moment. I'll probably think of something later on, but nothing I can think of at the moment. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered as someone who has been dedicated to family and I'd like to be remembered as someone who made every effort to work on behalf of people who needed help, encouragement or whatever, and I don't say that in a way that I think that I have done so much. I've done very little in comparison. But, it, it is very satisfying to me to know that people will remember that I did try to be a good citizen and member of the community, which has lots of needs. So, that's how I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Thank you very much...