 Story_ID: 268761 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Certainly, [HistoryMaker] Keith H. Williamson, K-E-I-T-H, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what does the H stand for? Speaker 2: Harvey. Speaker 1: Now do you have any nicknames or any other names you know about? Speaker 2: Not that I know about. Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Sure I was born in St. Louis, Missouri, May 16, 1952. Speaker 1: What is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer and currently I work for Pitney Bowes [Inc.] as president of their Capital Services division. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is February 15, 2005. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Shelton, Connecticut. Story_ID: 268762 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions I'm compelled by management to ask that only require a short answer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, sure. Good, okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, sir do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Popcorn. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Life is a process of change. Story_ID: 268763 Speaker 1: Look, I'm going to ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to start with your mother's side and then we're going to ask about your father's [Irving Williamson] side. First, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: Certainly. Elizabeth Rebecca Giddings Williamson. Elizabeth is E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Rebecca R-E-B-E-C-C-A, her maiden name is Giddings G-I-D-D-I-N-G-S. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 1st--I'd have to look it up to make sure that I don't get the year wrong but I can easily do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a guess about what time she was born? Speaker 2: Yeah sure I can back into it, I mean she died in 1998 at eighty so that makes it like 1918. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Tell me, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace those ancestors? Speaker 1: Sure and then the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh where was she born, I'm sorry we didn't get that yet? Speaker 1: Yonkers, New York and so my mother's mother [Mabelle Gulliver Giddings] and father [Arthur Giddings, Sr.] lived in Yonkers, New York right there on Warburton Avenue in Yonkers. They were a fairly strong family in that area. Speaker 2: Okay. Are there any--is that as far back as you can go? Speaker 1: I have some pictures in that book that actually will show in addition to my mother's parents some of her, I guess her mother's sisters so I can do some aunts at that level. I think there's a picture of my mother's grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay so you can't go back any further that your grandparents? Speaker 1: Not that I can actually recall and I have some pictures which would go back to a great-grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay are there any stories in the family about where the family was from originally? Were they (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Virginia. Speaker 2: Okay and do you have any idea of when the family came to New York? Speaker 1: I don't other than saying it was probably around the time of my great-grandparents. Speaker 2: Okay. So you think they were probably in Virginia prior to the Civil War and then probably after the--during Reconstruction or the period just, you know, just before the turn of the century they moved to New York? Speaker 1: I believe so. Story_ID: 268764 Speaker 1: Well are there any good stories passed down through the family or even any bad stories about (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure the stories I remember my mother's [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson] father, Arthur Giddings [Sr.] was an engineer and my mother always talked about the fact that he was the first black Phi Beta Kappa. He went to New York University [New York, New York] and got a degree in engineering from there. Apparently after he got his degree, I guess came looking for a job and was really unable to get a job easily in engineering although I think ultimately he got some job as the assistant engineer. I don't know whether this story is true but it was always said that he worked on the Tappan Zee Bridge and did a significant amount of the work but was never able to actually get the recognition in terms of job title you know, working for the city that perhaps he deserved. Speaker 1: Now the Tappan Zee Bridge connects (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New York and New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay any other stories on that side? That's quite a story. Now he's an engineer at an age when there were very few black engineers. Speaker 2: Yes and so I think there's a fair amount of pride in his accomplishments in terms of actually being able to get a college degree from New York University and actually to do it and be Phi Beta Kappa was a source of pride. Speaker 1: Yeah I've heard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 1: No, go ahead-- Speaker 2: --no, no, go ahead. Speaker 1: Now I've heard of another black engineer in Chicago [Illinois] during the same era that I've heard of. We interviewed someone who they had a relative that designed public works in the City of Chicago around the same era there weren't many so that's really something. So was he the first person in this family to go to college do you know or was he (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I believe he was. And I don't know a lot about the generation further back but he did and then he married my, you know, grandmother [Mabelle Gulliver Giddings] and the two of them had five children a very strong group of children in terms of their success in the Yonkers [New York] area. Speaker 1: Okay. So any stories about them? Speaker 2: Sure so the oldest of the children was my Uncle Arthur [Giddings, Jr.] and Arthur was quite a character. I'm trying to think he had a reminiscent to an earlier [HistoryMaker] Darwin [N.] Davis [Sr.] in the sense of a lot of great stories and very sociable. At one point in time he was working with a children's social agency in the Yonkers area. He was at one point in time he had a restaurant or bar in the Yonkers area and so he was probably the most colorful. Then his younger brother, Curtis [Giddings] taught in the Yonkers public schools. He was actually the first one of them to pass away of cancer but, so he was second in line. My mother was third of the siblings and I guess a story I can remember hearing about her was that they sent her to a family in New York [New York] and her adopted by them so that she could go to Hunter College [New York, New York]. Again I think this is back in the '30s [1930s] that she went to college and because tuition was much lower if you were a resident of New York City [New York, New York]. They went through that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So she didn't have to be formally adopted did she or did she just have to live in New York? Speaker 2: Well again this is the story that I heard but it sounds like she was actually sort of legal--sort of formally well they went through some process to claim that she was a--had been adopted and therefore was able to be treated as a city resident and so she went to Hunter College and then from there she went to Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts] and got her master's [degree] in social work and from Smith headed out to the Midwest. Speaker 1: Okay so she headed to St. Louis [Missouri]. Did she head to St. Louis first? Speaker 2: Well actually her first job after Smith was in Ohio and that's where I was trying to remember whether that was Dayton [Ohio] or Columbus [Ohio] but I want to say I think it was Dayton and was her first day there in Dayton at a restaurant that she met a gentleman who was to become my father [Irving Williamson]. Speaker 1: Okay so she had a job at a restaurant? Speaker 2: No, no. she actually (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She actually met him in a restaurant. Speaker 2: Met him in a restaurant. Speaker 1: She was teaching or-- Speaker 2: Some type of social work. Speaker 1: Social service okay, that's right. Social work, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, uh-huh. Story_ID: 268765 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sure. Irving, I-R-V-I-N-G, Alexander A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, Williamson. Speaker 1: Okay, and what his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 10, 1908 he was ten years older than my mother [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson]. Speaker 1: Okay and where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Berwind, West Virginia. Speaker 1: Now where is Berwind, Virginia [sic.] do you have any idea? Speaker 2: Well I'm not sure, I mean I've actually only been to West Virginia once and actually I know much less about my father's side of the family than my mother's. My mother had a fairly strong, cohesive family. My father had more of a troubled childhood and then never really talked too much about his upbringing and so we never went back. Speaker 1: Now did he--was he raised in Berwind or did he (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I believe so. So the story I always heard was that my father's father [Thomas Williamson] was a one legged coal miner although I guess I should say when he was a coal miner he had two legs and then at some point there was some kind of mining accident in which at a point he became a one legged individual and my father's mother [Bessie Kane Williamson] again I never heard a lot about but apparently died very early in his life in some kind of a sudden way in connection with I think she was having a tooth removed or something else and then bled to death. So my father was raised by an aunt actually I think that was in Chicago [Illinois] and my middle name Harvey is named after the husband of the aunt. Speaker 1: So he was actually raised in Chicago or partly at least? Speaker 2: Partly in Chicago right, partly in Virginia and I think there was some period of time also which the family was in Ohio. And so what I do recall hearing is that certainly my father went to [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] at some point and he's very self-reliant at that point in time which he was working to put himself through school. Speaker 1: He starts out with kind of a rough situation but he ends up going to Ohio State that's quite an accomplishment in those days. Ohio State was not the easiest place to go to school even in those days. I've heard stories--I've met people who went to Ohio State. Yeah, so. But did he talk about growing up in Chicago or West Virginia or what it was like when he was growing up? Speaker 2: No my father really never talked either about his father or mother or growing up. And he was--being ten years older than my mother and the other thing that affected this was I think that his siblings all died fairly early. So that he had two brothers who, but who passed away--I was born in '52 [1952] I was going to say that I think that one of them died in 1960 so again we start losing connections on his side of the family. So-- Speaker 1: Did he ever--he must have had some decent direction to be able to, to prepare himself to go a place like Ohio State from Chicago because that means that you had to get a scholarship or something or cause you're an out of state student, you're black too he must have been quite a student I would think? Speaker 2: Yeah either you are quite a student or--and the way my mother used to say he was very hard working and actually throughout all of my life while he was living, he tended to--he worked during the day but he also tended to have sideline jobs as well. He was a newspaper editor a black weekly newspaper [St. Louis Argus]. But he would take--he was also a photographer and did quite a few weddings and the like. Speaker 1: Yeah, he sounds like a talented man. I mean to get to Ohio State in those days from Chicago you probably had to have, you know, a lot of talent I would guess, I mean, just, it seems to me. Story_ID: 268766 Speaker 1: If he [Williamson's father, Irving Williamson, Sr.] started school around age eighteen that would put him in 1936, so he would be going to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] as Jesse Owens was in the [1936 Summer] Olympics in Berlin [Germany], which the most famous Ohio State student in those days I would guess--black student, I would guess, would be Jesse Owens. Did he ever talk about that? You know-- Speaker 2: No he didn't. Speaker 1: Is he still alive? Speaker 2: No my dad died at eighty-four back in 1991. Speaker 1: Yeah he might not have known Jesse Owens but certainly coming to that campus when Jesse Owens, an Ohio State student, was running in the Olympic games, winning all the medals on this world stage, I mean second in fame only to Joe Louis. That would have been quite a, quite something--quite a thing to talk about. I know the black students at Ohio State probably could not ignore that kind of discussion (laughter) or the spotlight or just the effect of Jesse Owens would rub off on the rest of them. They were like dipped in it. So he never talked about that at all? Speaker 2: No and I was just trying to do the math assuming that he was in his twenties when he was at Ohio State 1908 so that'd make it 1928, it's right around in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He would be there if he started at eighteen at the youngest, if he started when he was twenty-- Speaker 2: That would be 1928. Speaker 1: Yeah he--no it would be '38 [1938] I guess--no 1928 I'm sorry you're right. So he was born in 1908--yeah '28 [1928], I'm getting him ten years ahead of himself. Yeah so he wouldn't necessarily have been there when Jesse Owens was there but he's still would have--it seemed like he would have been affected by it being at Ohio State that's interesting well okay. I blew it by ten years (laughter). Did he have any stories about Ohio State? Speaker 2: Actually not. I mean the only things I heard were essentially around, about his needing to sort of work his way through. But he didn't really talk much about Ohio State. Speaker 1: I didn't get it off, I was right, okay 1908 and ten is 1918 right, eight more years is nineteen--yeah you're right my math is not my strong suit. Speaker 2: Twenty-six [1926]? Speaker 1: Yeah. You're right. All right. Math is not my strong suit. Speaker 2: Not mine either I'll have to get my calculator out in a second. Speaker 1: But he didn't talk about it at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's not a, I'm telling you it wasn't a usual thing for black students then to go to Central State [Combined Normal and Industrial Department at Wilberforce University; Central State University] maybe in Wilberforce in Ohio (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But not Ohio State? Speaker 1: Not Ohio State it kind of could seem like a class by itself sort of. There weren't that many black students there I would guess in those days. So what was his major? Was it journalism? Speaker 2: I think so, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 268767 Speaker 1: Was he [Williamson's father, Irving Williamson, Sr.] working for a paper in Dayton [Ohio] when your mother [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson] met him? Speaker 2: Exactly. I mean that wasn't his first job. My recollection is that he had some job for a short period of time in Texas but then when they met he was actually in Dayton, Ohio with the paper there and then they both moved and shortly after--twelve months after they met to St. Louis [Missouri] and took jobs there. I think my mother was first working as a social worker in the St. Louis schools and my father was working with different papers starting with the St. Louis Argus. Speaker 1: Okay now there's a famous black paper is it the Argus is that the one that's been around for (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Could be the Argus then there's another paper called the [St. Louis] Sentinel that he worked with when that got started with a gentleman named James Woods [sic. Howard B. Woods and Jane Woods] was the publisher of that. Speaker 1: Yeah is that the one that had the longest life in St. Louis? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: There's one I know that is famous for sensational kind of lurid stories about shootings and so forth. Speaker 2: Oh really okay. Speaker 1: Yeah there's one--there has been stories written about the paper always highlighting these Saturday night shootouts and that sort of thing. They covered all that sort of thing but I don't know. I don't remember which one it is off hand. I know they have the St. Louis American now. I had a friend who used to write for the American. So he was a journalist and a photographer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did he have a studio or did he just shoot to serve journalism with the functions of journalism to get a story? Speaker 2: No he had a dark room down in the basement and he would develop his pictures down there. Speaker 1: Did he have a studio, I mean did he shoot like portraits and that sort of thing or was it just news photography? Speaker 2: Basically wedding photography, cotillions those types of events. Speaker 1: Okay so that is a commercial kind of photography. So is that what he did basically for a living? Speaker 2: I believe it was the--probably the newspaper was his primary source of income, and then the photography was more of a sideline. Story_ID: 268768 Speaker 1: What did your neighborhood look like? Speaker 2: Sure. You know, growing up in St. Louis [Missouri] I was born on--the house that we were born on--I was on St. Louis Avenue in St. Louis and we stayed there until I was five. On St. Louis Avenue was a two-family house in a very, very middle class--lower middle class neighborhood. So certainly sort of a step up when we moved to a house on a street called Kossuth [Avenue] which was on the north border of a park in St. Louis called Fairgrounds [sic. Fairground] Park. So what I recall of course is that I was hearing the story from my parents [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson and Irving Williamson, Sr.] at some point later on was that it was an all-white neighborhood and actually if I remember my history I think Kossuth was a general in one of the Polish wars, 1848 or one of the revolutions over there and came over. So I think it was that predominantly Polish neighborhood in St. Louis. My father bought the house for all cash and he did it providing it to a white lawyer who was as I understand married to a black woman and he was a relatively liberal person and did it on behalf I guess of my father. And 'cause otherwise I believe it was a house which our parents would not have been allowed to purchase in St. Louis. I was getting ready to say like Brown vs. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka], 1954, but I think another famous case which was around that time reflecting some of the discriminatory practices in St. Louis around housing at the time. So, but at any rate I'll make a long story short our parents bought the house and actually what I can recall is actually sort of the speed with which the neighborhood changed from being all white to over the next ten years really becoming pretty much an all minority African American neighborhood. Speaker 1: In St. Louis do blacks live on one side of town or is it (simultaneous) (unclear)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh without question so St. Louis--the north side of St. Louis today if you were to go there would be obviously a very high percentage of African Americans and then south St. Louis as they talk about it, would be primarily Caucasian. Speaker 1: Now do you have any brothers and sisters? I know you do but how many do you have and where do you fit in? Speaker 2: I have two. So I'm the youngest; I have a sister [Karen Williamson] who is four and a half years older than I am and then a brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.] who is nine years older, who is the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay so it's just three of you? Speaker 2: Just the three of us. Speaker 1: You're really kind of spread apart, you know. Speaker 2: We are. I mean, I don't know whether they were planning that for college but it worked out very nicely from that stand point. Story_ID: 268769 Speaker 1: Now do you have a first childhood memory, an earliest memory? Speaker 2: Okay, I have a couple of early childhood memories. I can remember and in part maybe because I've seen pictures of my sitting in the backyard of that house on St. Louis Avenue [St. Louis, Missouri] that I mentioned and the family dog at the time. And I was sitting with him and I can remember making mud pies in the backyard with the young girl who was my age and lived on the second story and as I said it was a two family house. The first floor was our floor and then there was another floor which was another family. Story_ID: 268770 Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sure. Okay, well again, all of my memories are very pleasant and I think I had a sheltered childhood and so it's the kind of thing I can remember I never really feeling--I can still remember going to--when we moved to Kossuth Avenue [St. Louis, Missouri] and starting--that was during the time I was five so I think right around the time for me to start kindergarten at a school called Harrison [School, St. Louis, Missouri] I can remember walking to. And basically I remember the first time being called a bad name, being called a nigger while walking to school. But by and large there are very few negative memories that sort of remain for me. I can certainly recall my mother [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson] talking later on about my being born in St. Mary's Infirmary [St. Louis, Missouri] and then learning later that actually the reason I wasn't born in a hospital was because again back in the days of segregation and so if you were black you were born in the infirmary versus if you were white and you could be born in the hospital. But it was the kind of thing where my parents were particularly my father [Irving Williamson, Sr.] who was involved with the black press clearly was a race man and sort of involved in civil rights and to some extent politics and certainly in various community affairs and certainly very conscious of racial issues and the like. But in terms of how they treated their children, they were always very positive and they always set very high standards and by and large, I'd say we were fairly sheltered from any ugly side of life. Story_ID: 268771 Speaker 1: I guess, what are some of the issues your father [Irving Williamson, Sr.] was working on when you were growing up? Or did--I mean, some of the issues in St. [Louis, Missouri]--did they talk about politics and that kind of thing at home? Speaker 2: Oh sure. They talked about politics one of my father's very dear friends, I mean none of them--my father I can remember ran for alderman one time in an unsuccessful bid but you know, he was always interested in politics and Fred Weathers [Frederick N. Weathers] was one of my father's good friends and he was one of these very powerful men behind the scenes. So Fred, Mr. Weathers never ran for office himself but he was pretty active in the Democratic Party in St. Louis [Missouri] particularly among African Americans. And I think he was, you know I think he would have had a hand in some of the folks who did run for office. So obviously you had [HistoryMaker] William Clay [Sr.] come out and various others. So my father was fairly well--he was fairly outgoing even though he didn't talk about his personal family life growing up as a child, he actually was a fairly outgoing sociable type of person and was in a large number of clubs and organizations. He was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and as I look back there was a group called the Frontiers that met, he was on the board of New Age Federal [Savings & Loan Association, St. Louis, Missouri] which was a savings and loan African American-owned that was formed and on the board of directors of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Organization]. I mean there is just any number of civic organizations that he was involved with. Speaker 1: Now what paper did you say he stayed with the longest? Was it the [St. Louis] Argus or the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It started with the Argus and then at some point then there's a paper called The Mirror [St. Louis Mirror] that was a small paper and then I believe he ended his career, the last couple of years was with a paper called the St. Louis Sentinel. Story_ID: 268841 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little kid? What did you like to do and what were you interested in? Speaker 2: Sure, well I was--at least the way I remember it, you know, fairly bookish. I enjoyed going to the library and getting books and bringing them back. I remember a family excursion when mom [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson] used to take us--we were lucky to have a park [Fairground Park, St. Louis, Missouri] right across the street and so it was the type of thing where one could go out after school, go across the street--it was a fairly safe street and could easily get a game of football or baseball going. I enjoyed those athletic endeavors and you know, looking back certainly a big influence on me was my brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.]. He was nine years older and was very much a role model and I certainly enjoyed doing things with him. Speaker 1: Nine years is a big gap so he was well maybe kind a like another daddy in some way I guess by being that old. Speaker 2: Yes. Because by the time I was nine he was eighteen and heading off to college. Speaker 1: Right so--okay. So what sport did you like the most? Speaker 2: Well actually I guess one I hadn't really mentioned at some point tennis. My brother played tennis in high school so he was the first one to give me some tennis lessons and in the park that we had right across the street were some tennis courts and so that was, you know, one of things I liked to do. Story_ID: 268842 Speaker 1: Tell me about grade school. Now, what grade school did you attend? Speaker 2: Yes. I went to a school called Harrison [School, St. Louis, Missouri] kindergarten through fourth grade and then in the fifth grade I transferred to a school called Walnut Park [School, St. Louis, Missouri]. St. Louis [Missouri] had a, what they called a gifted program which covered fifth grade through eighth grade. Actually a lot of very good people went through that program that I've stayed somewhat in touch with. Speaker 1: Okay so it kind of took you out of the neighborhood. Were you liked bussed to the other, to Walnut Park? Speaker 2: This was before the real bussing that got started in terms of desegregation. But I used to take a public bus from our neighborhood in North St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri] out to a--going all the way out I guess Lee Avenue. So it was around twenty-five, thirty minute bus ride to the Walnut Park area. Speaker 1: But it wasn't a public bus? Speaker 2: It was a public bus. Speaker 1: Okay so this was like 1962 or so I guess when you were ten, about ten years old? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: Yeah fifth grade okay. This was an integrated school I take it? Speaker 2: It was. I'm going to think back and say it was probably about 25 percent African American, 75 percent majority. Speaker 1: Did you miss the neighborhood school? Speaker 2: No not really and it was a better more stimulating program at Walnut Park and it was a good group of kids. So I had you know, made friends and actually a fairly stable class group right through fifth grade through eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what were your favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: Favorite subjects certainly I liked social studies. I can remember doing some--still retaining some book reports that I did back from those days, I liked reading quite a bit. You know, math wasn't my favorite subject but I didn't dislike math. I could remember well science and the memory that stands out is every year St. Louis had a science fair competition and so in the school it was always a big project where you sort of worked on it for months and it culminated in some exhibit and essentially had to put together and it got competed. So again the memory that stands out to separate years I remember--I don't know whether it was my seventh grade year or something like that where it was the night before this was due and I still had made little progress in figuring out what I was going to do it on and all that I can remember being in tears and finally having to suck it up and pull together a project. But I guess a better memory is in the following year I must have learned my lesson and had started much earlier 'cause I remember the first project was on the desalinization of salt water and so I was struggling at the end to sort to put an experiment together. Then the following year had to do with the respiratory rates of mice and how they reacted to different stimuli. And so I can remember this big thing in the family that we got this little white mouse and I remember working with our pediatrician and whatever who I had somehow gotten a syringe and I got some adrenalin and some different kinds of things and I would inject the little mouse and there was a little glass that we put him in with this little tube coming out of the stopper and there was some colored water and we'd measure his breathing rate and the like. So, at any rate, I remember actually getting a very good prize for having one of the top science fair projects. Story_ID: 268843 Speaker 1: Was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Not really. So I certainly remember we had a piano. I can remember taking piano lessons, you know, once or twice a week for a period of time although fortunately I think my parents [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson and Irving Williamson, Sr.] realized that I little talent in that area and at some point discontinued those lessons. My sister [Karen Williamson] had more talent and she continued for quite a few years. Speaker 1: Now did the family go to church? Speaker 2: Yes we went to a church called Antioch Baptist Church on Market Street in St. Louis [Missouri] and my father was active from the standpoint of being on the deacon board and I think he was treasurer of the church for a while and he was certainly involved in the politics of the church in terms of selecting a new minister and the like. My mother was probably more of a free thinker and would have been you know, going to the ethical society and listening to lectures and the like but got into the swing of things and again it certainly was a family kind of activity. I can remember going to Sunday school a lot. Speaker 1: So it wasn't a huge part of growing up necessarily but it was a part. Now what about television or radio and that sort of things? Speaker 2: Well certainly television was a part and sort of contrasting with my current lifestyle where it's always sort of hard to get home by a certain time and my mother had fairly regular hours during most of those years and my father was always committed in being home you know for the dinner hour, six o'clock. I certainly remember watching the news which was an important family activity on television and of course my father being a newspaper man and the like, he was always interested in current events. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your family talk about the Civil Rights Movement a lot? Speaker 2: I mean not a lot per se, I certainly remember--I was too young. My sister went with my father to the March on Washington. My father went to that and to cover it and so there certainly is a certain amount of political talk. I can always remember I was--being the youngest always is the least up to speed on what they were talking about but it was a topic. Speaker 1: But that's significant that they went to the March on Washington 'cause there weren't but so many people there that were actually able to go. So that's significant. Did they talk about it when they got back? Did you look for them on television? Speaker 2: Well I certainly looked for them on television, didn't see them but that certainly was a big--knowing that my father and sister were there and the fact that was of such historical importance, it was a significant event. Story_ID: 268844 Speaker 1: Tell me about high school. What high school did you attend? Speaker 2: Went to a school called Thomas Jefferson School [St. Louis, Missouri] which is--was and still is fairly unusual. I say that because most of my classmates from Walnut Park [School, St. Louis, Missouri] went to a public school called Northwest High School in St. Louis [Missouri] which is a public school. Thomas Jefferson was a private school and actually my brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.] went there for his four years in high school so that's how I learned about it. But its size is what made it unusual. It was a boarding school and when my brother was there they probably had about forty students. During most of the years when I was there the numbers were in the twenties. So my freshmen class in high school we had six people who were in the class. Speaker 1: Now that's unusual. Where is Thomas Jefferson? Speaker 2: Thomas Jefferson is on Lindbergh Boulevard, Sunset Hill[s], St. Louis so right below Kirkwood in St. Louis. Speaker 1: Is that like a suburb of St. Louis? Speaker 2: Yes it is. Speaker 1: So Sunset Hills? Okay so what did the school specialize in? Was it for the extremely gifted or was it, did it specialize in a certain (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I wouldn't say it was specialized in that way. It was founded in probably after World War II [WWII] and I'm going to guess even in the '50s [1950s] by a young man [sic. Robin B. McCoy, Graham Spring, and Charles E. Merrill, Jr.] who gone to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and they put their own money in to a large extent to acquire--you know they have a forty acre piece of property. They put up some buildings and some dorms and it was committed to some teaching in the classic style. So I was there and we took Greek. First, I may have taken Greek at least two or three years the four years I was there. A heavy emphasis on English in terms of reading and writing so every day of the year there was a requirement to read something like ten pages out of a book and you had to write a thirty word summary every day including in the summers. So in the summer you'd have to do it and then mail in your assignments--your summaries once a week. And focus on history--ancient history sort of an approach that was very classical. Speaker 1: A classical school people would call it. Now were there male and female students? Speaker 2: When I was there it was all-male although it has since become co-ed. Speaker 1: How did you like that? I mean, did you like the school? Speaker 2: Well in retrospect I look back on it and say it wasn't the most enjoyable four years that I spent but I was an extremely happy go lucky child and so I actually didn't realize until later that it was a little bit of an oppressive environment but I enjoyed it actually. I say oppressive by the time I got there, there had been a falling out among the--sort of this founders of the school and that's part of the reason why the student population dropped so significantly between the time my brother was there and when I was there. And I would say that the person [Robin B. McCoy] who remained as headmaster was fairly mean not to speak ill will of the deceased. But fairly on the mean side and there was certain positive aspects of having been in an environment where there was a great emphasis on discipline and rigor. So all of that was positive and I'd say served me in good stead for going on to college and the like. But in hindsight if I would do it again, I would think long and hard. It was a fairly isolated environment being so small, being out in the suburbs of St. Louis. During most of the time that I was there I was the only African American. I think certainly the only one in my year and in the next couple of years and then I think my senior year there was someone else who came in. And, you know, being all-male and the like, it was, you know, sort of a strange situation. Story_ID: 268845 Speaker 1: You know, here you are, teenagers, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --and teenagers in a, like, what do you got, twenty males-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --teenage boys isolated out in a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what did you all--did you plan an escape (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you know, for social activities? I mean, how did you--how was that handled? Did they bring like dances to the school [Thomas Jefferson School, St. Louis, Missouri] or some social activity? Speaker 2: We did have some dances and I can recall--I used to--certainly had the summers and there is obviously a lot of opportunity for fun in the summers. I was Jack and Jill [of America] at the time and so I know the other events that would occur on the weekend and so a certain number of weekends I would go home. I mean there wasn't--it was probably about a forty-five [minute] drive from my parents' [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson and Irving Williamson, Sr.] house and North St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri] to the location for the school. So I didn't always go back on a regular, you know, every night basis or even every weekend but did go back for the different kinds of events. But, you know, again we had a fairly structured day. We would have classes in the morning and of course with only six people in your class it really wasn't very easy to hide. It was a very participatory type of classroom approach. In the afternoon we'd have athletics or we'd start our homework, we'd have our outside reading which was due by a certain point in time in the afternoon to get in this written assignment and then we would be expected to be studying in the evening. Speaker 1: Okay. On the one hand the possibilities are really great. You've got like six students in your class, the individualized attention you would get but only twenty people around and with a mean disciplinarian in charge of you. It seems like--when you say mean was there a corporal punishment in the school? Speaker 2: No. So not corporal punishment but what they had at the school was called demerits and so they would give demerits for little infractions whether that be leaving your spoon on your coffee cup saucer as opposed to the proper etiquette was to take it down, that kind of thing and also for this outside reading. So I actually--I got sent home--I got suspended my first year at the school and again it was for getting demerits and the demerits were entirely related to this outside reading. And I may have--I had a similar type of experience I want to say my senior year or the like. Actually those were the two years that I had the headmaster [Robin B. McCoy] for English. So I had him for freshman English and for senior English I had different instructors my sophomore and junior English. So it was really--you know, I look back on it and say boy there was a high correlation between having him as my English teacher and encountering some difficulty. Story_ID: 268846 Speaker 1: How did you feel as the only African American in that kind of intense learning environment without any other--certainly no influences from any other African Americans around there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean, how did that make you feel? Speaker 2: Sure. Well and again so we're talking about 'cause I finished school in 1970, high school [Thomas Jefferson School, St. Louis, Missouri] and so again there is so much going on in the '60s [1960s] in the African American community and that's when I was starting to read more and you know to get more in touch and certainly I could pursue in college. But in high school from a day to day standpoint it was such a small school but I didn't particularly feel isolated because being the only African American--I mean at that point you're almost essentially blending in and so you don't necessarily think about it all the time. I mean I can remember even being surprised one time. This was the same headmaster, Robin [B.] McCoy was his name and he had a trip to Florence [Italy]. So we went to Florence and then Copenhagen [Denmark], three weeks in Florence and one week in Copenhagen. This was between my junior and senior years I believe and I can remember he was sort of commenting on how I was happy-go-lucky and he sort of brought up the race issue. So he was talking about, "Oh here it is you're--," I guess at the time it was Negro or whatever--, "and you really need to be buckling down more and the like" and this is the guy who actually was from Oklahoma originally, grew up and the like and of course had a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] education and the like. But again I always viewed him as being mean but I remember it sort of going through my mind his awareness of race and the like and bringing it up and also sort of making me, you know, somewhat suspicious of him. Speaker 1: So the context in which he brought it up--I guess I'm kind of unclear what was his message to you really about race? Speaker 2: Oh. I think his message was one of saying that you know, you're African American and there's a responsibility--I mean in some ways a positive message of saying you can't just be sliding through life but you need to step up and work hard and the like. I was actually going to school on scholarship and so again I think it was sort of a message of you need to be thankful for this opportunity that you're being given and do something with it. And, yes. Speaker 1: Did you have any--you had a lot of history and culture but did you have any black history or culture in high school? Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: And was there, did you think at the time that should have been some or--'cause a lot of--I'm just saying that because popular culture at that time is being inundated with new books and television--everybody had black history-- you know, black was, people started calling themselves black in 1969 or '70 [1970]. It was right around that period of time. We were Negroes and all of a sudden we were black around '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]. I think it started in '68 [1968] but didn't get everywhere until about '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]. By that time on if you called somebody a Negro they would-- Speaker 2: Get offended, right. Speaker 1: And before '68 [1968] if you called them black they would be offended. So it's a time of transition. Speaker 2: Well. But in answer to your question, I don't know that I ever sat and thought the curriculum of the school should be changed to have a greater focus on black history. You know I certainly remember having a girlfriend from St. Louis [Missouri] who I didn't see all that often but she was reading things and we would talk and certainly myself taking an interest and again it dovetailed very much but the interest that my family had in those types of issues. But the big issue for me with the school was, you know, they seemed to be out of step in so many ways beyond just the focus on African American history. I mean, I never particularly got into studying Greek myself although there was a certain sense of, boy, this is not the most relevant thing to be studying, but never really took it so far as to say well what we should be studying is not Greek but, yes. Story_ID: 268847 Speaker 1: Were the science studies--were they keeping up with trends in science there or did they--was that a big part of the school [Thomas Jefferson School, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: It wasn't a big part of the school but we did have, you know, science courses. Probably only about six teachers there which is still a very good student/teacher ratio but as I go back and look there was a guy named Robert Burton [ph.] who actually ended up being I guess related to family out in New York that was very involved with CBS and the like so had tons of money. So they were big actually supporters of the school and the funding but anyway he taught science and I liked him a lot so I did enjoy taking his courses. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there activities within the context of the school that you got involved in or clubs or--? I don't know if you had a student body with twenty students, I don't know if you even (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We definitely didn't have a student body. And it was-- there was very much the school ran around the academics. So I can remember get grades and some schools the grades were considered private whereas at this school they actually posted your grade, your grades on a piece of paper and they posted them up on the bulletin board. If you were the top student or the like, you get your name painted on a placard and the like that was up there and then when you made reference to the escape, it was sort interesting in my senior year my best friend at the school at the time was actually a very intelligent young man whose father was mayor of a city in Iowa, he actually took his guitar and walked off and headed home or was heading off on his own. Ultimately he got picked up by the police but was suspended from the school and never came back. But that was sort of a good example of what was an escape. For me, throughout my life I've been fairly adaptable and so I adjusted to different aspects. Speaker 1: Okay so you never really worried about well this is such an unusual place, I'd rather be someplace else. You never really had those kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No not until--it didn't cross my mind until after I was already out. So I mean, it was the kind of thing--I remember my mom [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson] asking me when I was in eighth grade [at Walnut Park School, St. Louis, Missouri] where do you want to go and I said I want to go the same place that my brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.] went and that's where he had gone and so I went there. And then once I was there I was sort of happy go lucky. It was sort of tough my first year and my last year but actually the years in between were fairly enjoyable. Story_ID: 268848 Speaker 1: So when you were a senior [at Thomas Jefferson School, St. Louis, Missouri]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what had you envisioned as a career, and-- Speaker 2: Okay. There was a teacher that I had probably in my junior year in high school, I think I had him for math, Gary Morrow was his name and at one point in time he said to me and he meant it as an insult actually, but he said, "Oh, you know you should be a lawyer," and I can't remember whether I was quibbling about one thing or another there or sort of disputing him on some point but he said it in that way. I sort of heard him and I said oh yeah maybe I will have some interest in that. So it was probably at that point in time that I thought about law although the way the school was set up really the first thing to focus on was just getting into college. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were pretty, so you were fairly, you were articulate enough to defend yourself and you can think on your feet, I guess. Even as an insult--if he was insulting you he was certainly indicating that you (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess it was a certain back handed aspect to the insult in the sense of yes (unclear). Speaker 1: But you had the will and the ability to defend yourself I guess and would. So now, were you really concerned that you might not go to college? It seemed like you were going (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I took it for granted that I was going to go to college. I only applied to one school; in fact the school would only let me apply to one school. Speaker 1: What school did you--would they let you apply to? Speaker 2: Brown. Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]. Speaker 1: So the school was--did they channel all the students towards the school or what? Speaker 2: They did and this is again as I said the school has changed a lot but at that point in time I would say the headmaster [Robin B. McCoy] you know he had this view of 'cause he controlled writing letters of recommendations, they controlled pretty much where students could apply. And in my case you know brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.] had gone to Brown University and I don't even recall much discussion about it. It was like oh, let's apply to Brown University. Speaker 1: So you knew you were going to Brown when you were a senior when you graduated? Speaker 2: Yes well I mean I guess it's just fortunate that I got in 'cause I don't know what I would have done, I mean when you apply to one school if I hadn't gotten in, but, yes. Story_ID: 269379 Speaker 1: Well tell us about Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. It's got to be a big change over high school [Thomas Jefferson School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Well it was I mean after being in such a small environment I was thrilled to get to Brown. I got there in 1970 that was right after they had a big sort of walk out in 1969 [sic. 1968], I believe and it was a large class of African Americans that came in 1970, 1969. The school had embarked on a new curriculum also right around that time where they got rid of most of the required courses and prerequisites and a sort of innovative approach. So it was just a great place to be, it was a lot of fun. Certainly the first challenge was not having the same discipline being surrounded by all of the routine of high school. I was sort of reconstructing that for myself but probably by my, the second half of my first year I had the good fortune of developing a relationship with a woman who was pre-med and so of course she was very studious and so the two of us would go to the library together and so that really helped instill some good academic work habits. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now what did you major in? Speaker 2: I majored in economics although I pause to say it was sort of a dual major, sociology and economics. But I, so I completed the requirements for economics major but my real heart was in sociology. I don't know whether that was the influence of my mother [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson] or the like. But I had a great professor there that I got attached to, Martin Martel was his name and I actually was--sort of got into a program that was a combined B.A./M.A. where I could get my master's [degree] in sociology at the end of the four years. I actually ended up not writing the thesis that was required for that because by the time I got to my last year I was already heading toward law school and business school and some other kinds of things. Not planning to go on to get a Ph.D. in sociology. So it was less relevant to try and do the master's program. Speaker 1: But you had some graduate level courses in sociology even in undergraduate school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any other than Martin Martel were there any other major mentors or teachers that played a role in your development at Brown? Speaker 2: Yes although he was, you know, far and away the biggest influence. There were some professors I can remember in the economics department. There were some others, sociology or other areas; I think a guy also named also Michael [S.] Harper who was a black professor in the English department who was a poet that I had a course with. But in terms of really forming a close relationship with a professor, it was Martin Martel. Story_ID: 269380 Speaker 1: Did you get involved in campus activities [at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]? Speaker 2: I did to some extent. I'm trying to remember, I was on I think it was student government that had some strange name. I want to say it was like the Comerian [ph.] Club or the like at the time but ran for that my first year and was elected to a position there. I was, you know, so--I'm trying to think of the different activities that I was involved in. Some intramural sports, I used to do--but mostly it was social and academic. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you had determined so what--I guess I steered you towards law school finally instead of sociology? Speaker 2: Well I think what steered me in that direction was again the influence of my brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.] and my sister [Karen Williamson]. So my sister got out of Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] in 1966 or I may be doing this wrong, '69 [1969] and she had been gone from there to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and got her M.B.A. from there. I think she got her M.B.A. in 1971 that was while I was at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] and my brother had gotten out of Brown in 1965, went to John[s] Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies [Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies, Washington, D.C.] but then later working in [Washington] D.C. went back to [The] George Washington University [Washington, D.C.] and got his law degree. So again you know, I think while I was still in my formative years I saw my brother getting a law degree and my sister getting an M.B.A. and I had an interest in both and I think that's what sort of caused me to look at a joint J.D./M.B.A. program coming out of Brown. Speaker 1: So you went to law school at Brown as well? Speaker 2: I went to law school and business school at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Oh at Harvard, okay, all right. Story_ID: 269381 Speaker 1: So you graduated from Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] in '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], uh-huh. Speaker 1: And then you went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] directly from Brown? Speaker 2: Yes. I went to Harvard from essentially--well '74 [1974] through '78 [1978] and my first year was at the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] then my second year was a first-year program at the law school and then the last two years I took courses at both schools. Speaker 1: Okay so this is a combined M.B.A./J.D. (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah J.D./M.B.A. Speaker 1: Well that's sound ambitious at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] too. So, well--was it difficult? Speaker 2: Well yes and no. Really the way the program was set up and of course the hardest years are the first year of each program. So the first year in business school was hard because there was a lot of work but it was fun and I would say it wasn't, you know, it wasn't hard in a mean way. Obviously in the business school there is a real focus on classroom participation, working in study groups. Like, so very different from law school 'cause your first year in law school really you don't get grades until the end of the year. It's all around taking a test and you know it's a different type of stress or a different type of focus. Much more academic than the business school. So in some ways what may be difficult about the combined program is that the schools have very different ways in which they measure success, very different styles to be successful. But each place, I mean if you get to the law school or the business school there's no reason not to be able to graduate from those programs. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you recruited into Harvard Law School? Did you just decide (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know coming out of Brown I certainly applied to a number of law schools and I think that was my primary focus and I, and then with the law schools that I applied to, I think I was looking at the combined joint program J.D./M.B.A. at a number of those schools. But it wasn't that they recruited me, I went through the normal process of getting the application and sending them in. Story_ID: 269382 Speaker 1: Well who were some of the professors--are there any professors or people at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that you remember significantly in terms of helping you? Speaker 2: Sure, let me see, so professors that I can remember pretty well Stephen Breyer, I probably had him my second year, he's on the [U.S.] Supreme Court now but I had him for anti-trust and I remember feeling pretty good. I think I got an A in anti-trust and so that was sort of a boost to my confidence and furthered my interests in corporate types of issues. I had a professor Marvin Chirelstein for tax and I had him during my second year, third year. He was visiting from Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] and he was a fascinating guy very on the one hand low key in the sense that and of course you have a fair number of egos that are there at Harvard but this guy Chirelstein was always very self-deprecating and the like. But he made tax extremely enjoyable from an let's say an intellectual stimulation standpoint and a way of trying to get to really the essence of the issues that were presented by the cases. And, you know, so stripping out a lot of times cases you go through all this detail statements about dollar amounts of someone's income or dollar amounts of someone's deductions and so Mr. Chirelstein always stripped down to ten dollars or five dollars. But you know he was able to contrast the approach in one case versus another to sort of highlight the, some of the logical inconsistencies that might be presented by the approaches of different cases. So I just found that quite enjoyable and so those are a couple of professors that come to mind. Louie Loss was dean of securities regulations; I had him and did very well in that course. Then on the flip side I can remember--I used to always have a fair amount of confidence in my academic abilities and never shied away from being willing to take on an academic challenge. So I can remember my first year having Archibald Cox who you know, got some fame I guess in Watergate, a prosecutor and [President] Richard [Milhous] Nixon (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that was about the time Nixon was impeached in '74 [1974], he was just coming off the impeachment of Nixon. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So he was as big as he ever was going to get (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes he was. He was a very big name at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time well in public affairs at the time. So I'm trying to remember--so I had him for constitutional law and I worked very hard I thought in this course. I actually thought that I had done very well and the like and it was like my--the one C that I got in the law school and so I just never could--I was dumbfounded by it a little. So I can remember going to him and complaining about my grade but it didn't do any good. But so that sort of stands out as a scar so that was my memory of those years. But Archibald Cox was a big name and yeah there were a few people that I had. Speaker 1: Anybody else that you remember? Speaker 2: Well okay the other person and of course I'm now starting to hit the less pleasant memories. It's the kind of thing, I was gonna say my first year in law school was my least favorite of the years that I spent there and actually I think the courses there were less to my liking but another professor I remember having Vern Countryman who taught bankruptcy law. Again now this was a course that I thought I was going to like but I did find it a little dry once we started down that topic. So, now certainly in law school there were certain areas that appealed to me and that I started gravitating toward, and those tended to be more on the corporate and commercial and tax related side. Story_ID: 269383 Speaker 1: Anything else about Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that you remember or during that period of time? Speaker 2: Not too much. I mean the only other story that I almost hesitate to say 'cause it's about a relatively famous black professor. I remember actually my first year wanting to take a course with [HistoryMaker] Andrew [F.] Brimmer who at the time was with the Federal Reserve [Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System] and the like. He was coming actually to teach at our Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] at the time. So I can remember writing a letter during the summer to the school and I had this sort of passionate statement about oh I'm really inspired by the possibility of taking courses with Andrew Brimmer. I'd like to be in his section and the like and then it turned out at the last minute that they switched so instead that first year course program I think he was teaching a second year course and the like. So I actually missed the opportunity and then I can recall running into him in a hotel in Boston [Massachusetts] at some point and going over to him--I've never been star struck. I've met various people who were sort of famous and I care less in terms of getting an autograph. But so it was the one time I went over to somebody and said "Oh Mr. Brimmer, you don't know me but I knew that you were coming to the school and I cared so much I even wrote a letter to the dean to take your course--," dada dada da. So it was one of these unfortunate instances and he said, "Oh okay" and then he just sort of brushed me off and went on about his business so it was sort of a funny experience. Speaker 1: During those days and I probably have missed some people, I'm just trying to think about who was at Harvard in those days (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I guess [HistoryMaker] Derrick [A.] Bell [Jr.] who was teaching constitutional civil rights issues was there. Actually are some of the people who are there now. [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree is a sort of prominent African American professor and he was in my class--law school and we were in the same study group in law school. A guy named Ken Frazier [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier] was in my study group. Ken is general counsel of Merck [& Co. Inc.] now so I guess there is some article recently; I guess they've got all these problems with one of their drugs, Vioxx. He's tied up in those issues. Speaker 1: What was his name again? Speaker 2: Kenneth Frazier. Speaker 1: Okay now did you--you were probably pretty busy but I don't know if you came across--you were at or near in the African studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies] or Martin [L.] Kilson [Jr.]. I know at that time [HistoryMaker S.] Allen Counter and David (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Nancy Kilson who I guess was maybe a daughter was there in my year and I was gonna say Constance Baker Motley's son Joel Motley I think was maybe a year behind me. Yeah but it was a good place actually me and a number of some very intelligent and soon to be successful African Americans. Story_ID: 269384 Speaker 1: That was a pretty intense period of time I guess at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You graduated in '78 [1978]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you got your degree in '78 [1978]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You must have had a lot of offers, I would guess, I mean a lot of opportunities or options with a law degree and an M.B.A. Speaker 2: Well, I mean one thing about the real world though is you have to make a choice coming out of school about whether you're going to go the legal route or the business route and so I probably just, I decided while I was there--at my first year in [Harvard] Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] I worked for a business but after that I was really work for law firms. So after my second year in the program, I worked for a New York [New York] law firm Mudge Rose [Guthrie Alexander & Ferdon]. Then my third year--I take back after my second year I went and worked for the largest firm in St. Louis [Missouri] a firm called Bryan Cave [LLP] (unclear). So then it was really after my third year that I went to a firm called Mudge Rose which actually had been the [President Richard Milhous] Nixon firm. So that was some of its background to some extent. Then coming out of my last year I was trying to choose between New York and Washington, D.C. and I got offers from some very good firms in New York. And in D.C. I ended up with a firm called Covington & Burling [LLP] which was really sort of at the time viewed as the best firm in Washington, D.C. A firm I was looking at in New York was Sullivan & Cromwell [LLP] which is also one of the top firms in New York. And Covington appealed to me because I was able to do tax work whereas if I'd gone to Sullivan & Cromwell they were telling me I was going to have to go into the corporate law department. So that's really sort of a choice of type of work that directed my decision. Speaker 1: Okay so you were a tax lawyer with Covington & Burling? Speaker 2: I became a tax lawyer. The funny thing about Covington actually and Washington, D.C. firms is they seem to be less specialized and less departmentalized. So at Covington I started off working for two different partners. One of them was a tax partner and one of them was a corporate law partner. But I would say fairly quickly over the first year or so I gravitated in the direction of tax. Speaker 1: Okay how long were you there? Speaker 2: About three and a half years. So I started there in '78 [1978] and then I left in the summer of '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay now where did you go in '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981] I left Covington, went to New York to a firm that was then called Reavis & McGrath. It has since merged into a law firm called Fulbright & Jaworski [LLP]. Speaker 1: I guess you continued as a tax lawyer basically? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. This is in New York City [New York, New York]. Okay. Did you like living in New York City because you were there before as an intern right so--? Speaker 2: Yes and then New York and D.C. are probably the two cities that my sister [Karen Williamson] and brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.] sort of gone back and forth between and so sort of still following their footsteps in terms of sort of the pattern--between those two cities. Yeah I liked--I loved D.C. actually when I was there and it was a great place to be particularly as a single African American male and the like and as a city and as a lawyer. I mean, it's great cities for both, but I enjoyed New York very much as well. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So how long did you stay in New York as-- Speaker 2: It was '81 [1981] to '88 [1988]. Story_ID: 269385 Speaker 1: During this time, were there any cases that you worked on that kind of stand out that you can tell us about that-- Speaker 2: Sure, well in Washington, D.C. the big matter that I worked on was the Penn Central [Transportation Company] reorganization in chapter 11 [United States Bankruptcy Code] and I was focused on it from a tax standpoint. So there are any number of rulings that needed to be obtained from the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] relating to tax planning that was being done in order to try and preserve net operating loss, carry forwards and the like that Penn Central had generated. So it was fertile ground for tax planning. And you know I probably was working on it the beginning and certainly I was working at the end when I left Covington & Burling [LLP]. Speaker 1: In New York [New York] what were your, what was your primary case? Speaker 2: Firm I went to in New York was more focused on venture capital with its actions in general. So they represented a number of biotech companies, a computer hardware company called Data General at the time and others like that and so it was more of a transaction-oriented type of tax practice of working on planning ideas for mergers and acquisitions or for investments funds of one type or another, onshore/offshore that type of thing. Speaker 1: Okay now so where did you go after '88 [1988]? Speaker 2: Oh that's when I joined Pitney Bowes [Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay. How did that happen, how did you get with Pitney Bowes? Speaker 2: Sure well I got with Pitney Bowes because I got a call from a recruiter who was looking for a tax person to head up the tax department for the Pitney Bowes financial services companies [Pitney Bowes Credit Corporation]. And I was receptive--the firm I was at Reavis & McGrath [Fulbright & Jaworski LLP] was going through some difficult times and this was back I guess '87 [1987] was significant stock market decline. Venture capital which had been very hot in the early '80s [1980s] and the like had cooled off and so a firm which had grown very rapidly the early part of my years and the like was going through various kinds of efforts to sort of have the growth stall and the like. So Pitney Bowes came along, it was a good opportunity to sort of move on, not wait around for the opportunity to make partner where it was really becoming clear they had too many tax partners for the business that they were generating. Story_ID: 269386 Speaker 1: We talked to [HistoryMaker] Darwin [N.] Davis [Sr.] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Darwin Davis. Speaker 1: And he was telling us about--well he showed us a copy of Newsweek that was--yeah he was interviewed in where he discussed--it was a copy of Newsweek that was basically generated to discuss a new book ['The Rage of a Privileged Class'] out by [HistoryMaker] Ellis Cose where he talked about--he discussed the frustrations of young black professionals in the business world. Did you at that time-- now you were a self-proclaimed happy-go-lucky guy, right? Speaker 2: Who doesn't seem to let things stop him, you're chugging along and things are bouncing off of you but did you kind of feel that you weren't going anywhere? You were seeing a lot of partners and a lot--did you think your chan- (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh well I always thought my chances were good. Truthfully when I left Covington & Burling [LLP, Washington, D.C.] and I left for personal, social reasons. I got engaged to a woman in New York [New York] and so I needed to make a change in cities. I realized when I left Covington you know, I liked the law and so I would strategize when you go to a somewhat smaller firm, less of a high powered name but you know, increase the chances of making partner and so I would have gone with a high expectation to make partner and then actually even being there I would have stayed feeling pretty confident all along that I was getting positive signals and that I was well positioned. So that being--this sort of ties back to this happy-go-lucky, there are things that particular now with a long amount of hindsight that I've got and I can sort of look at and I say okay well if I had it to do over again maybe I should have seen some of the economic factors that were affecting the firm [Reavis & McGrath; Fulbright & Jaworski LLP] sooner than I did and really law is a business, it's about attracting clients. So I sort of look back and see that I wasn't really attracting my own clients, I was really relying on a couple of different mentors to be my power base in the firm. And you know, some of the things in terms of what happens with the stock market are somewhat beyond ones control and in my case one of main mentors passed away right around that time I was coming up. So it was some effort on my part to capture some of his clients, I was going to make them my clients but it really wasn't a very realistic approach given that I was an associate, he was a corporate partner and you really need to be sort of a corporate partner to retain these clients. So rele- and of course there are other connections that come into play. So one of things for me being in New York is religion plays a role as well. Certainly the firm I was at was fairly mixed in terms of Jewish versus not Jewish. But the mentor that I had was Jewish and when you look at some of his clients, a number of them were biotech companies with offices in Israel or the like and so I suppose if I were really superhuman I could have overcome some of the challenges of forming those relationships and sort of winning over those clients. But in the practical world, I'm not sure how realistic that would have been. Story_ID: 268788 Speaker 1: We were just discussing off camera that the, I guess the perception that you just didn't have the connections on this, in the position that you were in, in the firm [Reavis & McGrath; Fulbright & Jaworski LLP] in New York [New York] to really do what you wanted to do. So you made a logical move to get with Pitney Bowes [Inc.]. Speaker 2: Get with Pitney Bowes and yeah, that was a great transition for me in the sense of first experience really working in the corporate world but it gave me an opportunity to continue my sort of specialized skills and practice in the tax area in a business which is very tax oriented which is equipment leasing and financing transactions. Yeah then it also gave me some exposure to managing people and working in organizational settings. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you have to really focus on that a lot? Had you had any experience managing people before? Speaker 2: Not really because in the law firm setting you're an individual contributor, you get assignments and you have to connect with clients too and you have to work sometimes in team settings on research or the like. But at most you've got one other associate perhaps that is a junior to you or a couple of them but they're obviously very self-directed and they tend to sort of go off and pursue their assignments and bring it back and you sort of coach them or review their work. Whereas in a business setting the management issues are intriguing because people look at things in different ways oftentimes and so actually getting them to work together and get results through them is a significant challenge. Speaker 1: What did you really learn--I mean what did you have to learn to be successful in managing people? Speaker 2: I guess if I'd had different jobs the issues have changed for me because the first role that I had was just managing a tax department which wasn't all that different in that again everybody was coming from the same discipline, way of thinking about things. So one of the things is to learn how to work with people on different levels. Folks who are not lawyers but responsible for getting your role done and who approaches things in not the same set of issues and motivations that you often see with lawyers. But as I've gotten different roles and one of the learnings for me is again how different people will see the same set of facts so differently just because they're coming at it from different functional areas. So every day I see someone from the sales or marketing side of the business and so the problem that they see is that we're not approving enough deals from a credit standpoint and you deal with a person on the credit side and the problem is that the sales people bring in lousy deals that are too risky. So the ability to see things from both perspectives and then get those individuals to start to appreciate the differing perspectives of their counterparts and then to be able to sort of drive them to jointly, you know, sort of sign up for a decision that's being made and be supportive of it. I think those were things that I learned. Story_ID: 268789 Speaker 1: What was the position that you started? Speaker 2: The first job I had at Pitney [Bowes Inc.] was director of tax and it was really for the financial services companies [Pitney Bowes Credit Corporation]. Speaker 1: Okay. And how long did you do that? Speaker 2: Actually I did that for a long time. I was working for the CFO of the financial services companies and did that from '88 [1988] to '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: And then what happened? Speaker 2: Then in--well in '93 [1993] sort of formalized. I was doing more than just tax. So I got a title that included assistant general counsel for the financial services companies and then in '94 [1994] I got the role of general counsel for the financial services companies. Speaker 1: Okay that was in '94 [1994] right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And how long did you do that? Speaker 2: Did that until--let me see here. In '98 [1998] I picked up another assignment where I was doing mergers and acquisitions for the parent company Pitney Bowes [Inc.]. So I got a title of deputy general counsel for mergers and acquisitions. Speaker 1: And how long did that last? Speaker 2: Then in the following year in '99 [1999] I picked up the role of running--president of Capital Services division and then-- in '99 [1999]-- then in I guess October, not to make this too complicated, 2002--I don't want to confuse the conversation with the ways in which Pitney is organized. So that first job capital services that I'm referring to really refers to financing equipment not made by Pitney Bowes and then in the fall of October 2002, I picked up responsibility as well for financing Pitney Bowes products. That was gratuitous because then in 2003 Pitney decided to discontinue really financing products that it didn't make. So then I sort of kept this role of heading up the financing of what they called captive financing for Pitney Bowes products. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did that job entail? It entails financing of the production of the products of the various business machines that Pitney Bowes makes. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So Pitney is well known for its postage meters and equipment that relates to mail and most of those products Pitney puts out on lease rather than just a straight sale. And so really the job is how to work effectively with the sales force to encourage leasing. You know, how to work with customers to get a particular decision to finance versus just paying cash and then it's all about how do we structure arrangements, which make it easy to lease or it makes it profitable to Pitney to be engaged in that leasing activity. Story_ID: 268790 Speaker 1: What would be the toughest aspect to what you do? Speaker 2: Sure. The toughest aspect I would say is coming up with ideas to make the business [at Pitney Bowes Inc.] more efficient and I guess I say that is tough because of course it's so easy once you start doing something a certain way just to continue to do it that way and the trick to becoming more efficient is to look for ways of changing how you do things. So that always, that requires motivating people to do something different involves some creativity around thinking of the different way to do it, involves some discipline in terms of then actually creating some type of methodology to determine that the change really is better than what was there before and to put metrics in place to determine that. Then it's all of the management of people and sort of get them to agree on the change and to have them put it into place. Story_ID: 268791 Speaker 1: Now there's a question of mine, a personal question (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, sure. What's that? Speaker 1: --about Pitney Bowes [Inc.]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that has troubled me and it's--I've always worried about this on the consumer end of it but I wonder what Pitney Bowes can do on their end of it. I've always worked for not-for-profit organizations-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I guess from 1978 through today-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I work for a not-for-profit organization that has had a Pitney Bowes machine (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: The poorest organization I've worked for had a machine that would sort the mail not only meter the mail but it would like--you could like send a stack of letters through-- Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: --and it was very efficient and fast. This organization had a lot of volunteers, but it really had the least amount of cash flow, but later on I worked for two organizations that had much more money, but they had machines that we had to feed each letter through-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I wondered if--and they were doing--the volume of mail they were doing was much greater than the first organization-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that had the machine. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I just wondered, does Pitney Bowes have a system--is there any way in the system that they--to determine the volume and to match the volume with the right equipment? I don't think that the customers--I mean, these organizations really knew they could get a bigger machine--or I don't know, they just didn't seem to be concerned about it. In fact, they had newer machines, you know, they were the new digital ones and so forth, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but they didn't seem to have machines that could handle the volume that they needed. You know, so they had to spend like--a lot of volunteers, people sitting around feeding-- Speaker 2: Yes. Okay. Well several thoughts triggered by your question. I think certainly Pitney Bowes does keep track to some extent of how often people reset their meters and the dollar amounts for which they set reset meters. So it is possible to get some information about customers' postage usage and there is no question that different machines are more appropriate for high volume mailers than for low volume mailers and so there is some attempt to match it up. Pitney, of course is the evolving in terms of how we get our equipment marketed and connected to customers but historically during the time I've been here and only until the last couple of years the predominant approach by Pitney was through a direct sales force. So the challenge you get, of course, with direct--the positive side of direct sales force is those people are very entrepreneurial by and large. They go out and they find customers and they try and sell them as much mailing products as the customers will buy. So that's sort of a good thing to tap into that entrepreneurial spirit. The negative side though is that you're relying on each individual sales person to try and get to the right solution for each customer. So it is very possible that you could be with an organization that needs a high volume machine and then it's in a geographic location where the sales rep who covers that area looks at the name, sees it's nonprofit and says this business is not going to pay much or they are strapped for cash and I'm not even going to bother to call upon them. So that's obviously from a business standpoint. A challenge for Pitney Bowes management is to make sure that they are giving sales people the right tools to determine which of the best prospects and then to make sure that they are following up and that those sales reps are doing it. Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause I kind of thought that maybe there were some corporate research on the Pitney Bowes side. That they'd run with some of kind of big deal for these not for profits to use the bigger machine than do a higher volume or something (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes there is no question that the corporate strategy matter. Speaker 1: 'Cause the non-for-profits didn't even know that they were-- Speaker 2: Pitney wants its sales reps getting out there and let customers have higher volume needs. We want to make sure that they get the appropriate more efficient equipment--more featured equipment. And you know, I think we've moved in some directions now where in addition to just going through a direct sales force are starting to figure out other ways of approaching customers through telemarketing and the like which allows you to be more targeted and systematic in making sure that they're following up. Speaker 1: Yeah I think there could almost be some kind of simple demonstration of the volume that the person is using versus the little machine they had (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It would be some kind of correlation between efficiency and what they're paying--I don't know. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes there is. Story_ID: 268792 Speaker 1: As a black person in your position, have you worked to bring other black folks along or is that something that you really worry about as a-- Speaker 2: Something that I think is very important and I certainly recognize the number of people who've gone out of their way to help me and there are a couple of different ways in which I try and tap into an opportunity to help others who are coming along. I belong to an organization called the Executive Leadership Council, which sponsors a mentorship program so I've got someone that I mentor in connection with that program, it's fairly organized. But obviously there are opportunities every day to act as a resource for others either inside of Pitney Bowes [Inc.] or others outside of Pitney Bowes as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I mean, there's the Black Executive Exchange Program which is something I've participated in for a number of years. That basically involves going to college campuses and speaking to students. Speaker 1: Okay are these primarily black college campuses [HBCUs] or (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually they are. So this is run by the [National] Urban League and I think in the last year or so they've actually tried to expand it so that they can get at minority students at non-predominantly black. But the program really is focused on historically black colleges and universities. Story_ID: 268793 Speaker 1: What do you see as your next move? Do you--or what are your ambitions at this point? Speaker 2: Sure, a couple of things. Well at this point Pitney Bowes [Inc.] has-you know I can say it because Pitney announced back in December that they are exploring a spinoff of their Capital Services division and if that goes forward then I would be the CEO of the spun-off entity. So my main ambition right now is to get that transaction to happen at some point this year. The real key is to try and get it hopefully solidified in the next month and then there is a lot of work to make that transaction happen. So that's the key thing and I guess a second ambition I've been focused on for a year or so is actually getting on to the board of a for profit corporation. I've been on a number of not for-profit boards but wanted the experience of being on a for profit board. I think I've actually come down the final stretch, one of those opportunities. Story_ID: 268794 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Sure. Well, I mean, I guess number one I'm certainly worried about young people and making sure that, you know I look at-- that the educational opportunities that I had even in public school in St. Louis [Missouri] and worry to some extent that our schools are failing our young people. I think that disproportionately impacts the African American community and you know I worry about how intractable a problem it's been to really get at the very porous strata of our population and not withstanding all of the significant advancements that I see in terms of people who are breaking into the top levels of corporations and the like. You know still a concern that a number of folks who seem to have a hard time actually breaking through the very basic kinds of economic self-help and, you know, empowerment. Story_ID: 268795 Speaker 1: What advice would you give some young person today who is aspiring--I mean, a young black person (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --who is aspiring to get in the business world, you know-- Speaker 2: Sure. Well, I mean, it's not very sage advice but just sort of the first thing that really occurs to me is follow your heart because whatever you do you have to make sure that you are enjoying it and inspired by it 'cause you need to really put your all into it to get all that you can out of it. So it's got to be something that you enjoy and then after that, I mean there are any number of sort of practical things that sometimes come to my mind that I wish someone had reminded me about when I was coming up. If you are going to interview with an investment banking firm don't wear a brown suit however mundane it may be. Speaker 1: That is actually advice that--I'm so unused to the business world but that is actually advice that somebody would give you not to wear a brown suit to a meeting--? Speaker 2: If someone asked me I would give them that advice. I'm still looking back on my first year at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I remember going out and getting a suit to interview in and it was actually, I don't know what I was thinking about, you know, but it was sort of a brown suit. So for certain companies I interviewed with that was fine but actually for certain companies that I had some interest in whether that was investment banking firms or some of the commercial banks or the like, it was not the best foot forward that I could have been putting. Speaker 1: So the color of your suit actually does mean something to-- Speaker 2: Well obviously yeah we lived in an environment in which people make quick decisions based on limited information and so obviously everyone is well advised to focus on those kinds of factors as well as all the other factors. Story_ID: 268796 Speaker 1: --You ever entertained going into business on your own or striking out on your own or forming a company, or-- Speaker 2: No. Other than what I shared just a second ago in terms of looking forward to the possibility of the spinoff that I'm working on. I think my--a couple things. One is my-- what seemed to make sense to me coming out of school was make mistakes on someone else's nickel. So the notion of actually right out of school, you know, starting one's own venture seemed to me a certain amount of hubris recognizing how much there is to learn after one first gets out of school before striking out. And then, two, I guess I was always for some of the things that interested me particularly tax law the issues are more interesting on a large scale endeavor than they are on a small scale endeavor. So if you're trying to do some very complicated tax planning, you can do it in a cross-border transaction that involves multi-millions, you can't really do it on some kind of small private transaction. If you're really just striking out on your own it's hard to expect someone is going to entrust you with multimillions. So I guess that's another reason why I was never particularly attracted in that direction. Story_ID: 268797 Speaker 1: You mentioned something earlier but is there any major thing that you would do differently if you had to do it over again? Speaker 2: Sure, what would I do differently other than buying a blue suit my first year in school? Yeah, a couple of things. One of the things that comes to my mind is I would have done better at building peer relationships with the law firm [Reavis & McGrath; Fulbright & Jaworski LLP] I was at in New York [New York]. It's something I've trying to be mindful of while I've been here at Pitney Bowes [Inc.]. Even now today you know when you go to seminars or go to these conferences and you have people with gray hair giving advice to you know people fresh out of school it's focused on getting a mentor and the like. I would say I went through those same kinds of conferences when I was at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] and certainly put a focus when I was first in the law firm in Washington D.C. [Covington & Burling LLP] and then the law firm in New York on sort of developing that mentor relationship. I don't think there is any question that it is an important relationship to form there is no question about that. I've had some success doing that Pitney Bowes and that has contributed to my ability to move up here in this corporation. But one of the things I think I did not pay enough attention to when I was in the law firm is really building those relationships with peers as well and also of recognizing that actually having a close relationship with a powerful person--with a strong mentor actually creates jealousies and sometimes with those who are your peers and it can start to potentially put you at risk if you don't manage those relationships and, you know, those frictions that can arise well. Story_ID: 268798 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you're still young (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's very kind. Speaker 1: I'm about the same age. But what would you see at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh gosh. Speaker 1: That's why I had to preface it that way 'cause I know you're not thinking about that yet. Speaker 2: That's right having an eleven-year-old daughter [Nicole Williamson]; I do feel sort of young and haven't thought about a legacy. But I do hope that if I were to make this transaction successful and leave Pitney Bowes [Inc.] that they would throw me some kind of going-away party and I would certainly hope to stay in the work environment for a second and then I'll move to a different context. But I think in the work environment I would hope that they would say, "Boy this guy was really good at helping the company come up with solutions to extremely complicated types of problems and situations," and it's something that I've always prided myself on actually is an ability to wrestle with complexity and sort of enjoy the problem solving aspects which is what I think attracted me to tax law. And you know, Pitney's been a great place for me because we've done any number of innovative, sophisticated transactions this is primarily on the side that involved financing equipment not made by Pitney Bowes. So it's more of a commercial aircraft side and the, you know sort of project, finance, real estate types of deals that we've done. But I think I've been pretty good at coming up with creative solutions. But you know, they always say when you look at your tombstone you don't write as your epitaph that he went to work every day. And so certainly the other thing that I would hope that when it really does get time to write my legacy that I hope it can be said that I made a significant contribution in some way to improving the opportunities for African Americans. Story_ID: 268799 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, you've got a daughter [Nicole Williamson] that's eleven you said and, well, just tell us-- Speaker 2: Sure, I got married in 1988 same year I came to Pitney Bowes [Inc.]. So I started a family in 1994 is when our daughter was born so she just turned eleven a week ago and my wife is originally from Washington, D.C., Addie Perkins [Williamson], Ph.D. in psychology from University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. She's worked for a number of good companies, Chase [Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase & Co.], Visor [sic. Pfizer Inc.], Pepsi [Cola; PepsiCo], American Express [Company]. She started her own consulting firm [Perkins Williamson Associates] right around I would say nineteen--about a year after our daughter was born, around 1995. And so that's been good and being a father has been good. We're heading toward those teenage years and I can already see--that's probably a little more challenging in many respects, but I'm sure they will be good as well. Story_ID: 268582 Speaker 1: We were talking about your family-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and, did you--had you completed earlier all your thoughts about your family? Speaker 2: Oh sure, although I guess, I'd have to say I have a wonderful wife [Addie Perkins Williamson], you know, since we're on the record here wouldn't want that to be overlooked and a very bright daughter [Nicole Williamson] who is coming along quite nicely. Speaker 1: Had you--I didn't think of this when I was talking but have you thought about--I know you were concerned about the education of young people. Have you ever thought about what an alternative school would look like an ideal scenario for an alternative school since you attended sort of an alternative school yourself at one point? Speaker 2: You know, I did attend a very unusual high school [Thomas Jefferson School, St. Louis, Missouri] and the like and I've been on the board of my daughter's school since she goes to a school called New Canaan Country School [New Canaan, Connecticut] here in this area. I went to a board meeting just last night and, but if I were crafting a curriculum you know I think I would still focus on the basics of reading and writing first and foremost and then it seems to me after that it's really about inculcating a love of learning in students and then they go off and they become lifelong learners versus just trying to learn by rote or just trying to study for purposes of taking a test. Story_ID: 268583 Speaker 1: Did your parents [Elizabeth Giddings Williamson and Irving Williamson] get a chance to see you become successful? Speaker 2: Yes, I would say so. And, of course, I'm the youngest of the three, so I think--so my father and mother were still alive to see us all get through school, my brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.], sister [Karen Williamson] and I and to see us sort of launched on our careers and the like. So I had certainly some success in business before they passed away. Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't asked you that you think you should address or should talk about before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: No I don't think so. Speaker 1: There is always something that we haven't talked about (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You've been pretty well around, you know, most of the areas, so. Story_ID: 268584 Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different, and this is something somebody your age probably wouldn't be thinking about that much now but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Okay. Yes. Well and it's really getting very much at the same types of things as legacy. I have spent a lot of time developing my own self-concept as being someone who is successful but yet I actually don't think of that first and foremost as much as I think of myself as being a good human being sort of following certain moral precepts of treating others well. So I guess I'll start with that. I certainly would want to have it said about me that he thought about others, he was a gentleman in the classic sense of good breeding and treating others with respect. So that's just sort of the very basic but sort of moving on it seems to me that one has to have some balance in life and all I mean by that is there is sort of the workplace, there is sort of the social setting, family setting, community and civic organization and so as I've tried to go through my life while there have been some periods and I think particularly working in a law firm where you get all consumed just with work. Even in those years I've tried to maintain some attention to balance and I would certainly hope that I don't look back on my life and they say he was a great corporate executive but a real SOB around the house or did not care about his community or doing things for others. So I would hope that in the end I would have some success in remaining balanced and, you know, making contributions in all areas. Story_ID: 268585 Speaker 1: That's me, 1952, the year I was born. Speaker 2: Next. Let's get you with your mother. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's also 1952 and that's my mother Elizabeth Giddings Williamson with me. Yes, my sister Karen [Williamson] and my father Irving Williamson [Sr.] and me again in 1952. And then yeah- Speaker 2: So this was you? Speaker 1: No that was actually my friend Tony [ph.] right down the street. That was back in 1959 the summer, and it looks like I was out of school and enjoying myself. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That was 1961, I believe I was heading off to see my brother [Irving Williamson, Jr.] who was starting in Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] that year so I was heading up to Providence, Rhode Island. My father was a photographer and it looks like I'm carrying some of his camera and photographic equipment. Sure. That's an example of the Christmas cards that we used to send out every year and my father would take the picture and each year it would be my brother, my sister, myself on the front of the card. Sure that was shot in 1967, I was fifteen in high school [Thomas Jefferson High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. I'm holding a newspaper article which was the paper my father edited and it's got a picture of my brother and his new wife. This was the year they got married. Yes that's a picture of my whole family at the time. My sister, brother and myself, mother and father. Speaker 2: What year was it? Speaker 1: I'm going to guess that's 1968. Yes that's my grandmother Mabelle [Gulliver] Giddings and let's see, she looks like she's quite young in her thirties. That's my grandfather Arthur Giddings, Sr. in his bowtie looking very scholarly. Speaker 2: Now was he a teacher? Speaker 1: Engineer. So I think it looks like at that top picture it looks like he's engineering drawing or something. Yes, that's a picture of my grandfather Arthur Giddings. Very sure. This is a picture of Dr. Fredda Witherspoon and Robert Witherspoon. They were very active in St. Louis [Missouri] community events back in the '60s [1960s]. She was a lawyer and very much involved in civic affairs. Sure that's a picture of my grandparents, Arthur and Mabelle Giddings. It looks like that's fairly early in their marriage. Speaker 2: So that would be around the turn of the century? Speaker 1: I would think so. It's got--this is a picture of my mother when she was younger. It looks like she's probably in her teens. Sure that's a picture of my father who passed away August 29, 1991. That's a picture taken at a camping trip on my fortieth birthday with a number of friends and relatives. That's a picture of my wife, Addie Perkins [Williamson] taken in the summer of 1992. That's a picture of me also taken in August 1992. Speaker 2: So is this your daughter as a baby? Speaker 1: Yes it is. My wife on the right and my daughter Nicole [Williamson] on the left when she was two years old. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my wife and I taken about two years ago, 2003. That's a picture of me actually probably about eighteen years ago 'cause I was still working in New York City [New York, New York] at the time. That's a picture of my daughter Nicole taken in the year 2000. Speaker 2: That was five years ago. Speaker 1: Yeah it is. She looks (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So she was about six then...