 Story_ID: 644522 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: David Brian Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], so that's D-A-V-I-D, B-R-I-A-N, W-I-L-K-I-N-S. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 22, 1956 in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: So I'm a law professor and I have a very long title at the moment. So I am the Lester Kissel Professor of Law. I am the vice dean for Global Initiatives on the Legal Profession and I am the faculty director of the program on the legal profession [Center on the Legal Profession] and the Center on Lawyers and the Professional Services Industry [sic. Center for Lawyers and the Professional Services Industry] at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], that's a mouthfull (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes it is, yes it is, yes it is. And sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: It's April 29, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at Harvard Law School in the basement of the Reginald Lewis center for international law [Reginald F. Lewis International Law Center] and that's an important thing because Reginald Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] was a distinguished black alumnus of this school and the first person, and in my knowledge the only person, to have a building--only black American to have a building named after him on the entire Harvard University campus [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And he's a recent--I mean he's within the last--he's not a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's within my living memory. In fact I knew him quite well and he was a person who played a very important role in my own life. So he died probably, don't hold me exactly to this, but I would say certainly in the 1990s, and he graduated from Harvard Law School in 1968 and was one of the very first of the, of the modern wave of black students to go to Harvard Law School. Speaker 1: He made corporate history in the United States too. Speaker 2: He was a billionaire which, you know is--haven't been very many black billionaires and he was probably the first or certainly among the very first. He was the CEO of Beatrice International [Beatrice Foods TLC; TLC Beatrice International Holdings, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And he passed, I guess about, about ten years ago? Speaker 2: Yeah it was in that--no more than that-- Speaker 1: More than that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think sadly. I think it was in the 1990s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure it was in the 1990s, mid to late 1990s. Story_ID: 644523 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, you want to know what it is? Boy that's a--now having said yes that's a, that's actually a tougher question than I would have thought actually. That's not a lightweight question (laughter). I have to say that the comfort food, I'll put it in terms of comfort food. My comfort food is macaroni and cheese. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, blue. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I love the fall. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Boy, I love to travel and I love to travel the world. I'd say Paris [France]. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Pause) Yes I'd say. I'll just say, just do it. Story_ID: 644524 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Julian Wilkins] side, but we'll start with your mother's side; and then we'll put them together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: So her name is Elizabeth Rae, R-A-E, is her middle name; Sweeney is her maiden name, S-W-E-E-N-E-Y, Wilkins [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins]. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: So her date of birth is November 3, 1928 and her place of birth is Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about things they were doing? Speaker 2: So the things I know the best about my mother's side of the family are about her parents. Her father was Reverend Samuel H. Sweeney [Samuel Sweeney]. He was a very prominent member of the United Methodist Church, which is the black Methodist church, and he eventually became the pastor of St. Mark's Methodist church in Chicago--I'm sorry in New York [St. Mark's United Methodist Church, New York, New York]. He was actually the pastor of St. Mark's in Chicago [St. Mark United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois] beforehand. And he was a kind of a very well known minister in the Harlem community which is where my mother, (cough) excuse me, mostly grew up. That is she travelled around in the way that church families do, but she mostly grew up in Harlem in New York [New York] in the rectory of her father's church. Her mother, her name is Alberta Sweeney [Alberta King Sweeney], although I'm not quite sure what her mother's maiden name is, and her mother loved music and was not a professional musician but played music and instilled the love of music in her daughter, my mother, in fact, all their children played musical instruments. Speaker 1: What did your grandmother play? Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure she played the piano. That's certainly what my mother played and my mother eventually--one of the famous incidents in our family is that my mother eventually took piano lessons from Bela Bartok, the famous composer, which happened in a way that combines the unique things of race and class in America. So my mother got to take piano lessons with first Mrs. Bartok [Ditta Pasztory Bartok] and eventually with Bela Bartok because Bela Bartok's maid went to my mother's father's church. My mother, being the youngest child and the only daughter, was sort of constantly put on display for her musical talent and Bela Bartok's maid apparently came back and told Mrs. Bartok that there was this bright young woman who lived up in Harlem and was the daughter of the minister and had all this musical talent, and Mrs. Bartok, herself a child of immigrants, understanding more perhaps of the American experience than many other white people, invited my mother to come down and play for her. So my mother remembers taking the A train down. The Bartoks lived right outside of Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] and she played for Mrs. Bartok and Mrs. Bartok told her to come back, and so she began taking lessons with Mrs. Bartok and eventually the great man wandered in one day and heard her playing and agreed to also give her a few lessons. So this is one of those kind of only in America stories. Story_ID: 644525 Speaker 1: I know much less about my mother's [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] family going back. My sister actually, who at some point I hope Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] will also record here, has been writing a series of books about our family history and has actually written a book about the women in my family history ['They Raised Me Up: A Black Single Mother and the Women Who Inspired Her,' Carolyn Marie Wilkins] including my mother's mother [Alberta King Sweeney] and I think her grandmother [Lilly Pruett King], but I haven't read the book yet so I don't actually know that much about her. Speaker 2: Okay, this is a book for commercial distribution? Speaker 1: Yeah so it's a--she has a book contract I think with the University of Missouri Press [Columbia, Missouri]. She wrote a book about my grandfather [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] on my father's side and eventually his father [John Bird Wilkins], which we actually knew almost nothing about, and she discovered some of that family history. That book came out a couple of years ago and it has the wonderful title of 'Damn Near White' ['Damn Near White: An African American Family's Rise from Slavery to Bittersweet Success,' Carolyn Marie Wilkins], and it's a story about race and class and social structure in black America as told through the lens of my family history. Speaker 2: Okay. 'Damn Near White' was published last year? Speaker 1: No, I would say probably three years ago now, something like that. The University of Missouri Press and I could certainly get you a copy and get you a citation. Speaker 2: Okay. So many new things being done with history these days, you know. Speaker 1: Well it really is and it's--my sister, who's quite a remarkable person, she trained as a musician. In fact, she still is a professional musician. She teaches at the Berklee school of music [Berklee College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], but she got interested in our family history and recognized, as I think with many black families that as the older generation you know was passing on that so much about our family history was being lost. Speaker 2: And what's your sister's name? Speaker 1: Her name is Carolyn, C-A-R-O-L-Y-N, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Wilkins [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins]. Story_ID: 644526 Speaker 1: Your mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] kind of grew up in a church, I mean well she was a-- Speaker 2: Yep, grew up in the back of the church really her whole life long. Speaker 1: In Harlem [New York, New York]. On the piano circuit, I mean as a piano--as a classical pianist did she know Philippa Schuyler? Did she ever mention her? Speaker 2: I don't--that name I don't know, but I'm not in the music side. Unfortunately, I didn't get the musical genes, other than a love of music. But my father's church was known--my grandfather's church was known for music and many of the prominent black musicians of the day belonged. It was kind of known as an intellectual church. That's at least the way my mother tells it to me, and so many of the intellectuals and artists who lived in Harlem at the time belonged to my grandfather's church. Speaker 1: Okay. St. Mark's-- Speaker 2: St. Mark's Methodist church [St. Mark's United Methodist Church] and the history of that church, it might be relevant. So my grandfather--my great-grandfather, I'm sorry excuse me, on my father's [Julian Wilkins] side was also a Methodist. He is sometimes called the father of Negro Methodism. He was one of the early pioneers in the United Methodist Church. His name was John Robinson Wilkins [sic.] and he actually built St. Mark's Church in New York [New York] and then my grandfather on my mother's side eventually became the pastor. In fact, this was the second church that this was true for. So my great-grandfather--I'm sorry, my great-grandfather's name was John Robinson [John Wallace Robinson], his last name was not Wilkins, his name was John Robinson. He also built St. Mark's Church in Chicago [St. Mark United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois], which eventually my grandfather on my mother's side, Sweeney [Samuel Sweeney], became the pastor of. And so the joke in my family was that my Great-grandfather Robinson would lay the cornerstone and my Grandfather Wilkins would pay off the mortgage. So the two families--the two sides of my family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your Grandfather Sweeney-- Speaker 2: Yes, Grandfather Sweeney. Did I say Wilkins? I'm sorry Sweeney yes. So the two sides of my family have had a connection that goes back several generations, two generations I think. Speaker 1: Now this--is this the home of the St. Mark's Playhouse [New York, New York] that the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] would play out of (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I--you know I don't know whether that's true. I think there may have been some connection but I don't--it wasn't in the church, I don't think. But I don't know whether there was that kind of connection. Speaker 1: That's interesting, so anybody listening to this can look it up. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well this is the amazing thing, that there might be some connection. It's funny I knew--I had a very good friend in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I sort of lost track of, whose grandfather, I think or maybe his father was one of the founding members of the Negro Ensemble Company, but I don't know that we ever put that together. Story_ID: 644527 Speaker 1: So your mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins]--so, so she was off on a track to become a classical musician. Speaker 2: So my mother wanted to be--I think there was a time in which she wanted to be a classical musician. I think, you know quite frankly the opportunity to be a black classical musician in the 1940s was certainly very limited. So she ended up studying music education. My mother went to Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts] and studied music education, as I think many blacks who probably would, in some ways wanted to be performers ended up studying music education as a way of, you know ensuring that they could get a job. My mother first went to Hunter College [New York, New York] I should say. She went to Hunter College as an undergraduate and then she went to get her master's [degree] in music education at Smith. Speaker 1: Tell me, did your mother attend a public school or did she? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother went to public school in New York [New York] and if I think hard enough I might be able to remember the name, but again that's why it would be great to have my mother do this. She eventually went to what I suppose you would think of today as a magnet school. That is, she took the train and went to a school that was far outside of her neighborhood in Harlem [New York, New York], it was downtown someplace, and in fact the reason why I know I could remember it eventually is that I've been there and I took my mother there for a kind of reunion. Then she went to Hunter, which you know is a part of the city university system [City University of New York, New York, New York] and was really the kind of elite commuter school in New York and she again commuted and then she finally went away to school when she went to Smith. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so did she pursue a graduate degree? Speaker 2: Yes, she got a master's in music education from Smith, which her mother [Alberta King Sweeney] insisted that she finish before she got married. She got married shortly after her graduation. Speaker 1: Okay. And that would be in--do you know the year? Speaker 2: Yeah, they got married in 1950. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty [1950]. Okay, now let me--should we go to your father's [Julian Wilkins] side now? Speaker 2: I mean, I can just tell you a little bit more about my mother's side in terms of her immediate family, but then you know we probably ought to leave that as I said, for my mother. So she had three brothers, none of whom sadly are still living. The oldest was also Samuel H. Sweeney [Samuel Sweeney, Jr.], so I guess he was a junior. Then the middle one was John Edward Sweeney [John Sweeney] and the youngest was Paul Wesley Sweeney [Paul Sweeney]. The eldest was injured slash traumatized in World War II [WWII] and never really recovered, lived in kind of halfway houses for the rest of his life and died relatively young, probably in his fifties, maybe early sixties, but probably more like his fifties. Speaker 1: That's what they call shellshock in those days (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know we now call it posttraumatic stress [posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)]. We now have many names for it, which we didn't used to have. Her middle brother did become a professional musician. He played the French horn and the organ. He was a very talented musician, he played in Europe but eventually he came back to the United States and became a professor at a school in Maryland and taught there for many years until he died probably ten, fifteen years ago. And the youngest became a lawyer and went out to California where he became one of the first black--one of the few black lawyers in the Los Angeles [California] area at the time. So he probably became a lawyer in the 1940s, moved out to Los Angeles and spent his career practicing law there. Story_ID: 644528 Speaker 1: We'll go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, his name was Julian Byrd Wilkins [Julian Wilkins], Byrd is B-Y-R-D, Julian, J-U-L-I-A-N, and he was born on October 5, 1926. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what can you tell us about his side of the family? Speaker 2: So my father came from a very distinguished family in the sort of black community of the day. His father, whose name was J. Ernest Wilkins [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.], was--had graduated from the University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois] in the late--I think in 1930 he graduated. He first went to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and then he graduated from the University of Chicago as one of the very first black, he wasn't the first but one of the first black graduates from the University of Chicago Law School. He went on to a very distinguished career. First of all he had his own law firm [Wilkins, Wilkins and Wilkins, Chicago, Illinois] and he was a very prominent lawyer in Chicago, but in the 1950s, he was selected by Dwight Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] to be the undersecretary of labor in the first Eisenhower administration. And he, as such he became the first black subcabinet level official. That is there had never been a black cabinet level official and he was in that immediate rank there under--they called it a subcabinet level official. It was a very--got lots of attention in the newspapers and the press. His wife who is--now this is terrible I'm just blanking out her name, it will come to me in a second, Lucille Robinson [Lucille Robinson Wilkins], I don't know her middle name. So Lucille Robinson was the daughter of John Robinson [John Wallace Robinson], who was the Methodist minister who laid the cornerstone, so this is his daughter. She married my grandfather and she was a school teacher in the Chicago public school system. They had three sons of which my father is the youngest. Story_ID: 644529 Speaker 1: The oldest son is named J. Ernest Wilkins, Jr. and he was a math genius, I think is the only way to say it. He graduated from high school when he was twelve. He went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and eventually got his Ph.D. in mathematics at the age of nineteen, making him the second youngest Ph.D. in the history of the University of Chicago. And eventually went on to a career that span both private industry, he actually was the chief engineer or administrator, I never quite knew the title of a nuclear power plant in Idaho. He was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a--now he was a member of the Manhattan Project. Speaker 1: Yes, he worked on the--so when he was in college he worked on the atom bomb, or as a graduate student I'd say. Speaker 2: This was being developed right there on the campus-- Speaker 1: Right there on the campus. Speaker 2: J. Robert Oppenheimer and Fermi, Enrico Fermi (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know your history well. He worked on the Manhattan Project, he taught at many different institutions including--he taught at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in the early days where he taught many of the Tuskegee Airmen and their children. He was, he taught at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Let me, let me slow down a second. Chronologically, I'm kind of concerned about what happened to him. So-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: When he graduated at nineteen, did he go right over to Tuskegee to teach or? Speaker 1: I think he did go to Tuskegee. I think that was one of the first things that he did and again it's a complex story of which I frankly don't know--I wish I knew more of it, but clearly he didn't have all the opportunities that someone of his incredible intellectual stature would have had. Speaker 2: I think when we--when I read about other African Americans that worked on the Manhattan Project, at a certain point the government drafted the best minds they could find. So this is non affirmative action position. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: They don't give you--they don't put you on the Manhattan Project because they need Negroes. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Man this was long before anybody thought that you needed Negroes for anything, as we were called. Speaker 2: He was known--you said he was a math genius, that's true, but I think the press called him the Negro as if there was a distinction between a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I'm sure. Absolutely, so and, and I think this was a constant frustration in his life that he constantly battled with and again as the title of my sister's book ['Damn Near White: An African American Family's Rise from Slavery to Bittersweet Success,' Carolyn Marie Wilkins] and as you can tell by me, my family was extremely light skinned. So a lot of people didn't necessarily know immediately that he was black. So he kind of walked that line, but he was, as was my entire family, driven very hard by their parents to succeed at the highest level. In fact the story, which I actually knew very much later in my life, actually when I was a visiting professor years later at the University of Chicago, I met--again, this is again a typical story of race in America. I'm going into the University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois] in the evening and there's somebody checking IDs there and it's an older black man, and he looks at me and he says, "You're Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins]?" And I said, "Yes." He said, "You're related to J. Ernest Wilkins?" And I said, "Yes, and Julian Wilkins that's my father." So, it turns out this guy had known my father from--before he had become kind of a security guard, he'd been a teacher for twenty years, and he'd known my father from dealings in the school board where my father had been active, because my brother went to a magnet school, Whitney Young in Chicago [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], and this guy had a kid at Whitney Young and so they were active together. And he says to me, he said, "Yes, your grandfather, J. Ernest Wilkins [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] was the math genius." I said, "No, you're confusing him with my uncle." And he said, "No I'm not. I know your uncle was the math genius who worked on the Manhattan Project, but," he said, "your grandfather was also a math genius at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]." And that your father--your grandfather, in fact wanted to be a professional--wanted to get a Ph.D. in math, and he had--his professors recognized that he had all the talent, but at some point they sat him down and they said, "J. Ernest, yes you have all the talent to be a very talented math professor, but there is only one problem. There is no such thing as a black mathematician in 1928 or 1929. You should go to law school where you can make a career." And so that's how he ended up in law school and I think that's why quite frankly he drove his first son very, very hard to become the math professor and the math genius that the, that the grandfather couldn't. Story_ID: 644530 Speaker 1: Now is there any thought in the family or otherwise of whether your [paternal] uncle was--and you answered it on some level, well if he was born a math genius or was he nurtured as one, 'cause there are educational theories, and one of the top mathematicians, he was actually associated with Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], was pushed actually by his father to become a genius and went to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] at age eleven, Norbert Wiener who invented algorithms for modern computers, he's one of the ones. The story was his father [Leo Wiener] said, "You can make anyone a genius if you push them like I pushed my son." But is it like the push or the-- Speaker 2: So I think it's obviously some combination. This is the nature/nurture debate and I think there is some combination of both. All three of the sons excelled at a very high level. So my Uncle Ernest [J. Ernest Wilkins, Jr.] graduated from high school at twelve. His middle brother, whose name was John Robinson Wilkins [John R. Wilkins], so named after John Robinson [John Wallace Robinson] the grandfather, the Methodist minister, graduated from high school at thirteen. And my father [Julian Wilkins] graduated from high school at fourteen and that was partly because they were very smart, but partly because their parents [Lucille Robinson Wilkins and J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] sent them to school all year round and that they were pushed to excel at an extremely high level. So they clearly were very bright, but they also were clearly pushed very hard to succeed in ways that frankly were both good and bad. It was good that they succeeded. My uncle and my father went off to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] and then eventually to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] where they both graduated in the 1940s. Again, an extremely unusual thing to have any black students let alone two brothers who were at Harvard Law School. But it was very difficult for them. My father would tell the story of going up to the University of Wisconsin when he was fourteen years old and he'd say he'd take some girl out on a date and he'd bring her back and she'd go out with somebody else 'cause he was like coming home at eight o'clock to go to bed. I've seen pictures of him with his freshman class, and he looks like the kid brother that somebody let sneak into the picture, especially because this is during the war years [World War II, WWII]. In which many of the students actually were people who were coming back from serving a tour in Europe or whatever. So they were even older than the typical eighteen or nineteen year old and my father was a very skinny little kid of fourteen. So it was some combination of being very bright, but also being pushed extremely hard. Story_ID: 644531 Speaker 1: We were talking about your, your father [Julian Wilkins] and his brothers [J. Ernest Wilkins, Jr. and John R. Wilkins] you know being pushed hard in school and being bright, but being pushed very hard. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so your father goes to University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] at age fourteen. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then, then to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Then to Harvard Law School. He gets drafted, I think after--somewhere in between--somewhere during his first year of law school. So he doesn't actually complete the first year, he goes off to the [U.S.] Army for two years and then comes back. It may have been even in--maybe at the end of the first semester, and it's actually always been a little ambiguous to me whether he got drafted or he volunteered instead of being drafted. This was at the time--this was in the, you know, it's mid- it's like 1944 or something like that where-- Speaker 1: Just before the end of the war [World War II, WWII]? Speaker 2: Yeah just before. So he goes and the war ends while, roughly speaking, either he's in basic training or--yeah he's in basic training. So he never goes overseas, but he goes to someplace like South Carolina or Georgia. And this is a very defining experience for him because he'd never lived in the South. So it was the first time that he experienced real open naked racism in a way that I think was very jarring for him, because he had grown up in a kind of protected environment, not that there wasn't racism in Chicago [Illinois] or anyplace else. But he was from a very privileged family, his father [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] was a lawyer, he grew up on the South Side in a black middle class community. So he'd never really experienced (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he grow up in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] or-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Hyde Park, he grew up in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Englewood, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, in fact on Evans Avenue and it'll--I could probably even come up with the number 'cause my father used to say it all of the time. That was at the time a kind of very stable, middle class, black community. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true. Now it's become one of the worst neighborhoods-- Speaker 2: No--it breaks your heart; and in fact even when I was growing up, my father would--we would go by occasionally and look at the house he grew up in and it would make him, it would make him very sad. Story_ID: 644532 Speaker 1: After your father [Julian Wilkins] comes back--now had he met your mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] yet by that time? Speaker 2: So my father met my mother while he was at Harvard and she was at Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts]. They met, again through the church, through St. Mark's Methodist Church in New York [St. Mark's United Methodist Church, New York, New York]. And the way they met, and this is an important figure in my life and in the life of my family, is because the youngest child of the Robinson family, right remember Robinson [Wilkins' paternal great-grandfather, John Wallace Robinson] lays the cornerstone, Sweeney [Wilkins' maternal grandfather, Samuel Sweeney] pays off the mortgage. Her name was J. Marjory Jackson, or Juanita [Juanita Robinson Jackson] I think was her first name, and she lived in New York [New York] and went to my Grandfather Sweeney's church. In other words she went to her own father's old church, which had then been taken over by my grandfather. In fact, like my mother, Aunt Marjory as we always called her, grew up in the back of St. Mark's Methodist Church. So again, you can see the complex relationship between the two families. So my Aunt Marjory knew that her sister's child was going to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and was an eligible young man, and that Reverend Sweeney's daughter was going to Smith and was an eligible young woman, and so my Aunt Marjory arranged a meeting of the two of them in New York. This must have happened sometime in the late 1940s, and they began dating. And in fact, my mother's first recollection of Harvard, and we have as you can see a long complicated relationship with Harvard, was coming up, I think to the Harvard/Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] football game to visit my father when my father was living in the dormitory, which still exists called Hastings Hall, Walter Hastings Hall. Their date was to go to the Harvard/Yale game and some ball afterwards as they used to do in those days. They dated for a couple of years and again as I think I said my grandmother [Alberta King Sweeney] insisted that my mother graduate from school before she got married, get your education, you can always have a man no matter what else happens to you. My father had graduated by this time and had gone to--he graduated I think in 1949 and had gone back to Chicago [Illinois] to join his father's law firm. In fact, my uncle [John R. Wilkins] also briefly went there; and the law firm was then at the time called Wilkins, Wilkins and Wilkins [Chicago, Illinois]. It was my grandfather [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.], my uncle and my father. Story_ID: 644533 Speaker 1: What year did your dad [Julian Wilkins] graduate from Harvard (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he graduated from Harvard in 1949. His brother, although only two years older, had graduated, I think in 1946--'45 [1945] or '46 [1946] because he had gone straight through. In other words he--my grand--my uncle didn't go to the [U.S.] military because he had some physical condition that kept him out of the [U.S.] Army. My uncle had gone on to a very distinguished career at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] where he became only the fourth black person to ever serve as an editor on the Harvard Law Review. The Harvard Law Review--now everybody, because of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], knows the Harvard Law Review, but the Harvard Law Review is a kind of the most prestigious student organization in the law school. At the time you were selected entirely on the basis of your first year grades. They only took the top five students out of each of the 150 person section, so only twenty students were selected. At the time there had only been three other blacks who had served on the law review. All of whom went on to great distinction. The first and most important being Charles Hamilton Houston who was the first black student on the law review in the 1920s, I want to say '21 [1921] or '22 [1922] or something like that. Followed by William Hastie [William H. Hastie], who of course went on to become the first black federal judge and a dean at Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and worked with Houston on many of the great civil rights cases. The third was William Coleman [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.], who eventually would go on to a very distinguished career in public and private service as you know and also worked with Houston and Hastie and signed the brief in Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. My uncle, John Robinson Wilkins [John R. Wilkins], was the fourth and he and Coleman actually served together, although Coleman's service was also interrupted by the war [World War II, WWII], as many people were during that period. Story_ID: 644534 Speaker 1: So Wilkins, Wilkins and Wilkins in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's the law firm. Speaker 2: That's the law firm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a typical you know black law firm of its day. Meaning it served primarily, if not almost exclusively, a clientele of black individuals and small black businesses. My grandfather [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] had built it up over the years at the time in which there were very few black lawyers in Chicago. He'd become well known in the Chicago legal circle. He was one of the few black lawyers who had gone to a prestigious law school [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois]. He was active in Republican politics. This was at the time in which it was still the party of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] and so most blacks were Republicans. That--it was through that combination of being prominent in the legal community, he was prominent--he was the head of the Cook County Bar Association, which was the black lawyers association, and also was a member of the ABA [American Bar Association] and of the Chicago Bar Association, again for black lawyers was very unusual, and I think it was that combination plus his role in politics which brought him to the attention of the Eisenhower administration [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]. That's why he got selected for that position and when he left to go to Washington [D.C.], my father [Julian Wilkins] took over the law firm and very quickly thereafter, and I can't quite get the chronology, it might have even been before my grandfather went to Washington, my uncle [John R. Wilkins] also left the firm. First, to go to be a law clerk to William Hastie [William H. Hastie] who by that time was now a federal judge on the United States Court of Appeals of the Third Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit]. Although he could have been when he was a district judge. Actually I should look that up to make sure. But he was Hastie's first law clerk and I'm pretty sure it was on the Third Circuit. Then my uncle went on to government service where he worked in the Agency for International Development [United States Agency for International Development] living in India for several years and eventually became--was appointed by President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] to be the general counsel of the Agency for International Development, where he became the first black general counsel of that organization. And until, I think this is fair to say, until the Obama administration [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] or certainly until the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], the only black general counsel. There has now been at least one more and maybe two more. Then he left there to become a professor at the University of California law school at Berkeley [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California], the Boalt school of law, where he became the first black professor of that law school and only the second black faculty member in the entire Berkeley campus [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. So he joined there '63 [1963] or '64 [1964] shortly after Kennedy was assassinated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather, in a history that actually is chronicled very well in my sister's book ['Damn Near White: An African American Family's Rise from Slavery to Bittersweet Success,' Carolyn Marie Wilkins], was--held his position for something like two or three years but eventually resigned in the course of a power struggle controversy around the direction of the labor department [U.S. Department of Labor] particularly, (cough) excuse me, in international affairs. So my grandfather had been the delegate to the International Labour Organization, which was a very important hotbed of controversy in the 1950s during the Cold War. And my father's--and my grandfather's appointment there was seen as a kind of way for the United States to blunt the criticism of the Soviet Union, that the U.S. was hostile to labor and particularly to black labor. So he was very much a symbol of his race in that organization and in a story that we still don't fully understand, he got into a power struggle with a new--Eisenhower had a new secretary of labor [James P. Mitchell] who was brought in the second term, I think so in nineteen fifty--fifty- no it was during the first term, it must have been in '55 [1955] or something like that, '54 [1954], '55 [1955]. Eventually my grandfather resigned and it was a big controversy about the resignation. There were lots of stories in the paper. My sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] writes about this in the book. But my grandfather stayed living in Washington as he decided what he was going to do and he died very tragically of a heart attack in his, he was in his mid-fifties. And, so he never came back to the firm. Story_ID: 644535 Speaker 1: And the firm really was left to my father [Julian Wilkins]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Who for twenty years or more thereafter ran the law firm of Wilkins, Wilkins and Wilkins [Chicago, Illinois] as a, essentially a solo practitioner representing many of his father's clients and many of his own that he developed. But still, in the classic way of a black practitioner of the day, representing black individuals, doctors and lawyers and others. He did a lot of probate work and then he--you know and small black businesses. For a time my father's biggest clients were things like White's French Fried Shrimp [Chicago, Illinois] on 63rd [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue]. And in the 1960s--but my father like his father [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] was a kind of prominent person in the bar. Again there were very few black lawyers who had graduated from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time. My father was active in bar organizations including the Chicago bar organization [Chicago Bar Association], and so in the mid-1960s, probably around 1965 or so, a group of black business men and other leaders decided that it was time for Chicago [Illinois] to--for the black community to have its own bank. So there were very few banks on the South Side of Chicago or on the West Side of Chicago, and my father was one of a small group of black business and civic leaders who started Seaway National Bank [Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois]. I can't remember the exact date but somewhere around say the mid-1960s, 1965. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so for a while my father was a director, and I think for a while also the general counsel, although at some point I think he gave that up, of Seaway National Bank. Speaker 2: So at the time--just putting it in perspective, at the time Chicago was the business mecca of black America. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After Seaway, I think Independence Bank [Independence Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Independence-- Speaker 2: Drexel [Drexel National Bank, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Drexel. So Independence (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South Shore's board was mostly black so again-- Speaker 1: Right. So all these things got started. I think Seaway, if I'm not mistaken, was the first. Independence came after that and then Drexel and South Shore Bank [ShoreBank, Chicago, Illinois] eventually, which was not totally black owned but eventually became--so as you say, so Chicago is a fascinating place and you know I grew up in Chicago. The South Side of Chicago was always a very vibrant, black community but it was--you know Chicago was the most racially segregated city in America, in many ways still is one of the most racially segregated cities in America, but was definitely the most racially segregated city at the time. So all of the black business wealth was on the South Side primarily; some on the West Side but mostly on the South Side. Story_ID: 644536 Speaker 1: Now your father [Julian Wilkins], just, just continue his--I--there was a--he, I think he was one of the first blacks hired by Jenner and Block, is what I (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So my father--so for--as I say, for twenty something years, from the early 1950s until about 1971, my father was a solo practitioner, and he ran his own law firm and he shared office space with other lawyers but basically he was a solo practitioner. One of my earliest memories is going down with my father on Saturdays and he would pay my sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] and I--well pay is a loose word, to--we'd have to dust the books in the library and we'd have to put in the pocket parts, which were every year they'd get the new supplements, new cases, to the books and we would have to take the old pocket parts out and put the new pocket parts in. In return he didn't really actually pay us, he would take us to lunch at a place that no longer exists, but to which I have some of the fondest memories. It was called Mayflower Donuts [Mayflower Donut Shops], it was on, I want to say Randolph [Street] or State [Street]. My father's office building, he was in 180 West Washington [Street], which I learned again years later when I started doing my own work on this topic, was called the black lawyers' building. I didn't know that at the time, but it was the first building that black lawyers could get office space in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois]. It was just inside the Loop, it was literally, if you know Chicago [Illinois] well, the elevated tracks ran right by the building or a half a block away, and the building had several black law firms in it--law firms, had several black lawyers in it. Most of whom were again solo practitioners sharing office space. My grandfather [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] was either the first or among the very first black lawyers to move there. By the time I was growing up, my father was still there, still practicing under Wilkins, Wilkins and Wilkins [Chicago, Illinois], and so in the 1960s we would go in and we would have--we'd go in the morning and my father would work and we'd dust the books and we'd put the pocket parts in and we'd go to Mayflower Donuts. Which used to--you could watch the donuts being made, they had like a little conveyor ramp and it didn't close until like the 1980s, and you could sit at a counter and have a grilled cheese sandwich and have a donut and that's one of my fondest memories. And actually you asked me for my favorite saying, and I was sort of not expecting that question, and so actually I didn't give you my favorite saying. My favorite saying comes from the Mayflower Donuts and it was over the lunch counter and it was written kind of in that old English way and the saying was, "As you travel on through life brother, whatever be your goal, keep your eye upon the donut and not upon the hole." And I've always thought that was about as good advice for life as you could ever get. So that is my favorite saying and those were some of my fondest memories with my father sitting at the lunch counter after dusting the books and we would get to bring a dozen donuts home from Mayflower Donuts. Speaker 1: Thank you for that, I'm going to use that myself. Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's a great saying (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's a great saying. Speaker 2: And for years and years I thought it was an invariable truth and then Dunkin' Donuts came out with donut holes, (laughter) which was one of the--yeah, right? Story_ID: 644537 Speaker 1: So my father [Julian Wilkins], that was his life until around 1970 when sort of out of the blue he got a call from Albert Jenner [Albert E. Jenner, Jr.], who was of course the main partner from Jenner and Block, and one of the leading lawyers in Chicago [Illinois]. Not just for his law firm but also his political work. He had been a kind of leading liberal lawyer in the cause of civil rights. One of the founders of the Lawyers' Committee on Civil Rights Under Law [sic. Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law]. I mean he was sort of a legend in Chicago and was until he died. Although I was not on this phone call, I learned about it shortly thereafter and Jenner called up my father and asked him whether he would be willing to come join Jenner and Block as, at the time, the first black partner in any major law firm in Chicago. There had been a few black lawyers. One of the first actually was someone who is also connected to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], but would go on to great prominence and still is very prominent and a dear friend, Harry Edwards [Harry T. Edwards], was either the first or among the very first black lawyers to work at any major law firm when he was hired from the University of Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] where he had graduated to be an associate at Seyfarth Shaw [Seyfarth, Shaw, Fairweather and Geraldson; Seyfarth Shaw LLP]. I'm pretty sure it was Seyfarth Shaw. But it was one of the labor law firms where Harry, now Judge Edwards as you know, judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and a former professor at Harvard Law School, so that's his Harvard Law School connection. But my father was asked to be the first black lawyer--the first black partner and this was at a time in which, you know there was just beginning to see blacks graduating in substantial numbers from elite law schools. So we mentioned that we're in the Reginald Lewis Center [Reginald F. Lewis International Law Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Reg Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] was in the Harvard Law School class of 1968, which was the first class to have a significant number of black students. In fact, Reg was brought in--this is a whole other story and you should interview his relatives for this, was brought in the first real affirmative action program ever in legal education, which was run right here at Harvard Law School, and he was invited to be a member of the class 1968, which I think for the first time had something like fifteen or eighteen black students, which was seventeen more than any other class that it ever had. So my father gets this call and I remember it vividly because we eventually have a family discussion about whether he should take this. And my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins], not surprisingly, thought it was a great idea and frankly the kids thought it was a great idea. We didn't know really much about law or law firms, but we knew that this was an important, prestigious organization in downtown Chicago. But my father didn't want to do it. Looking back on it years later, he didn't want to do it because I think he recognized how hard it was going to be for somebody who had been a solo practitioner all of his life and whose largest clients were White's French Fried Shrimp [Chicago, Illinois] and doctors he was writing probate for and maybe some work for Seaway Bank [Seaway National Bank; Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois], which was at the time a very small bank, to come to be a member of what at the time seemed like an enormous law firm that had a hundred lawyers and probably thirty partners. But he was eventually talked into doing it and I think he was talked into doing it because it seemed to offer financial security and it seemed to be in some ways a continuation of the civil rights struggle and of integration, which my father was deeply committed to. So in 1971 he became the first black partner not only at Jenner and Block but at any major law firm in Chicago, and one of the very few at any major law firm really anywhere in the United States. Story_ID: 644538 Speaker 1: Well how did it go? How did it-- Speaker 2: Well, I think in many ways my father [Julian Wilkins] proved to be right. I think it was a very, very difficult situation for my father; and he stayed only like five years, maybe six years and in 1976 or maybe it was 19--yeah I think it was 1976, he left. And you know, I've written some about this, that you know I always--I know what--hard it was like for my generation, okay so I graduated from law school in 1980. So I remember walking into Kirkland and Ellis [Kirkland and Ellis, LLP] where I worked as a summer associate in 1978, in which the firm had no black partners. It had maybe two black associates, at that time Kirkland had 200 or 250 lawyers. There were actually one or two other black summer clerks, which was a conscious effort by the firm, now some fifteen years later to still try to make some headway on diversity. We can talk about how much headway all these firms are still trying to make. But I remember how intimidating that felt to me and I went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. It was my expectation that I would go to a large law firm because that's where most of the students, including most of the black students, were going at that time. My father was a lawyer, I had lots of connections. I interviewed for the job, I interviewed at other law firms, so I had a lot of background experience and it still is intimidating. Now imagine you've lived your whole life as a solo practitioner, you know you went to Harvard Law School, but in the 1940s there was no law firm that was interviewing black people. We know this because William Coleman [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.] who graduated number one in his class and clerked for Felix Frankfurter, could not get a job in any major law firm in the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So there wasn't any idea that you could do such a thing. And then to walk in, not just as a lawyer but as a--supposedly as a partner in this organization where he was supposed to have associates working for him. Who you know, they undoubtedly didn't have any understanding of who he was or what he was and frankly probably resented the idea that they would have to work for him especially on such small matters. There were junior partners who were--there were senior partners who were younger than he was because my father at this point already was in his mid to late forties. So this would have been 1971, so my father was born in '26 [1926], (mumbles), so yeah he was like in his mid-forties. So it was a very difficult situation and one, in the end of the day I think was done with the best intentions. I think the firm [Jenner and Block] really did have the best intentions, but I think the firm had absolutely no idea of how to integrate somebody like my father; and there are many stories like this. Story_ID: 644539 Speaker 1: Your father lost some of the business in the black community by being a partner with Jenner and Block, right? Speaker 2: You know, again if you think about it, and again I'm sure no one really did think about it before it happened, he not only had to charge his clients a rate that was far higher than he had been charging them in the past because he had to charge them the Jenner and Block rate, but his clients had to go to a place where they didn't feel comfortable. So it's true, again this is so different than the world today, but you know my father's clients, I remember vividly would call him Lawyer Wilkins [Julian Wilkins], lawyer being an honorific title. They would come see him in his office, which was already a big deal because as I said it was at the outskirts of the Loop [Chicago, Illinois]. But it was nothing like going down to Jenner and Block, which was at the time in what was then called the IBM building [One IBM Plaza, Chicago, Illinois], which was that black forty story concrete building there on Wacker, or right off of Wacker Drive. They had to go up in an elevator where there were no other black people except the cleaning staff or the messengers. There were no other black people in the entire firm. So for a long time he was the only black lawyer, not just the only black partner but the only black lawyer. You know and sit in a waiting room to which they felt very uncomfortable. So people didn't want to come and they didn't want to pay the rates. So that clientele that had sustained him he lost much of it and then the kind of work that Jenner and Block did, he had no connection to. No idea how to do. It's not that anybody was giving him clients. The firm's work was not the kind of work that he did. So he became extremely isolated, and now having studied the careers of black lawyers for many years, it's very common. This is a very common pattern and many of the blacks who were brought in in this way, that is, there was an idea that to fix the problem which again to the credit of many of the mainstream white lawyers who were running these firms, they knew they had a problem. They knew they had a problem in part because many of them were active in the Civil Rights Movement. They were pushing for desegregation in all sorts of other institutions and then in their own institutions were completely all white. So they thought rather than bring in a junior lawyer and grow them over the six years back in those days that it took to become a partner, they thought they would jump start the problem by bringing in a more senior lawyer as a partner. But what they forgot was there's a whole process of socialization that goes on during those years when you're growing up inside the law firm. These lawyers not only didn't have that, but they were working in an environment which most of the white lawyers who brought them in had no idea about it. Those lawyers had never been solo practitioners, they'd never lived in a segregated world, they'd never represented individual clients, they'd never gone to probate court, all the kinds of things that were the daily reality of these lawyers. They never went to visit their clients in their homes, as my father did on many occasions. I mean they just never did any of these things. So there was just a complete mismatch between the experience and the worldview and the legal practice of the lawyers coming in like my father and the environments in which they were brought in. Not surprisingly most of these lawyers either left or ended up very bitter and isolated within their firms. Charlie Lomax [Charles E. Lomax] is no longer with us, but he was the second black lawyer, and stories of his disenchantment and alienation from the law firm that he was in [Sidley Austin LLP, Chicago, Illinois] are legendary and you can kind and go right down the line with many of this kind of first generation pioneers, as I call them in some of the stuff that I've written. Story_ID: 644540 Speaker 1: Your father was there [Jenner and Block] about five years and then he left. Speaker 2: And then he left and he immediately went back to what he was doing before. He, he became a solo practitioner, in fact one of the, you know kind of most bittersweet days of my life, I helped my father move out of his office and back to a one room you know solo practitioner's office and actually I think it was in the Brunswick Building [Chicago, Illinois]. But shortly thereafter, things were already beginning to change in different ways, so now we're in the late 1970s and Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious] was coming back from being in Washington [D.C.]. She had been the--an assistant solicitor general. She was the first black person--no first black woman, I should say. Of course Thurgood Marshall was the first black person to be in the solicitor general's office where he was of course the solicitor general. But she came back to Chicago [Illinois] and she had a dream of starting a real black law firm. There really were not black law firms at the time. There were solo practitioners or lawyers who had one or two junior lawyers or not partner lawyers who worked with them. Take the legendary [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal, one of my parents' [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins and Julian Wilkins] dearest friend and one of the great lawyers of Chicago [Illinois]. A man who I don't think nearly gets as much credit for the incredible things he did in the city. I miss him still very dearly. But you know, he had something called the law offices of Earl Neal [Earl L. Neal and Associates, Chicago, Illinois] and he took over from his father [Earl J. Neal] who was a lawyer, and he had a few lawyers working with him. But Earl would be the first to say at that time it wasn't a law firm in the traditional sense. Jewel wanted to start a black law firm and, I say a black law firm but I think from the beginning her vision was not a black law firm, but a minority law firm in which it wasn't that there wouldn't be white lawyers but that it would be a kind of law firm in which black lawyers would be major senior partners. So she came to my father because they had known each other for many years, and in fact Lafontant [H. Ernest Lafontant] was Jewel's husband at the time--second husband I guess. Before he died, he had been a lawyer and he'd known my [paternal] grandfather [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] and he'd known my father. So to make a long story short they started a law firm where I can't quite remember the name initially. It went through many name changes as people came and went, but I think at the time it was called Lafontant, Wilkins and Fisher [Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler, Chicago, Illinois]. Fisher I think was a white lawyer and their goal was to create a real law firm. So they got more space in the Brunswick Building and they constituted themselves as a partnership and they hired one or two junior lawyers. One of the first of which was I think Martin Greene, who now has a very prominent black law firm in Chicago called Greene and Letts, I think is its current name. And my father practiced law in that firm which eventually became fairly large. So it eventually became Lafontant, Wilkins, Jones, Ware and Grenard [Jones, Ware and Grenard, Chicago, Illinois], and Mitch Ware [Mitchell Ware] and--oh what is Jones' first name who also died [Mark Jones]. Tragically all these people are gone now. But it became really the model for several other black law firms in Chicago and it was, I think, one of the first, not just in Chicago but around the country, of a wave of an effort to really build real minority law firms. And again I've, I've written about this as well. Story_ID: 644541 Speaker 1: And my father [Julian Wilkins] practiced law there [Lafontant, Wilkins and Fisher; Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler, Chicago, Illinois] until he died in 1984. My father died very young, he was fifty-seven years old, which is partly why I'm doing this interview with you right now because I turn fifty-seven in January and it seems to me that I should take nothing for granted. He had a brain tumor, it turned out it had been a slow growing brain tumor for many years, and nobody knew he had it and over time he had certain kinds of erratic behavior which now we know was connected to the fact that he had this slow growing brain tumor but which at the time nobody knew about. So it gives one pause when you become the same age as your father did when he died. My uncle [John R. Wilkins] also died of a brain tumor. He was also very young, even much younger than my father. My uncle's brain tumor developed when he was in his mid-forties. In probably, I think it first developed around 1974 or '75 [1975], and they told him he had six months to live, but he ended up living something like five years after that. He died, so maybe it happened in 1974 and he died in 1978 [sic. 1976]. My Uncle Ernest [J. Ernest Wilkins, Jr.] lived much longer and he just died within the last ten years, really within the last five or six years [sic. 2011]. He was in his eighties by the time he died. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Well, we've spent so much time on your father because I think his story fits into the overarching story of your own career. (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's absolutely right and partly what I want to do is to put things about my father here for this historical record so, so--since he can't do it. And you know, we're, you know if we don't finish today by noon, we'll, we'll pick up another time, so don't worry about it. Story_ID: 644542 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, look, how they acted in public, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, you know I'm a funny hybrid because of course I pursued the family business of my father [Julian Wilkins] and my grandfather [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.]. So I became a lawyer, I went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], but interestingly, and this is, I think, important about my father, I did these things and I'm sure I did them in part because of my father, but yet I never felt any pressure to do them because of my father. That I think is a result of my father's own upbringing. As I told you my father was pressed extremely hard by his parents. So hard that when he graduated from high school at fourteen, that his mother [Lucille Robinson Wilkins] took to calling him the slow one because one [J. Ernest Wilkins, Jr.] graduated at twelve and one [John R. Wilkins] graduated at thirteen. You can imagine the unbelievable pressure. I think that is why my father was adamant that I would never skip a grade. None of my siblings ever skipped a grade. We all did very well in school, we probably could have been pushed to skip grades, but my father I think recognized exactly how hard skipping all those grades had been on him. My father never once, I never remember my father telling me I had to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or I should go to Harvard, and even when I got into Harvard and I got into Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I got into Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and these other places, I never remember my father telling me you should go to Harvard. Yet of course I know my father clearly wanted me to go to Harvard. It was a big deal that I did go to Harvard. But my father was very careful not to push me in that direction, I think because he felt so pushed. My father and my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] were very different in many ways. So my father took after his father and was sort of an ascetic. He didn't drink, he didn't smoke, and he didn't really like to go out at night. He liked to stay home, he liked to read, he was--he didn't like clothes, and he hated to go shopping. He was in some ways very shy although he could be very funny and outgoing, but I think again a lot of things of being the youngest, being always not just the youngest in his family but always the youngest in many situations. He was in many ways a homebody. And his favorite time, and again another favorite memory that I have of my father, is that my mother's family because they never owned a home of their own; you grow up in the church, you live in a rectory in the back of the church, you never have your own home. My grandfather built a little house in the Adirondacks [Adirondack Mountains] in Upstate New York. He bought a little piece of land on a beautiful little lake called Lake Clear, which is up by Saranac Lake and Lake Placid. And he and his sons [Samuel Sweeney, Jr., John Sweeney and Paul Sweeney] literally built the house with their own hands. We would go when I was very young, we would go to my grandparents' house and spend kind of a month in the summer, and then my grandparents were killed very tragically and suddenly actually driving to that house. In 1965 they were killed in a car accident. Speaker 1: These were your maternal-- Speaker 2: These were my maternal, my maternal grandparents, Reverend Sweeney [Samuel Sweeney] and his wife [Alberta King Sweeney]. They were actually driving a Volkswagen Beetle of all things they had in the 1960s, mid-'60s [1960s], imagine these are two people in their seventies driving in a Volkswagen Beetle, and somebody came on the other side of traffic and they were killed instantly. My parents took the house over and we would continue to go every summer for a month in the summer until--really until my father died, and certainly throughout my growing up years, so I graduated from high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] in 1973. And every summer we would go there for a month. I say this to you to say this was the happiest my father ever was. It was a very simple house, it was on a beautiful piece of land, it backed up on a lake. He didn't ever have to get dressed, his clients couldn't find him. There was no Internet at the time. There was a party phone. Anybody remember a party phone? Where there were like several families and you had to listen for how many times it rang that was whether it was for you or for somebody else. And it was the only time that I really ever saw my father completely relax. Story_ID: 644543 Speaker 1: My mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] on the other hand grew up in New York City [New York, New York], and she loved all things New York. And so she loved, she loved to get dressed up and to go out at night. She loved the opera and the symphony and she loved the Broadway shows. She grew up with a, kind of a love of nice things and eventually developed a real love of travel. So in 1971, so this is actually as my father [Julian Wilkins]--either before he goes to Jenner and Block or right after. I can't quite remember this. But my mother decides that we're all going to take our first ever family vacation out of the country, other than a day in Canada or something like that. Instead of doing what I suppose would have been more normal, go to Europe or something like that; she decides we're going to South America. She decides this because my brother--I have two younger brothers [Stephen Wilkins and Timothy Wilkins], and this is my middle brother, he was in second grade at the time and he has a second grade teacher who has been in the Peace Corps. And that teacher decides--that teacher teaches second grade kind of from her experiences being a Peace Corps volunteer in Latin America. My mother gets very interested in this, and so she decides we're all going to go to Latin America for five and a half weeks. Now this is notwithstanding the fact that we speak no Spanish, that we have never been outside of the country, that we're going to go to places that frankly most of my friends, including me, had never heard of like Paraguay and Uruguay. Not just in other words to Brazil but all over South America. We pack up and we go and this trip changed my life. Speaker 2: Now how old were you then? Speaker 1: I'm fifteen years old. Speaker 2: Fifteen, okay. Speaker 1: So I'm a sophomore in high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is--this is in 1971? Speaker 1: In 1971, I'd just finished my sophomore year in high school. I had just had my real first job working at McDonald's flipping burgers on 67th [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue]. How come I got this job? Because my father represented Herman Petty who was the first black McDonald's franchise owner in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. That was his first store right there on 67th and Stony Island. It's still there. So I get a job at McDonald's and I work there until the end of July and then we're going to take this big trip. That trip changed my life and in many ways the life of my entire family. But it changed my life because it instilled in me my mother's love of travel and adventure. Story_ID: 644544 Speaker 1: So like my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins], I love to get dressed up and go out to dinner. In fact actually that even happened earlier. My mother--because my father [Julian Wilkins] hated to go to dinner, my mother liked to go out, so my mother at a certain point when I was probably ten or eleven or twelve years old, she would dress me up and we would go out and we'd go to dinner. In fact one of my fondest memories with my mother is going to the Top of the Rock [Stouffer's Top of the Rock], which you may remember was in the old Prudential Building [One Prudential Plaza], which was at the time the tallest building in Chicago [Illinois] which probably had thirty, thirty-five floors [sic. forty-one], towered over the landscape. And there was a restaurant at the top called the Top of the Rock and it had glass windows and you could see, because Chicago is flat as a pancake, you could see for miles. And we I'm sure must have had some 5:00 or 5:30 dinner because I couldn't have been any older than twelve and then we went to the Chicago Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] to watch 'The Sound of Music.' You know, and that began a love of getting dressed up and going to eat. And then we go to Brazil and that instilled a love in travel. These things, if you ask anybody who knows me, define my life. I love beautiful clothes, which is why I hope whatever I sound like that the suit looks good. I love to go out to eat, it's one of my favorite things to do and I love to travel and in my current life, which at some point we will get to, I now run a global research initiative [Global Initiatives on the Legal Profession], which has taken me since February--I've since just this February, I've been to China, Japan, Jamaica that was for vacation with my wife [Ann Marie Wilkins], Mexico. I was in South Africa, I've also--I was in Brazil. Back earlier I had a love affair with Brazil ever since. Speaker 2: This is just since February of this year? Speaker 1: Yes, just since February this year. Speaker 2: Four months. Speaker 1: I travel like crazy and we can talk about the project. I probably travel too much at this point, but I've always wanted to see the world, I've always wanted to experience what different places and different people were like. And my favorite thing when I go to these different places is to get dressed up and go out to eat and meet people. And that all I get from my mother. Story_ID: 644545 Speaker 1: My mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] tells me that I probably look more like my--her father [Samuel Sweeney]. So I--it sort of--I ha- I resemble the Sweeneys in that way, and her father also was a very cultured man. But you know my love of law and logic and all that and of teaching, I think comes from my father [Julian Wilkins]. And my father was a very sensitive man. I think again a person who experienced many difficult times and disappointments in his life, I think--that made him very sensitive. I just think he had a kind of sensitive temperament. And ironically my father, although both my father and I went to law school, I don't think either of us were very much cut out for being lawyers. My father I think was in some ways ultimately very unhappy being a lawyer, and I think my father if he could have been anything would have loved to have been a teacher. So that part I get from my father. Speaker 2: So you're in a position that your father would envy in some ways. Speaker 1: Yes. I think so. And one of the saddest things for me is that my father never lived to see me have this job. So I'm blessed he lived to see me graduate from law school and there's a very ironic story in my family history. So my father as I said graduated from law school in 1949, we came back probably, I think I was four or five years old, so this would have been in the early 1960s, we did a tour of New England and we went camping and whatnot but we stopped in Boston [Massachusetts]. My parents took a picture of me, which if I can find it would be a good picture for the pictures you're looking for. They took a picture of me opening the door--the main door to the Langdell library [Langdell Hall, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Langdell library is the main--the biggest law library in the world. It's sort of the center of the Harvard Law School campus [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and they took a picture of me opening the door of Harvard Law School. I've seen this picture my whole life. So when I graduated from Harvard Law School in 1980, I wanted to take a picture of me closing the door at Harvard Law School as a kind of bookend. The Harvard graduation--the law school graduation actually takes place right in front of the door. So you kind of walk up and get your diploma. They build a stage right in front of the door. So the bottom line is the door is sort of blocked off and you can't really take pictures in front of the door, and so I kept saying to myself, well we'll come back after they dismantle the stage and we'll take the picture. But we forgot, I forgot, my family forgot and so the graduation ends and we leave and I don't take that picture. I always--and for years I regretted not taking that picture. It was just one of those things where you know--I could go back and take it but I wouldn't be at my graduation, my parents wouldn't be there. So I just always thought that was a tremendous gaff on my part, and then of course six year later, I'm back being a faculty member at Harvard Law School, a position to which I've never left. So the bottom line is of course, I wasn't closing the door on Harvard Law School, and in fact, you know it would have been wrong to take that picture, but you know. So as my--another of my favorite sayings, as my grandmother used to say, "The Lord moves in mysterious ways." Story_ID: 644546 Speaker 1: I'm not quite sure why I started--(laughter) what was the question that started that whole story (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we were--I was asking you about who you take after most-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --your mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] or your father [Julian Wilkins]. Speaker 1: And so, you know I, so--oh you, and you said I had the job that my father would have always wanted, and I have to say both my father and my [paternal] uncle [John R. Wilkins]; my father because he never became a professor and when my father was very ill shortly before he died, I had this conversation with him, but it was clear that he didn't want to be a lawyer, and I said, "What would you like to do?" And he said, "Well, I'd like to teach." Then my uncle, I think would have so loved to have seen me be a professor and follow in his footsteps. I'm hoping actually--it's funny. A friend of mine is now the dean at Berkeley law school [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California]. Actually another black graduate and somebody Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], if you haven't got on tape you should, Christopher Edley [Christopher Edley, Jr.]. He is the first black dean at Berkeley law school. He was the fifth black person on the Harvard Law Review, so here's another connection. My uncle, remember I told you was the fourth, Chris was the fifth. The only problem was there was twenty something or thirty something years' difference, right. So my uncle was on the law review in 1945 and Chris was on the law review, I think he got on the law review in something like 1975 or '76 [1976] or something like that. But anyway I've said to Chris that I want to write something about my uncle at Berkeley in which I want to connect kind of his dream to my own. So, but in any event, my father, you know died in 1984, so he never quite got to see me in this position. Story_ID: 644547 Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about your siblings now, and can, can you list them and put yourself in order for us? Speaker 2: So my oldest sist- si- (makes sound), my oldest sibling is my sister, Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins]. She's four years older than me. She was born in 1953--April of 1953, so almost four years older than me. She is now a professor at the Berklee school of music [Berklee College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts]. She is a professional jazz pianist. She's had a fascinating career. She in some ways was sort of on a course to live out in some ways my mother's fantasy of being a classical musician. So she went to Oberlin Conservatory of Music [Oberlin, Ohio] first studying piano, eventually studying percussion, and for several years tried to find a job at a symphony orchestra. Perhaps the only thing more racially restrictive than the legal profession was the symphony orchestra profession and they are really still to this day very, very few black musicians. So at some point she realized that her first love really was jazz. She starts playing jazz piano and eventually goes back and gets a master's [degree] in that, in music education and has been living here in Boston [Massachusetts]. We both moved here together in 1986 and she's been teaching at Berklee probably since the late '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s]. But her most recent passion is the one that I said a little bit about, which is she's become kind of the family historian. A position that she took over from my Great Aunt Marjory [Juanita Robinson Jackson], who I mentioned earlier, who lived until she was about ninety-two or ninety-three and who was really the keeper of the family history until then. When she died, my sister kind of took over not just the role, but all of my aunt's records and photographs and documents and everything that she had, and has been going through and using that as a basis to really understand our family history and then writing a series of wonderful books. The most recent of which ['They Raised Me Up: A Black Single Mother and the Women Who Inspired Her,' Carolyn Marie Wilkins] is about the women in my family, which is about to come out, I hope in the fall. So that's my oldest sibling. I'm next and then I have two much younger brothers. Since I once asked my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] at some point when I got old enough, it seemed like such an odd approach to family planning that you'd have two kids three years apart and then I'm six years older than the next brother and eight years older than the youngest one. She said, not surprisingly, it wasn't really family planning, she didn't think she could have any more children and then all of a sudden she's pregnant again. So the middle brother whose name is Stephen [Stephen Wilkins] with a P-H, so S-T-E-P-H-E-N, Michael Wilkins, M-I-C-H-A-E-L. He lives in Chicago [Illinois] now and he's done a variety of things. He spent some time in the hospitality industry, some time actually living in Thailand. He lived in Thailand for several years; actually I'll come back to that part of the story. Then he worked for the Chicago Board of Education. In fact, he's very good friends with Arne Duncan. Arne used to live across the street from us, across the alley from where I grew up. My earliest memory of Arne is taking my brother and Arne out to play basketball on the hoop in the alley, which I used to do until Arne was maybe in the fifth grade and then he was already so good that I couldn't play with him much anymore. Speaker 1: Some don't know about--Arne was the captain of the Harvard basketball team (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, Arne went on and he played professional basketball in Australia. Speaker 1: He's about 6'5", point guard (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Arne (laughter) he was a serious hoopster even when he was like in the sixth grade. But at any event, my brother worked at the Chicago Public Schools and then when the whole budget crisis happened, he got laid off from there, and now he's doing a very interesting venture in which he's working in this kind of socially conscious finance or entrepreneurialship, and works with a company [Kota Global Securities, Inc.] that its goal is to take part of its profits and to put back into social ventures in the community. So that's my middle brother and then the youngest brother, his name is Timothy Allen Wilkins [Timothy Wilkins], so A-L-L-E-N, I think is the way his Allen is spelled. He also graduated from Harvard. My middle brother went to Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut] and he eventually got a M.B.A. at Yale [Yale School of Management, New Haven, Connecticut]. My youngest brother went to Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and also Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]. So he's very much in the family Harvard tradition. But he spent several years in Tokyo [Japan]. Story_ID: 644548 Speaker 1: I told you my mother instilled in me this great love of travel, and also in my brothers. Because when we took that big family vacation, in fact my sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] who was older and already in college [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] at the time didn't go. But my two younger brothers did, and they were quite young, so one was in like eight and one was like six or something like that, and I was fifteen--or one was nine and seven I guess it was. Then I went off to go to school and I went to Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I did it the way kids did then when I just went straight through school. So I went to high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and graduated, and went to college, graduated, and went to law school. But I always regretted that and I always wished that I had taken some time off and spent some time abroad. So the one thing that I really urged my parents [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins and Julian Wilkins] to allow my younger brothers to do was to take time off. So both of them took time off between college and going to graduate school, and both of them went to foreign countries. So my brother Timothy [Timothy Wilkins] actually went first and he went to Japan where eventually he stayed for two years and became fluent in Japanese and this has really been a defining part of his life. After he graduated from law school, he went back to Japan and he's probably lived off and on in Japan for ten years. My brother Stephen [Stephen Wilkins] went to Thailand in part because he went to visit his brother in Tokyo [Japan] and realized what an exciting thing that was. At that time Thailand was really taking off and so he went to live in Thailand. So I think if I had any positive influence in my brothers' lives it's that I encouraged them to really live abroad; and I think that's really changed, changed their lives. Story_ID: 644549 Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, your household consisted of you and your sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] in the beginning, and then later on the brothers [Stephen Wilkins and Timothy Wilkins] come along. Speaker 2: Right, my sister wasn't, I think, very thrilled about my arrival as many only children aren't. She used to tease me and pick on me mercilessly until one day I picked up one of my father's golf clubs and whacked her in the head and apparently that backed her up, so. And then we've had since, a wonderful relationship. It was just the two of us for a while, and our family we always think of as having two parts to it because really my sister and my reality in some ways was very different than my brothers' reality. 'Cause when my sister and I were young, my father [Julian Wilkins] was a solo practitioner, and Chicago [Illinois] was a very segregated place, and we had a life that revolved around his law practice [Wilkins, Wilkins and Wilkins] and that part of his life. Then by the time my younger brothers came, and especially as they got old enough to really remember, my father was a partner in this law firm [Jenner and Block] and then when he had left there he was with this now growing black firm [Lafontant, Wilkins and Fisher; Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler, Chicago, Illinois] that we talked about. Their lives were really quite different I think in many ways. So it's a funny thing, we lived in one of these townhouse developments that--Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]--we were in one of the first townhouse developments in Hyde Park. Here's another story about Chicago, so as you know the story of Hyde Park is one of these great ironies in integration, because Hyde Park really gets created as the Hyde Park we know once the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] recognizes that it can neither stop the Black Belt from moving in from the South Side of Chicago. So as neighborhood after neighborhood, South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and all of Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] go from predominantly white neighborhoods to being predominantly or exclusively black neighborhoods, and it's not willing to move to Lake Forest [Illinois]. Actually there was a proposal on the table that they just pick the whole thing up and move in. Then Julian Levi, as I understand the story, recognized that they had to figure out another solution, since they didn't want to be swallowed by the Black Belt but they also didn't want to move. So they designed a strategy of urban renewal, and of course urban renewal as the old joke goes, usually meant Negro removal. But in our case, it meant Negro insertion as they tore down these tenement buildings, and where my little thing, Harper's Square [Harper Square Cooperative, Chicago, Illinois] used to be three and four story walkup tenements mostly inhabited by Polish and Italian immigrants, they tore them down--working class immigrant, and they built single family houses. These little townhouses, which they made affordable but not--they weren't rental, you had to be able to own them, but they wanted to attract families. Then they quite self consciously steered in one or two or three black families on every block. No more, no more less to try to build the beginnings of an integrated community. Although of dubious legality undoubtedly, it turned out to be great social policy because Hyde Park is still today the most integrated neighborhood I've ever lived in in my life, and I'm sure it's one of the most integrated in the country. And as a footnote, as I wrote in a piece where I also encouraged David Remnick to go look, I do not believe Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] would be Barack Obama if he had not come to live in Hyde Park. Hyde Park has a very unique set of parameters that were conducive to the president becoming first the state senator, then the U.S. senator and then the president. So I say all this to say we lived in one of those ticky tacky boxes on 57th [Street] and Harper [Avenue]. My family was one of three black families that lived in the little development of probably forty or fifty homes. And we moved in 1960 and my parents moved there I think for two reasons; one was where we used to live, which was 7433 Prairie [Avenue], which was a middle class black neighborhood of the day, but people were worried would it stay a middle class black neighborhood as some of the surrounding areas were getting tougher and gangs and all sorts of things like that. Although my memories of 74th [Street] and Prairie are very idyllic and I still have a visual memory of the house and I still have a visual memory of the moving day, when we moved to our new house. I probably remember this because they let me sit in the front seat of the moving van, which of course one would never be able to do today. And I didn't have--I had on pants that were too big for me and I didn't have a belt and so pants were falling down--I remember this very vividly. And we move in in October of 1960 right around my parents'--my father's birthday. Story_ID: 644550 Speaker 1: Now did you feel at the time, and I know you're a little kid, but the area at 74th [Street] and Prairie [Avenue], you all were in a house? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Those are--this is a nice home (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They are nice houses. Speaker 1: --nice homes there. Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause my father [Julian Wilkins] was a lawyer. My father had, for a black lawyer and for a black person, a very respectable income. He was never rich and in fact actually years later when I realized how much money he was making, it was a miracle that he could put four kids through private school and I'll come back to that in a second. Speaker 1: Did you feel that you were--I mean the area over there on 57th Street, it's probably a little more congested I would think than (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, no, we lived in a much less big house with a much less big yard and it was--you know I think at the time I just felt it was exciting because here we were, we were moving in this new house, and my earliest memory of the house is actually some number of months beforehand when my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins]--because we were the first people to live in the house. They had built those houses and we were the first occupants. I remember going over to look at the kitchen with my mother, I couldn't have been--if I was four when we moved, I was probably three and a half or something. Why I remember it, I'm sure, so vividly was we were sitting in the kitchen looking at countertops--at tiles for the floor and my mother had gone to get me something to eat including some milk at the store that was across the street, that's still across the street and she had mistakenly instead of buying milk she bought buttermilk. So she poured me this big glass of milk, which I drank and immediately threw up all over the place because of course buttermilk, I had no idea. So yeah it was a funny thing and of course--so they moved there, I think partly to move to a more integrated community, but the main reason they moved there was so that they hoped that we could go to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. So I think the thing that my parents were the most worried about was not the neighborhood, it was the schools. By this point the Chicago Public Schools had been in a state of decline, much better than I'm sure they are today. Both my parents cared deeply about education and so they wanted to send us to the Lab School. So they bought this house in the hopes that if they lived in the neighborhood [Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois] that one, it would improve their chances of getting in--our getting in, and two that it would be close, and that we might be able to walk to school. Eventually both things came to pass, that is my sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] actually I think was initially turned down for the Lab School, which--or put on a waiting list, which my parents were very incensed about. They marched themselves down and talked to the people and eventually they let my sister in and then once one sibling gets in, so we all went there. That was both an incredibly important defining part of my life, and also I think of a very difficult thing for my father, because he had to pay private school tuition eventually for four children, which was a huge struggle given his income level. He made just enough so that he didn't really qualify for scholarship, and it wasn't all that much scholarship there, but not enough so that he could afford this comfortably. I think for all my entire time growing up money was a serious issue. But you talk about space, the other--you know when my younger brothers [Stephen Wilkins and Timothy Wilkins] came along, eventually I shared a room. There were only--it was sort of a three bedroom house and so that was fine when it was my parents, my brother [sic.] and my sister. But then all of sudden we had these two other kids, and my sister got the room to herself as the only girl, then I shared a room for several years with both my younger brothers until my sister went to college [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio]. And then I got her room and then when I went to college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] my brothers each got their own room. Speaker 1: So your brothers were, were really much young- much younger than you like (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight and six years younger, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a big, big gap. Speaker 2: Yeah it was a big, it was a big gap. Story_ID: 644551 Speaker 1: But you know, the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] was certainly a very important thing for me; and again when I went there starting in the 1960s, so I went there from nursery school all the way through high school, and until I got to high school there were only two or three other black students in my entire class. Speaker 2: So who were they? Do you remember (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember, I remember very vividly in fact, and many of them I'm still friends with today. So there was a guy named Danny Claiborne [ph.] who I just actually got an email from. A lot of people--you know it's funny the marathon bombing for when this is played, no one will I hope remember this horrible tragedy, but the Boston Marathon terrorists exploded bombs by the finish line, and because so many people know I live in Boston [Massachusetts], I got emails from people I haven't talked to in years including one of which from Danny Claiborne asking are you okay, 'cause he knows I like to run, and you know, it was actually quite touching. But there were maybe three of four of us and that was true until I went to high school, and I went to high school in 1969. This is of course relevant because in April 1968 Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is killed, Chicago [Illinois] goes up in flames as many other cities do. And again the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] is a very interesting institution. It responds to crises, particularly racial crises, by actually trying to figure out how to take some actions to try to blunt the crises. I think when they looked up and here cities were burning, the death of the great iconic civil rights leader, are we going to see the death of the dream of civil rights and equality, after all Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] is created to be a stable, integrated community, and yet they have this school, which probably has several hundred kids in it, maybe five hundred kids in it, six hundred kids in it altogether, and they probably have a handful of black students. So in the summer of 1968 they do what many other institutions do--elite institutions do and they go out and find the smartest black kids they can find in the City of Chicago. I mean they literally scour the city. They go to middle schools and say, "Who is your best student?" They go to employees, not faculty members, but people who work in the university and they say, "Your kid should apply." They test these kids; they run a summer program. And so in nineteen sixty--in June of 1968 when I graduate from middle school, at the time they had something called pre-freshman, which was a combined seventh and eighth grade, I graduate in a class of maybe 100 students altogether and there're probably five black students. In 19--the fall of 1968 when I come back to school as a freshman in high school, there are like 130 students in the class or 140 students in the class, maybe 135, and there is something like thirty or thirty-five black students. Story_ID: 644552 Speaker 1: I still to this day have never been in an educational environment where the percentage of black students has been so high, and that too changed my life. Because suddenly I was in an environment in which there were many other black students and these black students came from all over the City of Chicago [Illinois]. So there were some who were like me, who were the sons and daughters of essentially the black elites. So one of the--she's actually a year or two younger than me, but you know Linda Johnson [HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice] was always--she'd been in the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] maybe since nursery school, maybe since first grade. Those were the kinds of kids you tended to get. There were a few who weren't like that, but you know Danny Claiborne's [ph.] father was a doctor, for example. But suddenly you had kids who were from the projects because they went and got the smartest kids they could find. So there was a guy in my grade, who I have to say I've lost touch with, but his name is David Love [ph.] and he lived in Cabrini-Green--no Robert R. Taylor, he lived in the Robert R. Taylor Homes [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. One of my dear friends to this day is Lorenzo Jeffries. He lived on 55th [Street] and State [Street] or something like that. Maurice Arthur [ph.] lived around the corner from where I used to live. His father was a--owned his own watch repair store, but he was there because his mother worked at the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and they knew this kid was smart and this kid was in a local grammar school and they had him take a test and he came. John Carr [ph.] another of my best friends to this day--remember I told you my first job was flipping burgers at McDonald's on 67th [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue], well I worked with John Carr, only John likes to joke that I got the job because my father [Julian Wilkins] represented the owner [Herman Petty] and he got the job because he lived in the neighborhood. So he lived at 66th [Street] right around the corner from McDonald's. His father was a house painter. So suddenly there was a whole large number of black students from all kinds of backgrounds and that, I always credit all of them with kind of saving my life and my racial identity because I don't think--I was living in a very rarified, privileged world and they opened my eyes to a whole range of experience and we have stayed very, very close ever since. And it also changed the life of the white people who were there too. So just as an example, and Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] will know this person, there's a wonderful woman who--she wasn't quite there from nursery school but I think she came in the second or third grade in my class. Her name was Melody Martin [ph.] at the time, and we went through high school together and we stayed close over the years, then she very tragically died a little over a year ago from cancer. At her memorial service in Chicago, we must have had easily sixty or seventy of our classmates came back. Most people can't name anybody they went to high school with. I'm closer to the people I went to high school with than I am to the people I went to college with [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. It was because, I think growing up in that time, the 1960s, in a world where everything is kind of exploding all around us; the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War], the Civil Rights Movement, black power. But in a really, truly integrated environment, my class was something like 30 or 35 percent black, in a neighborhood [Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois], which was itself truly integrated, with a school that really took this mission very seriously. The white students who were there are more comfortable with black people than almost any other white students that I know. The, the black people are more comfortable with white students. There are many, many friendships that cross boundaries that have lasted for decades. It's--was a quite remarkable experience. Story_ID: 644553 Speaker 1: Yeah just from--looking from the outside of this, I know I've played basketball with Arne Duncan who comes over to Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to play with an all--he's the only white person there. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well I think this is why he and the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] are so close. I mean Arne--now Arne's story you should ge- I don't know if he qualifies, but Arne's mother--the reason why Arne is so comfortable, Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] was part of it, but it's because his mother, who I think is still alive and is an extraordinary woman named Sue Duncan. She ran an afterschool program [Sue Duncan Children's Center, Chicago, Illinois] for kids who went to public school in the--you know the public schools in the area, in the near so- you know in the, Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois] and beyond, so whatever that is to the north of Kenwood. It was an afterschool enrichment program and Arne would go to school there every day. He'd finish school and then he'd go over there and he'd teach reading and then of course he'd play hoops. That's why he's so good, it wasn't my teaching. It was because he played with a bunch of black kids and that's why he's totally at ease and I think that's why he was such a successful superintendent of the schools or CEO of the schools or whatever they call it because he understood those schools because his mother was dealing with all the problems of those schools in her afterschool center and I think that's why he could be tough when he needed to be tough but he also no one could doubt that he had the core values of the schools in mind. It's funny I just had a chance to see him recently at the inauguration. We were both--he for obvious reasons, me for lucky reasons, the first lady [Michelle Obama] was my student and I've known the president forever. We were invited to a kind of an after inauguration party at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. You know, just talking to him and his wife [Karen Duncan], and I just think that's why they've been so terrific at everything that they've done because they truly understand these issues. Story_ID: 644554 Speaker 1: I just want to kind of go back to your early days in school. And--now, you're about four when you move to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], so you really kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --that's your, your neighborhood you know, and--so what, what were you interested in as a four year old? Speaker 2: So I'm sure the same--you know, guns, cars you know the usual little boy stuff. I always liked to play sports and so one very nice thing when I was growing up, and I have to say now that I'm a parent myself, it's much harder today, but we lived in the kind of neighborhood where my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] would send me out with a bat and a ball or you know, and just say go to the park. And we'd go to Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois] or in fact right in the alley behind our house there was a hoop and I used to play basketball there. We had a little, like a tiny little miniature diamond so you could play baseball. There were a lot of kids in the neighborhood and it was just easy, and again it was a very--you know it was an integrated neighborhood, though again unlike after 1968 or even today, there were very few black kids. So there were only on my block maybe two or three other black kids and most of the kids were white. So most of my friends growing up were white, and that was the same thing that was true of the school I went to. So I probably went to nursery school starting in the fifth grade--fifth--five years old, so the next year or maybe one year after, and you know I went through the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and for years really all of my little friends were white. Now my parents were always very careful to introduce me to other black kids and they maybe joined Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], which at the time I didn't like very much, but I would go. And there were people who I've known all my life, like [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett, and so she's been a lifelong friend. Her parents and my parents were very dear friends and so I grew up with Valerie, and in fact Valerie went to the Lab School until, I forget when she stopped going. Speaker 1: Now these are the Bowmans--Dr. Bowman [HistoryMaker Dr. James Bowman] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, sorry Valerie Bowman was her name at the time. Dr. Bowman who was a kind of legend and one of the-- Speaker 1: A geneticist-- Speaker 2: He was a genius and in one of the--again life has a way of coming around in circles. They were one of my parents' very closest friends and one of the first people my mother met when she came to Chicago [Illinois]. Years and years later when my father [Julian Wilkins] went into a coma and they discovered that he had a brain tumor and he was taken to the emergency room at the University of Chicago hospital [University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], Dr. Bowman was the one who supervised all of his care and made sure he got the best care, and really was the one to tell us that it was an inoperable tumor and he was going to die. As hard as that news was, it was so much better to come from someone who I have known my whole life. When I got married [to Ann Marie Wilkins] we had the Sunday after the wedding ceremony reception in the Bowmans' beautiful house that they still live in--Mrs. Bowman [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] still lives in, with that big beautiful yard. So I say all this to say I knew within a circle of people, I certainly had black friends. Toni Cook [Antoinette Cook Bush] I've known forever and ever, and there was a kind of circle there, but at school and in my neighborhood it was mostly white kids. Story_ID: 644555 Speaker 1: Other than that I suppose I was a typical kid. I, I liked sports, I was never, I was never a great athlete and part of that I think was, I was--never had the kind of self confidence or fearlessness that you need to have to become a great athlete. So I was always a good athlete, I loved to play but I was never great, and I think I never had the confidence to kind of push myself out there. That's probably why I never really pursued sports. So when I got actually to this point where I was going into high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], I was a pretty good basketball player, I was a pretty good soccer player, but I got interested when I was in the eighth--what would have been the eighth grade, pre-freshman it was called, in high school debate. So I--the coach [Earl Bell], I met the coach of the debate team and some other guys who were on the debate team and they kind of recruited me to become a debater, and my best friend at the time was a kid who lived in my neighborhood [Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois] and who I had--he'd moved into the neighborhood when he was like in the third or fourth grade and we'd really become best friends. We both decided that instead of playing sports, we were going to become debaters. And his name was Aaron Parzen, he came from a Jewish family. His father was a psychoanalyst and they moved into one of the townhouses kind of near the corner of my street. So we both became high school debaters and that's what I really did my first two years in high school. That also really changed my life, because that's where I think I learned the skills of oral presentation and argument and research and all these things that actually--probably helped my academic career tremendously, and probably did as much to steer me into law as anything else. Story_ID: 644556 Speaker 1: I know you didn't go to any, any other school, but in retrospect how was Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] different from say a normal public school in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: So it was very different, and I think we felt it even though--even if you're a lifer as I was. Partly you felt it because in high school a lot of kids came in from other kinds of schools and they would talk about how different it was. First of all, it was just way smaller. So until I went to high school, probably the number of kids who were in any classes that I was in was more like fifteen or twenty, maybe twenty-five at the most, and the whole community was small. And the dominant--the kind of archetypal kid in the school was different, and this is something I think about now because I sent my son [Brian Wilkins] to a private school, and--although his school is not quite like this--for most private schools the archetypical kid--the archetypal kid is a rich kid. At the Lab School, the archetypal kid is a faculty kid, which is a big difference, right. Because most faculty members particularly in the 1960s were not rich. They were English professors or chemistry professors or something. I mean they were solidly middle class but they weren't rich. So the whole school had a kind of academic vibe to it, because you had all of these faculty kids and then many of the faculty members themselves had Ph.D.'s or advance degrees and were themselves connected to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Then the University of Chicago exercised a lot of oversight over the school. So it was a very academic environment and I've often said, actually once--now this has got to be fifteen years ago, I was invited back to be the graduation speaker at Lab School graduation, high school graduation. I said then, and I was totally serious about it, that I think the education I got at the Lab School was the best education I've ever gotten and I've had seven years of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] thereafter. And it was because of I think the love of learning. I mean you know so Dewey [John Dewey] was the model. In fact, Dewey started this school as I understand it. It was very much encouraging a love of learning, about reading, about you've got to create your own research projects. They had this, when you were a senior you got a May project in which you could work on anything you wanted in the month of May. I remember I was writing research papers when I was like in the fifth and sixth grade. And by the time I was in high school, I was auditing college courses. Story_ID: 644557 Speaker 1: So it was a very--a kind of a very academic environment, but it was also a very free and tolerant environment and that's partly because it was connected to the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], right. So we were literally located as you know on the university's campus and so for example when the university went on strike about the bombing of Cambodia, we went on strike. We would see ourselves very much as connected to the university, and the university was a very political university at the time; a very left leaning university. It's funny unlike today where its reputation is being a very conservative university, in the 1960s it was a very left wing university. So we became kind of left wing. So it was nothing to spout Eldridge Cleaver, the Weathermen [Weather Underground Organization] or this or that, nobody ever did anything--I mean it was in that very middle class contained radicalism way, but we thought of ourselves as very much a part of the student movement, much more so than I think kids did in public school. Our teachers gave us a lot more leeway. Again, probably more than we probably should have gotten. So sex, drugs and rock and roll were much more a part of our school, I think than they probably were in the typical public school in a more open way. Although, again now that you think of the modern day everything was so much more innocent then than it is today on all of those dimensions. So whatever we were doing when we were juniors and seniors in high school is you know now what I worry about my kid [Brian Wilkins] in the fifth and sixth grade. So life has changed tremendously (laughter). But still it was a very open, liberal environment in kind of every sense of that word. You felt like you were getting something special. I mean they kind of instilled that in you. Like it's a special place and you're getting something special and I think people knew that the public schools all around, even Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], which was a very good high school at the time before it became some kind of academy or something. But that was only opened--this is Kenwood High School [Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], right. That was only opened while I was in high school and in fact some of the kids from Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] went to Kenwood because this was now a public school that people could go to. Before then nobody ever thought that the public schools were schools they wanted to send their kids. Speaker 2: I think Kenwood started a gifted program or a magnet school within the context of a public school. Speaker 1: And in fact, some of my friends went there and got great educations. And in fact, but they would come back and say Kenwood was way bigger, so maybe Lab School had 120 kids or 130 kids in the class, they would have four hundred kids in the class. Sports were real--you could be a star athlete. So I debated for two years and then I actually went back to playing basketball, which by this time I was distinctly mediocre at it, sat at the end of the bench. You know you could do these things in an independent school where you were going to Kenwood and you couldn't play ball at all. So it was a little bit of an oasis. And I think as racial tensions mounted in the rest of Chicago [Illinois] right, so as Chicago becomes more and more of a polarized place, I think people felt it to be a little oasis, which is partly why people are close. There was still a black table, but there was none of this you can't have white friends, you know there was none of the kind of--there were no gangs, there was no--none of the--it was a very (laughter), again, it was a very gentle bit of an oasis. Story_ID: 644558 Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that you remember? Speaker 2: So the most important teacher for me was my high school debate coach; and I'm actually still very close to him, his name is Earl Bell. He became--he was sort of a legend in the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] because he was notoriously tough. He's from North Carolina, he has that kind of no nonsense, no BS you know southern attitude, and because he had grown up around black people, because his father had been a tobacco farmer and so he had grown up around black people all of his life and he had played basketball. Again, I always think basketball is the great equalizer. You play basketball it's about, okay can you play or can you not play? And it's always been a black sport. He played at Winston-Salem or Wake Forest [Wake Forest University], either Wake Forest--Wake Forest which was in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]. He was good, in fact he played briefly with Earl "The Pearl" Monroe [Earl Monroe]. He was a serious basketball player and he had taught at a high school in which kids had gone off and fought and died in Vietnam. So he had a kind of toughness about him that really the Lab School--very few people had. He was very much a strong mentor to me because he both took me under his wing, but he also pushed me. When we were debating, he pushed us to work really hard. And so we would go and research our debate cases in the University of Chicago Law Library [D'Angelo Law Library, Chicago, Illinois]. In fact, years later when I came back to be a visiting professor at Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], this was 1995, right at the time The HistoryMakers project was born, is when I was there. I remember talking to Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] about this project. I remember I had an office in the law library, which is the same law library, and it was like deja vu because I remember going in there as a high school freshman down in the bowels of the library pulling out these dusty books on nuclear disarmament, which was what the debate proposition was. So he was probably as important as any teacher I've ever had in my life and we have maintained--we've been close ever since. In fact, actually I just sent him something because again as the world comes full circle, my former high school debate partner is now a very famous professor of constitutional law named Erwin Chemerinsky, who's the dean of the University of California at Irvine law school [University of California Irvine School of Law, Irvine, California]. And Erwin invited me to come out and give a big named lecture at Irvine, and so there we are, two former high school debate partners, and we took a picture and we sent it to Mr. Bell. Story_ID: 644559 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question though we usually ask it earlier but, considering the environment around it, the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] and all the bookstores, all the things that--music and everything that goes on in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], what were some of the sights, and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: So the Museum of Science and Industry is clearly an important place for me as a kid. Again, back in the day when you would just let your kids go out, we used to go over there by ourselves. It was either free--I don't know five cents or something--and we would just go wander around and push all the buttons and would go over there as kids. I remember going in the coal mine the first time and I thought it was the scariest thing I'd ever been to, and I had the great pleasure of taking my son [Brian Wilkins] to go to the coal mine five years ago or something like that. But that was a very important congregating place, as was Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois] 'cause you could go over there, again you can walk to Jackson Park. You take your bat and your ball and you go play baseball or basketball or whatever. In my immediate environment the Medici pizza place [Medici on 57th, Chicago, Illinois] was the focal point. For years I was forbidden to go in because it was a den of iniquity, as it actually rightly was. Legend has it there were hash brownies being sold, there were radical plots being hatched, but for us it was like the coolest place that you couldn't quite get in but you could hang out by the front door. In fact, in that little block, there were coffeehouses and then there was a record store. There was a record store, I don't know what's there now, that was right sort of two or three doors down by the Medici. I have to admit much more than Powell's bookstore [Powell's Books Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], which has been there forever and ever, it was that record store that you go in 'cause they would sell 45s [45 rpm records] and albums and as you got older you'd go there and you'd look through the bins and they'd have cutouts where the records were cheaper. I had always grown up with a love of music and as I got older, particularly a love of jazz because my sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] was--always loved jazz and my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins]. So they taught me about jazz. I would go downtown, now this was Rose's record store [Rose Records, Chicago, Illinois], remember that? Rose's record store, there was the ninety-nine cent bins and I still have albums to this day, which I still occasionally bust out and put on my--I insisted on buying--on keeping a turntable, and I still have Dave Brubeck and Stanley Turrentine, and you know Coltrane [John Coltrane]. I have tons of old albums that I bought at Rose's record store for literally ninety-nine cents. So that little block of stores--there was a grocery store which at the time was called Grocerland [Grocerland Cooperative, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], it's been through five or six different names, but the big thing was when I was old enough to cross the street myself to go to Grocerland and to buy Hostess Twinkies and dum- dum- what do they call them? The little cupcake things that were called dumb dumb, dumbbells [sic. ding dong] something anyway. But I used to love those kinds of things and I'd save up all my little pennies from dusting my father's [Julian Wilkins] books or from my allowance and I'd go splurge, or Cracker Jacks and look for the prize inside the Cracker Jacks. That hoop that was outside in the alley where I used to take Arne [Arne Duncan] to play, that was very important to me. And then there was another hoop, kind of it's a square, right and there was one here and then one on the other side. And the one on the other side actually had a court with lines painted on it and stuff and we would spend hours and hours playing basketball on that court. The university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] was kind of always there and as you got older the idea of being able to go to Ida Noyes [Ida Noyes Hall, Chicago, Illinois] and watch a movie. You know, they would have these movies, and especially when I got into high school-- Speaker 1: They always had these classic film series at (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly right, and you would go there and-- Speaker 1: Doc Films [International House Documentary Film Group; Doc Films] they called it, Doc Films. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I remember seeing I think 'The Good, the Bad and the Ugly' on that, or maybe it was I saw the early ones 'cause 'The Good, the Bad and the Ugly' hadn't come out, so I saw 'A Fistful of Dollars' and 'A Few Dollars More' ['For a Few Dollars More']. That's where you could meet with a bunch of friends. It wasn't quite a date, but it was sort of like girls where there so you know--Medici, not the Medici pizza, but eventually there was another pizza place that was down the street. There was a drugstore, which was like at the corner of Kenwood [Avenue] and 57th Street that you could walk from the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. So the thing about Hyde Park was you could walk and parents, in a way that they would never do today, just send their kids out. And I had friends who lived in the neighborhood and I would just walk over to their house and then I'd have to walk back f- in time for dinner or call my mother and say I'm having dinner over there. Story_ID: 644560 Speaker 1: And then sort of going in the other direction, now this was actually an interesting thing, because of course as you went further north it got progressively blacker and more moderate income. I mean everybody in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] at some level, was a middle income of some level, but the part nearest to 57th, 58th [Street], 59th [Street] was qualitatively different in that way than say if you start going towards 53rd Street. I remember my parents were more nervous if I was going past 55th Street to the north [sic.], 53rd toward 57th Street, than if I was going in the other direction. And I think if I'm honest with myself, I was more nervous because, especially when I was younger where most of my world was white, the kids who were going to grade school or going to some of the schools in the neighborhood there, they'd make me nervous. There were occasional muggings; I remember I got mugged on the way to walk to some friend of mine's house on 55th Street. Speaker 2: Oh, did somebody take your money or something? Speaker 1: Yeah they took my--I probably had a pocket full of quarters or something like that (laughter). There was no violence, there was no weapon. Again when you think of what kids go through today and all the fear and all that, the worst that happened was I got beat up. I think the worst fear that I ever had was that maybe I'd get in a fight. It wasn't that actually some terrible thing, there was no gun, there were no knives, in fact actually the only--there were a couple of white kids who lived on my block who wanted to be--desperate want to be Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation]. They really, really wanted to be 'cause they wanted to be like the cool kids and they were white and so that was the way to be cool. They didn't go to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], they went to the public schools and so the only time I ever saw anybody with a knife was these white kids who had these knives 'cause they wanted to show how cool they were. Eventually one of them succeeded enough, in becoming cool enough that he got himself strung out on dope and eventually got killed. So you know they succeeded in their orientation. Ironically, the black kids were mostly like the straight and narrow kids 'cause their parents--the whole genius of Hyde Park was that Julian Levi realized that if we move in some middle class black families here, they will be more fierce in defending the line against undesirable types than any white people, because they'll recognize the dangerous ones from the non dangerous ones and that they will fight hard to protect their own property values. So it turned out that was like--the kids who were always getting in trouble were the white kids. Because they were mostly smoking dope and they were hanging out and they got into more serious drugs and these were the ones, if I look at my neighborhood, the ones who got in trouble were the white kids. Speaker 2: That's interesting, the people we've interviewed who have like mixed parents that lived in Hyde Park always described the white as being the liberal of the two of them, the black parent is the conservative. Speaker 1: Yeah, the first time I ever drank wine was when I went over to the--there was a Jewish family that lived nex- three or four down and they had--it was probably for Passover now that I think about it. They like busted out the Mogen David wine and they served it to all the kids and my parents were like horrified but they didn't quite know what to say because there we were and they had already poured it in the glass. It's a miracle that I've grown to love wine, again I told you my father [Julian Wilkins] and my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins]--I have five thousand bottles of wine in my basement, I'm a big wino. But that was my first taste of wine; of course it was totally disgusting because they add sugar to it. But yeah, the white parents were the ones who let the kids come over and play spin the bottle in their house and all that; and the black parents would have none of that. I mean you had to say, "Yes, ma'am," and, "No, sir," and you know everybody was on the straight and narrow. Story_ID: 644561 Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, you, you alluded to that before. You were in eighth grade then? Speaker 2: I was in--I was just graduating from high school. Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] at the time, much to my current regret, had a seventh and eighth grade that was combined, so it was called pre-freshman. And you remember--look there were, you know there were troops stationed in Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois] in the Midway [Midway Plaisance, Chicago, Illinois]--actually in the Midway and also Jackson Park. That was also the summer of the Democratic Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] and of course being politically active and thinking I was all radical and cool and stuff, I remember going down to the Conrad Hilton Hotel [Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and quickly realizing, with a couple of my buddies, that we were way out of our league (laughter), okay because this was when they were dumping excrement out the window and they were yelling, "Fuck the pigs." It was clear that this was going to get bad, so we left and then later on of course all the stuff that happened in that convention. But because you were at the Lab School, you felt like you were a part of it, even though you were young. Story_ID: 644562 Speaker 1: All right. So this is 1968, '69 [1969] and just to point out the, the riots were really only on the West Side, right? Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There really weren't any on the-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head) And by the way, I grew up my whole life on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], we never went to the West Side. We were terrified of going to the West Side. And it was only when I met kids of the West Side that--they said, "We were terrified of going to the South Side" (laughter). Then I realized that's just the way in which Chicago [Illinois] worked, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a whole--huge black community on the West Side of Chicago. Speaker 2: Huge. And it was not until, I remember--so I dated a girl who lived in Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois], or on Lawndale [Avenue]. This was--I must have been in high school, and my parents [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins and Julian Wilkins] were deeply worried because I would go drop her off on the West Side at home. And, you know Chicago again, it's hard to really understand how racially segregated it was so--and that was within the black community. Then, of course, the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] no one--no black person lived north of State Street [sic.]. And I remember vividly I took one of my still to this day best friends, his name is Maurice Arthur [ph.], he grew up on 74th [Street] and Vernon [Avenue] around by where I used to live. He comes to the high school in freshman year, and this is--now we're graduating from high school and I have always--my parents went everywhere, in part because they had that view, and in fact because they were light skinned maybe it was easier for them, I don't know. So I wanted to go buy a pair of jeans on Clark Street--North Clark Street and we went and we were hungry. I was driving, so we stopped, there's a McDonald's on Clark Street, I think it's still there. We go into this McDonald's and I see my friend and he's kind of looking around and looking around and finally he looks to me and he says, "So this is where all the white people are." (Laughter) He said, "I knew there were a lot of white people in Chicago," he said, "but where I'm from I don't see them" (laughter). You know he said, "Where I'm from--." You know in Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], okay we see some, in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], but I didn't get how there could be like a million and a half white people. He said, "Now I get it," 'cause he's looking around and we're the only black people in the whole place. So that's what Chicago was like. But yes, the South Side much less touched by the '68 [1968] riots than the, than the West Side. Story_ID: 644563 Speaker 1: And then you were asking me about Mar- Fred Hampton (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Fred Hampton and Mark Clark. Speaker 1: And Mark Clark. So I never heard Fred Hampton and Mark Clark speak. I certainly knew who they were, but they became an important part of my family's life because when they were killed, they--the--either the city or the state, I can't remember which, put together a blue ribbon panel to investigate the killings, and my father [Julian Wilkins] was on that panel. I think that was one of the hardest moments of his life because you know there was all of this outcry over the killings. And you know many people to this day believe that they were murdered or assassinated, and he was the only black person, maybe there was one other black person, on this panel in which they were charged with writing a report about the killings. The report, which my father signed on to, said that the police had acted with justification. I think that was very difficult for him. I wish--it's one of the things that I wish I had talked to him more about it before he died. Because I wonder how sure of that he was, I wonder what kind of evidence they had. He was, as I say, he was a respectable black person and that's why they put him on the panel. They didn't put any rabble rousers, black--Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was not on that panel. I think my father felt a lot of pressure to be a respectable black person. Speaker 2: By this time was he a member of the Democratic Party? Speaker 1: Yes, so my father after Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I think that many--my father probably voted for Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] in 1960. I'm not sure he ever fully admitted that to me, but I'm pretty sure he probably did. He certainly voted for Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] over Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II]. But it was Goldwater [Barry Goldwater] that made my father, and probably many, many other black Democrats. They probably would have voted for Kennedy the second time around anyway. Although, as we know, Kennedy's record on civil rights was way less good than the mythology has been made out to be. But Goldwater was a complete, not only Neanderthal, but a crazy man, and so my father could not vote for Goldwater. So he voted for LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], and after that I don't think anybody from my family ever voted for a Republican. That's not true, I voted for Bill Weld [William F. Weld] over John Silber when he ran for governor here [Massachusetts] 'cause John Silber was a maniac (laughter). So anyway, my father was by this point a Democrat. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, so. So all this turbulent activity is going on--the city council [Chicago City Council], I think the Hyde Park city councilperson was Leon (pronunciation) Despres right? Speaker 1: Yes, Despres-- Speaker 2: Despres, Despres (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and he was, you know again if there was no Leon Despres would there be a Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], and then Dick Newhouse [Richard Newhouse, Jr.]. So my father worked on Dick Newhouse's first campaign when he ran for state senate [Illinois Senate], which is eventually the seat I think Barack held. So, again these were times in which just having a black person on the city council or just having a black person on the state legislature. Although of course, you know--I don't know why I'm going to blank on his name. Dawson had been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) William Dawson [William L. Dawson]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he had been in [U.S.] Congress and my father--so my father practiced law with Dawson's brother I want to say, could have been his cousin [sic. great nephew], but anyway his name was Dawson. And Michael Dawson, again is one of the great ironies, Michael Dawson is now a very well known professor of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], maybe one of the greatest experts on black politics. I grew up knowing--Michael went to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and then we ended up teaching together at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 644564 Speaker 1: Now did your father [Julian Wilkins] and mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] interact with Harold Washington at all? Speaker 2: Yep (nods head), so when Harold Washington--so by the time Washington--so my father--so Washington didn't--he wasn't in the congressional district that Hyde Park's [Chicago, Illinois] in right? He was in the different--he was farther south, I think. But my father certainly knew Harold Washington, knew him as a lawyer. I'm sure contributed to his campaign. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in Hyde Park, the 1st Congressional District was in-- Speaker 2: And then they split it. Speaker 1: Yeah to make 1 and 2 [2nd Congressional District]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And when they split it, remember they did it to get Harold Washington out of [U.S.] Congress as I recall vaguely. But then when--by the time Harold Washington ran for mayor, my father had already died. And my mother was--this was a huge issue for her. Again, until (laughter), until the president, Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], became the president, I never thought I would live to see a black mayor in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. So when Harold Washington won for mayor in the City of Chicago, this was a huge issue. We thought we'd have Daleys or Daleyites our whole life. Speaker 1: Harold Washington was a Hyde Parker as an adult. Speaker 2: Yes, well he lived in the Del Prado--what's the name of the hotel he lived-- Speaker 1: The Algonquin [Algonquin Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] I think. Speaker 2: The Algonquin that's it, yeah, yeah. So my parents--there isn't anyone of that generation that my family didn't know and it's because, remember my [paternal] grandfather's family was the most--one of the most famous black families in America. They were on the cover of Ebony and Jet and all that. When my grandfather--my grandfather not only was he--actually here's a funny story. So I--for years people have always asked me am I related to Roger [HistoryMaker Roger Wilkins] and Roy Wilkins, perfectly understandable, black people, light skinned blah, blah blah. It turns out as far as we know there's no relationship, and my grandfather who knew Roy Wilkins very well, sat down and went through the respected family tree for as long as anybody could find back and they couldn't find anybody in common. Now I tell you this story for two subsequent funny stories. One is that, so people come up to me all the time and they say to me, "Are you related to the famous Wilkins?" And they mean Roy Wilkins, and I'm used to hearing this that I always say, "No, I understand how you could think it, completely understandable, but no I'm no relation to Roy Wilkins." Well, one time I said this, there was an older black person and he said, "No, no, I don't mean that Wilkins. I mean the famous Wilkins, J. Ernest Wilkins [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.]." And I said, "Well yeah, that's my grandfather, but why do you know him?" He said, "Because I'm a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.]." So my grandfather was the grand polemarch or whatever you call the top dog in the Kappas, and then my uncle, his son, J. Ernest Wilkins, Jr., was also the grand polemarch of the Kappas. Plus both of them were each in their own day the grand sire archon of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity]. So of a certain generation of people, everybody knows my family in some--you know of a certain social strata and a certain generation. And that's particularly true in Chicago because you know that's where my grandfather and my father lived their whole life. Story_ID: 644565 Speaker 1: In high school now you, were you pretty much convinced you were going to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] you know as a--? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) So here's the thing, and I can say this in all honesty and it's come up in several points in my life, and it's one of the things that I'm most deeply grateful but also kind of in awe of my father because I swear that when I was thinking about applying to college, and I was thinking about accepting and going to college, I never thought I had to go to Harvard because that's where my father went. Instead the reason why I was interested in going to Harvard was that a guy who was a year ahead of me, who I had known, again he was one of those lifelong Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] kids, maybe he came in the second or third grade. His name is Brandon Balthazar [ph.], who also very sadly died quite young. Brandon was the senior class president and he got into Harvard and I remember thinking to myself, well gee I'm the senior class president this year, maybe I could get into Harvard. That was kind of the first time I really ever thought about it, and so I applied and I got in and then I got into Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I got into Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. I think those were the three places I was looking at, maybe Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. And I decided to go to Harvard because Harvard had more black students than any of the other comparable schools, and that's by the way still the case, partly because it's bigger and it's partly because it's--Harvard, to its credit, has made having black students a part of the university a priority for longer than any of the rest of the places and it's done it pretty systematically. We could still do a lot better, but it's done it pretty systematically. So I went to Harvard not really thinking of myself as following in my father's footsteps. Although when I got in and when I decided to go, I could see how proud my father was and when he brought me--my parents [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins and Julian Wilkins] brought me to school in 1973 and dropped me off at my dorm room and all of those rituals, you know it was a big--I could see it was a real big deal for my father and that meant a lot to me. But the same thing happened when I went to law school, just to skip ahead a little bit. It never really occurred to me that I was going to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] to be like my father. In fact, if anything I was worried about going to law school just because everybody in my family had done it. So in fact I briefly became a psychology major in college to see whether or not there was something else that I would like to do, 'cause I was scared that I was going to law school just because it's what my father had done. It's probably the best thing that ever happened to me when I got to Harvard in nine- this is now 1977. I decided-- Speaker 1: Law school? Speaker 2: Law school yeah, I decided, I decided that I was going to work really hard my first year in law school to see whether I really liked it, because I was really nervous about just kind of drifting into it. And school had always come easy for me; I'd always been good at school. I never really had to work very hard at being good at school. But the trap of that was, well was that--then was I just going to drift into something 'cause it was easy. I suppose subconsciously if I had any worry about that, that worry probably came from the fact that I felt that my father had drifted into being a lawyer and he didn't really like it very much. And, you know he'd done it because his father [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] had done it and it was the expected thing; and I didn't want that to happen to me. Story_ID: 644566 Speaker 1: Well, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in '73 [1973], you ended up majoring in government, yeah (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, which is just political science but Harvard is so--(laughter) you know Harvard, it's, it's so typically Harvard. We don't call it political science because it's government, because we should be running the government, so that's why we call it the government. I was a government major and it was sort of the natural thing for me to do. I always liked politics and I was always interested in politics, and I used to argue with my father [Julian Wilkins] at the dinner table who was, of course, a product of his generation so he was way more conservative than I was, and so we would--because I went to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and of that, I had a very kind of idealized view about politics. So I wanted to be involved in politics and I think I probably harbored some secret ambition of running for office someday, which is why I've always had the greatest respect for the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] because it wasn't long before I realized that's an insane life. How could you possibly do that? I so admired the people who would actually go ahead and do that. Speaker 1: Yeah, the year before you entered Harvard, '72 [1972] was the election of George McGovern who was defeated by Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Which is sort of a defeat for liberal thinking people in the country I would guess. Speaker 2: It was a watershed moment. So until 1972, you know we thought we lived in a liberal place, really until 1968--so the beginning of the end was 1968 for us because when Hubert Humphrey, who by the way liberals defeated, if the liberals, McGovern and all of that had, just come out and voted for Humphrey, we would have had eight years of Humphrey, which would have changed the entire landscape of the world. But we were disenchanted and so people voted for--didn't vote, voted for McGovern. So you get Nixon and then we sort of think Nixon is kind of a aberration, but now we're going to right things with McCarthy [Eugene McCarthy] and, "Clean Gene," and all of that, and then he gets destroyed. And then Watergate happens, and that changes everything about the way in which we think about politics; and all of that happened while I was in school. Story_ID: 644567 Speaker 1: It was a very, in some ways a very heady time to be an undergraduate at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And Harvard by this point has, you know, five hundred black students. It has a very large black student population, and for the most part I lived in a very black world. So by the time I graduated from high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], I'd gone from having a social circle that was overwhelmingly white to having one that was overwhelmingly black. That again is where I credit those, all those black students who came in the last two years of my high school career, and I view sort of saved me from being someone who had a deeply confused sense of my own racial identity. Then I go to Harvard and you could just immerse yourselves into a totally black world. Probably way more immersion than I think most of us looking back on it wish we had done. But you sat at the black table, I requested black roommates, I played intramural basketball. I, pretty much my whole social world was black and it wasn't just at Harvard. The beauty of being here in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and in Boston [Massachusetts] is when you get sick of the black people at Harvard, you could go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you could go to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], you could go to BC [Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], you could go to Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], you could go to Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You could go to Tufts. There was a huge, relatively speaking, black student population here and it was very energized because this was--we got the best, I always say, of affirmative action, because it wasn't the first year where it was really hard and where you were one of a very few. We had already ramped up to critical mass. It wasn't--you know there was a black consciousness without it having to be insane or crazy or violent. So in other words there was nobody taking over buildings. We'd have protests over South Africa or whatever but like it was--there was no violence, there was no pressure for violence the way I think if you graduated from Harvard in 1968 for example between the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and the Weathermen [Weather Underground Organization] and all of that--that it was a much more risky time. The administration was used to us and so they were, welcoming is probably too strong a word, but they were happy I think to have us here. And there was a--and the attack against affirmative action hadn't really gotten mobilized. So that there was no real conservative student body, Reaganism hadn't come in. So the '70s [1970s] in some sense were sort of idyllic time. The music was great, there was no AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] to worry about, the drugs were safe, everything was--you could live and there was no pressure not to--there was not the same kind of pressure that I think my sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] felt. Never speak to a white person, never have a white roommate. There was pressure like that, but it was nothing like it was before, and there was no pressure to deny that you were black as there was in the 1980s. So it was a great time to go to school and I had a great time. Story_ID: 644568 Speaker 1: So there, there's a black student organization I know, right? Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was it called the--? Speaker 2: So actually we were--there--it had been called AFRO [Association of African and Afro American Students] and then it had kind of--you know, again this just shows you the moment we arrived. So in the '60s [1960s], AFRO had been a really incredibly important part for the black students. There were very few of them, it had been a very radical organization. They had pressed exceptionally hard to open up Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and had done a brilliant job. By the time we got there, so 1973, it had kind of--there was a sort of much more apathetic view about black student organizations. In our junior year, my college roommate, who is still my best friend and the godfather of my son [Brian Wilkins], his name is Tony Chase [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase]; he decided that we should revive the student organization. He said let's do it--whenever you want to revive something it's easier to just start something new. So we started this new organization, which was called BSA or the Black Students Association, which was a kind of a much more typical name and we started it. We were the first people to start it and he was the first president, I had some title or other. We kind of galvanized people and now that's an organization that continues to this day. In fact, ironically my younger brother [Timothy Wilkins]--the youngest one, when he was at Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] he became the president of the Black Students Association. But there was also lots of third world solidarity. So there was a whole third world student organization [Third World Students Alliance]. This is one of the things I try to remind my Asian friends and even my women friends, that when I was in school, Asians and Latinos, but certainly Asians, let's just stick with them for the moment, they were part of our diversity agenda. That is, we would lobby for Asian students because there were a tiny, tiny number of Asian students who were at Harvard at the time. And the black students did as much as any other group to lobby for more Latinos, more Asians and more women. This was all part of the affirmative action agenda and it's why, and it always sort of breaks my heart, when now you have Asians attacking affirmative action as you know holding back their progress. You know to which I always say, "You know, don't go after our 8 percent, go after their 92, you know (laughter)? 'Ccause when you were 1 percent, we were for you," and it's really true. Story_ID: 644569 Speaker 1: The department of--African American studies department, that was Ewart Guinier, right? (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ewart Guinier. This was a huge issue when I was here. So the two big issues, which eventually became three, but it really started out as two was: we wanted a department of Afro American studies you know, and there was something that did not have full departmental status, and Ewart Guinier, [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier's father, was the first and only faculty member for years and years. And then eventually they got a couple of others, but they resisted it, a department, and we went on strikes and protests, that was a huge thing. And then the other was more black students and more students of color, keeping the pipeline open. And it was only in the last few years that some very progressive and worldly students began putting South Africa on our agenda. I'd say that really--so we began in the late '70s [1970s] is when the whole divestment movement really picks up steam. So those were the three issues around which kind of black political mobilization in the university [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was taking place. Speaker 1: Okay. I know we interviewed Archie Epps [HistoryMaker Archie C. Epps, III] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh you did? Good I'm glad, 'cause he died didn't he? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. So I'm glad you got Archie. So he was a pivotal and quite controversial figure (laughter) especially among the black students. Speaker 1: How did they rec- he's a very British man though he's from Lake (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he's from like Alabama. So you know, but this-- Speaker 1: Lake Charles, Louisiana. Speaker 2: Okay, there you go. So this became a source of great derision among black students. Looking back on it, we were really hard on Archie and we were hard--this was the moment where we were hard on anybody who had the whiff of being an Uncle Tom right, and that was explicitly what people were called. Archie would show up in his bow ties and sing opera and we never gave him the space to be the guy that he was, and to be honest, Archie actually did try to help black students. Now of course he never helped us as much as we wanted and there was always the suspicion that Archie would sell you out, but in fact, Archie went out of his way to help black students and I'm sure we don't even know the half of it. You know, it's funny even Walter Leonard [HistoryMaker Walter J. Leonard]--now have you talked to Walter Leonard yet? Speaker 1: No [sic.]. Speaker 2: You should talk to Walter Leonard before he dies. Walter is well up in his eighties now, but Walter was--Derek Bok brought Walter Leonard in to be his advisor on race issues when Derek moved from being the dean of Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] to being the president of the university. When--so Walter Leonard, when he started out at the law school, I didn't know him until he moved into the role with Derek Bok. If you talk to black students who went to Harvard Law School in the early to mid-1960s, Walter Leonard is a hero to them because he was the one who really helped to set up the programs that brought the first black students here and he was the only black person in any administrative role here. But then Derek Bok takes him to be his person on race, and of course all the black students immediately think he's an Uncle Tom (laughter). And we gave him fits you know. Now of course, years later when you read about all the things that he did, he was a real pioneer for opening up higher education--elite higher education to black students. But it was very tough to be a member of that older generation and to have conflicting loyalties, which is why I hope people have sympathy for the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. I wrote a piece about the president, and you know the president in this position where of course he can't be the president of the black people, he has to be president of all the people, and to be president of all the people comes with a bunch of responsibilities that sometimes will not allow you to do what all the black people would like you to do if you were president of the black people. And that was true in all these positions; and, you know I've spent a lot of my life writing about this conflict. But yes, Archie was there-- Story_ID: 644570 Speaker 1: There was only two or three black tenured professors, who we also gave fits to and thought they were all Uncle Toms. So [HistoryMaker] Martin Kilson who is--if he's still alive and if you haven't talked to him you should definitely talk to Kilson. I think Orlando Patterson came while I was an undergraduate and he--you know Orlando is still on the faculty. You know maybe two (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What about Allen Counter [HistoryMaker S. Allen Counter]? Speaker 1: Allen Counter, but Allen Counter has never been a full professor I don't think. Now don't get me in trouble for this if it turns out I'm wrong, but I think Allen Counter has always had a position at the medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts]. He's got a professor title, but I don't know that he's a full tenured professor at the--but he was certainly here and we used to get in fights with him too. Because all these guys, we wanted them to be something that they couldn't, and it's only in retrospect when I'm a faculty member here now, I have much more sympathy and respect for what it must have been like to be the only black or one of two or three black professors in a school of five hundred faculty members, I forget how many Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] has. It's really quite a--whatever they did--so Martin Kilson, just to pick on poor Martin Kilson, he wrote this piece in The New York Times Magazine, right before we get here, meaning in the summer of 1972, criticizing all the black students for sitting at the black tables and not integrating. We were furious, we thought he was an Uncle Tom, we hated him, and I bet you if you ask every black student who was a student with me and you say, "What's one of your biggest regrets at Harvard?" They'd say, "I didn't know any white people" (laughter). Because all we did, we had a great time, it was really important for us to have solidarity, but we didn't take advantage as much as we could have in the full range of the school. Story_ID: 644571 Speaker 1: --Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer this time; and Matth- Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I want to have you start out by stating and spelling your name for us and the date--and today's date and location. Speaker 2: So I'm David Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], D-A-V-I-D--I'm actually David Brian Wilkins, D-A-V-I-D, B-R-I-A-N, W-I-L-K-I-N-S. I think today is October 18th, 2016 and we're in Cambridge, Massachusetts. And here's what I want you to tell me, should I look at you or look at the camera (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Look at me. Speaker 2: That's what I thought. Story_ID: 644572 Speaker 1: I want to go back 'cause I looked at your interview in preparation for today, which is very rich in a lot of ways. (Cough) And I want to focus now, 'cause, you know we, we talked about the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and growing up in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and your family history. Your rich family history that could be actually a movie, but we won't go there yet. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: But I would like to go back to your father [Julian Wilkins] and your uncle's time at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] because that was not really covered and I'm just wondering what they told you, if much, about their time here. Speaker 2: So it's very interesting, and I think this is not dissimilar with many black people of a certain generation. So my father didn't talk a lot about being at Harvard Law School. I'd say I know about it in maybe two or three different ways. One is that he came here very young so both my--I think my father probably was something like eighteen when he came, and my uncle [John R. Wilkins] was even younger because they had gone to college at fourteen and fifteen respectively, and so by the time they got here they were maybe eighteen and nineteen. And of course you'll remember this is in the '40s [1940s] so the war [World War II, WWII] is going on so there are people coming back who are much older, and so Harvard Law School is an, an intimidating place for anybody and undoubtedly was a very much more intimidating place then. And you know my father alluded to the fact that it was a very kind of scary place, or intimidating place is more the right word. Having said that, I think my father really liked his time here. My father liked the law, the academic part of the law. My father was a very, in some ways a very academic person, which is--I always find you know meaningful for me because I think my father if he could have been anything would have liked to have been a teacher of some kind, some kind of professor. I think he liked that way more than he liked the practice of law, the kind of day to day detail of the practice of law. And so I think he liked studying the law and he found the challenge here challenging but also exciting. And so he would tell me little snippets about what it was like to be in class. The favorite one I remember just because it was funny was he was here when Frankfurter [Felix Frankfurter] was appointed to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, I guess by Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. And Frankfurter apparently was not all that popular with the students because he was a very demanding taskmaster, but Roscoe Pound was very popular with the students, and I think my father was in a class with Roscoe Pound and he said that the day--and many students had hoped that Roscoe Pound would be elevated to the Supreme Court. He was also obviously a very distinguished person, and my father said that the day it was announced that Frankfurter would be the one to go on the Supreme Court that some student came in and wrote on the blackboard, "It takes a dozen Frankfurters to make a Pound" (laughter). Which I thought, even as a little kid I thought was an amazing story, yeah. Story_ID: 644573 Speaker 1: But you know my father [Julian Wilkins] didn't talk a lot about what it was like to be here, and my guess is that's because it was hard. And my uncle [John R. Wilkins], who I would have probably talked more about it, but my uncle died very young. So you know both, as you may know, both my father and my uncle died in their fifties. I think my uncle was fifty-four and my--or fifty-two maybe and my father was fifty-seven in any event, and my uncle died before I got into Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I often found myself thinking while I was here, particularly when I was doing things that he did like becoming a member of the Harvard Law Review, that I wished I could have talked to him about what that was like. I remember going to find his picture in Gannett House, which is the Harvard Law Review house, and that was a very meaningful thing for me. And my father died before I became a law professor, so my father died in 1984 shortly after I graduated from law school. And the--and so I'm sure if he had lived longer and we had more of a chance to talk about it while I was here, I would have asked him more about it. But he wasn't the kind of person that talked much about himself. The other way in which I know about my father's experience at Harvard Law School and also my uncle's, is from their widows. So my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] and my aunt, who was my Aunt Constance [Constance Wilkins], who was married to my uncle, are still alive. My aunt is ninety and my mother is about to be eighty-eight, and they often talk about what it was like, particularly my mother talks about what it was like for my father because they were courting when she was--my father was a student. They met sometime after my father's first year. It may have been after he went into the [U.S.] Army. It was either right before or right after, and so my mother has memories of coming up here to visit him and kind of what it was like to come to Harvard Law School in the 1940s. Her memories are more of kind of the awe of the place, the wonder of the place but I think she also remembers my father as being, you know this wasn't an easy place for him, and particularly because he had his time here interrupted by going into the Army and, and coming back. Story_ID: 644574 Speaker 1: David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], let me ask you, in--as you're growing up, and you know you described in the interview how there are two fam- you know, there's a six and eight year gap-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --with your brothers [Stephen Wilkins and Timothy Wilkins]--your younger brothers, but as you're growing up in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and your father [Julian Wilkins] is practicing, and you talk about the practice, you know that he is a sole practitioner for most of the time, is there cultivation going on about you following in the profession? Is that discussed either inside the household or outside the household, and I want to take you to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], which is really where I want to say the interview ends, but you're at the Lab School and you're talking about the integration of the Lab School after the shooting of Fred Hampton that it becomes way more diverse and that's one of your defining moments. Speaker 2: So you know people always say to me, "Well of course you went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because your father went to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]," and, "Of course you became a lawyer because your father was a lawyer." And the funny thing is I never thought about that until I got to Harvard. So my father who had so much of his life programmed for him and planned for him and demanded for him by his own father [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.], I think really, really, really worked hard to make sure he never did that with his kids, and I think in particular with me because I was the oldest boy. I remember coming to visit Harvard, we came on the college tour, so my father took me on the college tour and I remember we went to Harvard and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and maybe one or two others. Story_ID: 644575 Speaker 1: The ABC students [A Better Chance] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: Right. So I'd say you know the--I was talking about the black table I think at the time. Speaker 2: Right, the black table, that's right. If you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. So, you know there was still a kind of strong racial consciousness among most of the black students who were there. Most of us had our formative experiences in high school and junior high school in the '60s [1960s] and very much thought of ourselves that way. So there was absolutely a black table, and the great thing about Harvard is there's a huge number of black students. There were more black students than I've ever been around. So there were probably something like, well if there--Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] has something like six hundred students per class and the class was probably 8 percent black, so that means there was like fifty black students per class, multiplied by four there were more than two hundred black undergraduates. Now you start talking about all the graduate schools and the other schools. I mean in a way it was a kind of paradise for somebody who had come from an environment like mine, because there were so many, there were so many black students and they were so talented. Because again these were people who were coming in who were either had been parts of these programs where they'd been picked up in elementary school and taken to Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] and Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], and Tony [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase] went to the Episcopal High School for boys in Virginia [Alexandria, Virginia]. Of course not all of them made it, and a lot of them didn't make it through, and then even when we got to Harvard we had kids who the pressure of those environments was too much. But there were a lot of them that not only made it but flourished and then we had the top kids coming out of the public high schools. Because again back in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] you still had a lot of middle class black people living in middle class--traditional middle class black neighborhoods and going to public high schools and Harvard was looking for them. A huge part of my experience at Harvard to this day is David Evans [David L. Evans], who they totally appropriately just gave the, whatever that freedom--that medal that Skip [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] gives out and his--I forget which one it is--the--I hope they don't--the Du Bois Medal [W.E.B. Du Bois Medal]. Speaker 2: The Du Bois. It's the--that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Hopefully they don't call it the Hutchinson medal. Yeah cut that out of the tape (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But Dave Evans had become the admissions director at Harvard two years or three years before I got there. So David Evans admitted me and he was the first black admissions director at Harvard College and he's still admitting students today. It's quite a remarkable thing, and so Dave Evans, who had grown up in Alabama, he would go out there and he'd look for the best, most talented black students he could find anywhere. So it was really a quite extraordinary collection of people and that was the core of my social circle. But the good news was, unlike when my wife [Ann Marie Wilkins] went to school, which was four years earlier 'cause she came young to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], where if you were seen walking down the street with a white person, people might throw something at you. There wasn't really much of that. As long as you hung out with the black folks, you could also hang out with the white folks and you could be involved in activities and you could have friends. I'm not saying there was no pressure around there. There probably was more pressure around let's say interracial dating certainly than there is today. But it was a much more open time, but yet a time where people felt a real sense of identity and there was a real group, and frankly for me that's the most important thing about Harvard College. Luckily, I was a pretty good student, not because I worked particularly hard at it, and again Harvard was structured so you didn't have to work that hard at it. We had like a three week reading period after Christmas. So exams ended before Christmas, I mean classes ended like a week or two before Christmas and the exams were not until middle to late January. So essentially you could pretty much do nothing all semester and then you'd have like a month to do everything to get your house in order. And if you were good enough at doing that kind of stuff, and I had gone to a school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] that had prepared me well to be a liberal arts major of some kind, so I was a government major at Harvard. School wasn't that difficult. And for me the most important thing about Harvard College was the friends that I made and the social circle that I had. Story_ID: 644576 Speaker 1: So can you talk about who you were in school with, you know during that time? Some of the names of the people. You mentioned Tony Chase [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase] already (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, Tony Chase was--is, is still my best friend in the world. He was my roommate; I met him the very first day. I never will forget, I had gotten to school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're two fairly different--now, you have--the thing I wanted to say in here is that you had experienced a lot of people, but he's from Houston. Speaker 2: Right, he's from Houston, Texas. His father [HistoryMaker John S. Chase] was a very famous architect. He'd gone to prep school--boarding school [Episcopal High School, Alexandria, Virginia], which was hugely different from the kind of upbringing that I had. And again I got to school early. Now here's one thing I did know because my sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] had gone to school before me and so I knew that you wanted to be there when the dorms opened because that way you could get the best room. So Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], again it's sort of luxurious living. We were living actually right outside of the yard [Harvard Yard, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because they didn't have enough space in the yard, so we lived in a place called Claverly [Claverly Hall], which is still there. It was one of these things where it was like a two bedroom--two bedrooms and a living room and they put three people in there, which meant that there was a single and a double. And so I made sure that we were there at nine a.m. when they opened up the thing and I plopped my stuff right down in the single room (laughter). Then I waited for my roommates to arrive and several hours later Tony Chase arrived, and I always tease him about this, he arrived, he walked in the door in a white full length leather coat, John Shaft style, and holding a lacrosse stick, which I had never seen in my entire life. So the stick with a basket on it right. So here's this black guy with an Afro and a John Shaft full length white leather coat holding this thing, which I'd never seen before, which looks like, I don't know, like a sphere or something. I'm like what is this, right? So, that was my first memory of Tony Chase and that was forty-five years ago almost and we've been best friends ever since. We had one more roommate named Mark Roberts [ph.], who we've kind of lost touch with, but he married another of our classmates. I'd say the people who you might know who I was in school with, of which there were many, one of the most prominent was Cornel West. I got to know Cornel, who I actually just missed, he just came here but I was out of town, because Tony, as was his want, was dating a girl who was a sophomore when he was only a freshman so that was like a big deal, and she lived in Leverett House and her roommate whose name is Mary Johnson [Mary Johnson Osirim], who is now I think a professor of history or sociology or something in some college someplace [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], was dating Cornel West, and Cornel was a senior. The first time I remember ever seeing Cornel was, I was in their room, we were kind of hanging out and Cornel came in and basically he looked exactly the same as he does today. Same hair, same little wire rim glasses. He was carrying a stack of books, only instead of a black suit, he had a black leather jacket, black jeans and a black turtleneck. Otherwise he looked exactly the same, he talked exactly the same. It was clear right from the start that he was one of the most brilliant people that I ever met. He was reading Marx [Karl Marx] and philosophy and talking revolution and he was a senior, I think he might have been a three year senior, and everybody knew he was brilliant. But he was cool and brilliant you know, so. So he was there, I'm trying to think of who else kind of from my college class is somebody who--I mean there are lots of people who have become--so there's a guy named Emery Carr- Emery Clark [sic. HistoryMaker Emery Brown], who--he's a very famous now research biologist who has a joint appointment, he actually--he has a joint appointment at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and at Harvard, and he has a Ph.D. and an M.D. I mean he's one of these super brainiacs, and it was really lovely because we were actually both inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Sciences [Cambridge, Massachusetts] the same year. And you know, it just made me--it was wonderful to see him there and you know we see each other periodically. There was--you know it was a--I'd say there are many people who are--you know who populate the, the kind of upper echelons of American society in almost every way. Story_ID: 644577 Speaker 1: I mean we had people who were really talented in the arts; we had people really talented in sports. So James Brown, you know the guy who does 'The NFL Today' on whatever that is, CBS, he is--I think he might have been a senior when we were freshmen, or maybe he had just graduated. Renaldo Nehemiah who did the hurdles in the Olympics [sic.] was in school with us. Alan Haymon [Al Haymon], one of my best friends is Alan Haymon who you should--I doubt you'll--if you could get Alan--you got Alan to talk to you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, people say I will not get him but-- Speaker 1: You'll never ever get Alan, but he would be the most fascinating interview of all time. So Alan Haymon, who has gone on to become without question--well he's now the world's biggest most important boxing promoter and he was--what's his name who just retired--Floyd May- he created Floyd Mayweather. I mean he created the model for Floyd Mayweather. Before Mayweather, Don King and the promoters they owned the events, they rented out the arenas, they cut the TV deals and the closed circuit deals and then they would pay the fighters, and they would pay them a lot of money, 10, $20 million for Muhammad Ali or Mike Tyson. But the promoter ran the show. Alan said to Floyd Mayweather, "Why are you doing that? You should own the event, you hire out the event, you get the cable TV deal and you pay the other fighter." So when he fought Manny Pacquiao, it's Floyd Mayweather who is basically in charge of the whole thing, and that was Alan's deal and Alan is the most important boxing promoter. But before that he was Michael Jackson's--he did all Michael Jackson's concert tour around the 'Thriller' tour, but I first met Alan at the Harvard House of Pizza [Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is on Massachusetts Avenue, maybe the second or third day we were here. He was dressed in red pants, red jacket, and red platform shoes. He was from Shaker Heights, Ohio and we bonded over pizza at the Harvard House of Pizza and we've been friends ever since. And Alan did his first concert promotion when he was a junior at Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. He said there is no black music here and so he went and he rented out the Berklee school of music [Berklee College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] performance arena, which is still Berklee auditorium [Berklee Performance Center, Boston, Massachusetts], whatever it's kind of their main thing. Somehow, I don't know quite how he got in touch with Grover Washington, Jr. and he persuaded Grover Washington to come do a concert here and Alan was the promoter. Then Alan got all of us to go sell tickets. And instead of us saying, "Oh yeah, we'll help you sell tickets for 10 percent of the gate or 1 percent of your future revenue lifetime," we said, "Can we come to the after party? Can we meet Grover Washington? Are there going to be girls there?" (Laughter) So we did all this free work so we could go and hang out, which we did at the after party which was fun and there were girls there, so I guess it was worth it (laughter). Speaker 2: But he started--he really went in the promotion business, 'cause he (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no. I looked around, he promoted a Rick James concert while we were in--this may have been while I was in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it might have been while we were still in college, which then--while he was in college he was the biggest black concert promoter certainly in Boston [Massachusetts] and maybe in New England. He bought a house, which he still might own in Newton [Massachusetts] or someplace which he called the Rick James estate. It had a pool and stuff and he was like twenty something years old, he was just a--but he, he is brilliant. Brilliant, brilliant, brilliant. Anyhow, he had a mind for business and he had the will to, to do it and he did it. Story_ID: 644578 Speaker 1: Think about what these numbers did, you know because just the generation before people were coming in such small numbers. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They are having a totally different experience (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Totally different, this was--no, my sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] is four years older than me, so I know what it was like. My sister--so I graduate from--I go to high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] in 1969, she goes to college in 1969, and she is in that generation where you know--she wrote a book about some of this, which is called 'Damn Near White' ['Damn Near White: An African American Family's Rise from Slavery to Bittersweet Success,' Carolyn Marie Wilkins], but you know, to be called light, bright and damn near white when you're in 1969 in the age of black is beautiful. But it's also as you say a numbers problem and it's also--again they were going out as Ann Marie [Wilkins' wife, Ann Marie Wilkins] will tell you, at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] they would go to the prisons and they would say, "Who are the smartest black kids in the prison?" And they would let them into Cornell. Some of them--one guy who had come out of some kind of juvenile jail or something, one day they found that he was selling IBM Selectrics from Cornell on the street in Manhattan [New York], like just selling them out the back of his car. Okay, but then there were people who became neurosurgeons. So this is the thing that it was a lot easier when I went there and there had been a lot more preparation because again many of the students, though certainly not all, were people who had already had some experience with integration while they were in high school. But the return on investment for the black students they took, who they allegedly took a chance on, to let them in has been astounding. This is what Ted Wells [HistoryMaker Theodore V. Wells, Jr.] said. He said the ROI, you know the return on investment on blacks is way higher than any other group, and it's why when I did the first black alumni reunion [Celebration of Black Alumni], which I did in 2000, where we brought probably at that point five hundred or six hundred black graduates came back to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] for the first time ever it had been done by any school in the year 2000. I got Neil Rudenstine, who was then the president of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to give kind of a Saturday keynote. It was at Sanders Theatre [Cambridge, Massachusetts]--are you tapping her shoulder because you want her for something? Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: And it was at Sanders Theatre, and there were probably four hundred people there or something like that, and Neil Rudenstine sat on a chair, I introduced him or maybe Tree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree] introduced him I can't remember. He came out there and stood up and he said, "You know everybody's always talking about what we've done for you, how we let you in, how we gave you your education, we gave you a chance, we let you into the American society," he said, "but we haven't done anything for you compared to what you've done for us. What you've made this institution, how much better it is now that you've come." I can hardly talk about it without crying, it was such an emotional moment for people who've been told for years that they've been done a favor, special treatment or affirmative action or whatever you want to call it. He said, "No, you did us a favor," and I'm firmly convinced that's true. You just have to look around at what the university is like and then what those graduates have gone on to become. So I could name to you some more famous people, but the more important thing, and the reason why I did the reunion, so I told the story a little bit in my keynote address at the celebration, which by the way if you want you can have, we're going to post it, that you know it was going to be the millennium and the black students, who have always been really active here at the law school, wanted to do something and they came to me and Lani [HistoryMaker Lani Guinier] and they said--actually we met in Lani's office at Griswold [Griswold Hall] and they said, "We want to really do something special." We said, "Well, I don't know, what did you have in mind?" And they said, "Well, why don't we get all the members of the Congressional Black Caucus," 'cause at that time that was the highest black elected official we could ever imagine or maybe some judges or something. I said, "That would be fine, but why don't we showcase what's really special here, which is all of these unbelievable black students who have come through here and look at all the amazing things they're doing. Why don't we just bring them all together and show people in one place what diversity and inclusion really means." And then they said, "That's a great idea. Why don't you go do it?" So I spent the next year of my life doing it, but I'm sure it will be one of those things that will be on my--if I get a, if I get a obit [obituary] in The New York Times--that'll be the second thing. The first thing will be that I clerked for Thurgood Marshall, and then the second thing will be that I organized this celebration, and I'm very proud of that. Story_ID: 644579 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I want three things, important things, at Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] while you were there. Speaker 2: So as I started to say before, the most important thing for me about Harvard College was the--was being in this big black social environment, but that turned out to you know have some things that we--that kind of we did that turned out to be important because they were--again we were transforming everything. It had been--1968 is always the watershed year when the number of blacks goes from a trickle to, not quite a flood, but to some critical mass. So there are lots of things that are the first. So for example, the black student organization had kind of--it was very strong and militant in the early and mid to late '60s [1960s] and then it kind of petered out. I think it was called the OAU or something [sic. Association of African and Afro American Students], I forget what it was called, but Tony Chase [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase], my roommate, and I decided we should reinvigorate this. So I think it was our junior year or our senior year, we didn't--so the old organization was kind of dead, but we didn't quite know how to resuscitate it so we just started something else, we called it the BSA, we called it the Black Students Association, and Tony appropriately was the first president and I forget I had some silly title. But I was like Rahm Emanuel to Tony. I was like assistant to the president or something, chief of staff or something. But it was actually significant because it kind of reenergized the black students around issues and around ideas and around the responsibility of, now that we were juniors and seniors, for the younger black students who were coming in. Many of them, actually it's funny now when they talk about us they talk about us like we were the role models. So here's some names; Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick], so the governor of Massachusetts, he was a year behind me at Harvard--behind me and Tony and he moved in the Dunster House where we lived as undergraduates. Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] who has become one of the most influential financiers in the world and also one of the most renowned art collectors, and Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] also another Wall Street pioneer. And Bill, Bill and Ray were I think either one year or two years behind us. Whenever I see Ray he says, "You and Tony Chase paved the way." Well what we did was, we created some kind of structure where there was more cohesion among the black students and particularly between the more senior ones and the more junior ones. So that turned out to be a big thing. Another thing that was a big thing-- Speaker 1: Were you doing more programs or it was programs and parties? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a lot of parties frankly. I mean, I think--if you really woke us up and said, "Why did you do this?" I would say probably more parties than programs, but this was a time, remember so now we're in 1975, 1976, you get things--when is Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978]? Maybe that's 1974, or '5 [1975], something like that. You know you've got--and I think DeFunis [DeFunis v. Odegaard, 1974] comes before Bakke. I don't know if you know anything about constitutional law (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think Bakke is later. Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe that's '77 [sic. 1978] or something, but in any event the attack on affirmative action has begun. Derek Bok, who we eventually give the Charles Hamilton Houston Medal of Freedom to along with Walter Leonard [HistoryMaker Walter J. Leonard], is a complex figure, I'll just say. I'd say the protest mostly around Bok were not so much around black students in affirmative action, they were around divesting in South Africa. So another big thing that comes is that I have a friend named Felipe Noguera and somehow he gets some connection, he starts something called the Third World student organization [Third World Student Alliance] and there are all these organizations, and they bring Bob Marley to, I'm pretty sure Harvard's stadium [Harvard Stadium, Boston, Massachusetts] and this is a huge cultural--a huge event in school. But there were again, so the protests were mostly now around things beginning like--although this was the first time I had ever heard of apartheid issues and divestiture issues and all of that, were just beginning in the 1970s. Story_ID: 644580 Speaker 1: Then I was always involved in theater, so I--there was a black organization, a black theatrical organization called BlackCAST, which I think stood for community and students together [sic. Harvard Black Community and Student Theater Group], even though I'm not exactly sure what we did that was community and students together (laughter), but it was a--we put on black plays like the 'Day of Absence' [Douglas Turner Ward] and we put on--I'm trying to remember what else I was in, but I was in several plays, but the biggest thing was when there was a black director whose name was Tony [ph.]--oh gosh what was Tony's last name, I can see him but I can't think of his last name, beginning with a L, sort of French sounding name. He was very artistic, and he was in the big drama club and he got the chance to direct a play on the mainstage [Loeb Drama Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. We did 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show'] on the mainstage. Speaker 2: Jean Genet. Speaker 1: Jean Genet, and I was the judge, and that was a huge deal because there had never been a black play on the mainstage with a black cast. So that kind of theater was an important part, in fact actually partly the reason why I'm such good friends with Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] is because, I think, was it 'Day of Absence' [sic. 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men,' Lonne Elder III]? I forget the name of the play we did, but I played a pimp in which I got to straighten my hair. So I got my hair conked and the pimp was Blue Haven, and I got to wear this big blue suede coat and this big hat and one of the--I think she was either one of my ladies or some other female character was Kathy--I can't remember her maiden, but she's now Kathy Chenault [Kathryn Chenault], she married Ken Chenault. Ken might have been dating her at the time 'cause he was a law school student and she was at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts]. So again the other thing about being here was there were black students everywhere. So the best black radio station was out of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it was called the Ghetto and the deejays were famous all over campus. There was a guy called Ace [HistoryMaker Gerald Adolph] and they would have these parties at MIT and everybody would come, and actually Tony Chase [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase] and I had a radio show at WHRB [WHRB Radio, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which we called 'Night Birds' [ph.] 'cause we came out like midnight until three o'clock in the morning (laughter) or some ridiculous thing like that. We played jazz and soul music and stuff. So again all these things were new. There was no black radio--there was no black radio on the radio waves, so black radio was college radio, which was being created by people like us in all these WHRB--I mean WERS [WERS Radio, Boston, Massachusetts], which was the Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] radio station. They had a black radio show. There were always these shows, right? Because there was no black radio anywhere in Boston [Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 644581 Speaker 1: Maybe the most salient thing, was I arrive when busing begins, and so 1973 or 1974 is the beginning of busing. And Boston [Massachusetts] was without question the most racist place I'd ever been in my entire life. Now that sounds funny coming from Chicago [Illinois], which is notoriously racist, which Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] called the most racist place he'd ever been. But here's the difference in Chicago. Chicago is a big giant city and everybody knew their place and everybody stayed in their place and so you just didn't go to Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois]. You didn't have to go to Bridgeport. There was no way that you were going to mix it up with kids who you knew you shouldn't be in that neighborhood, and frankly the white people didn't come in the neighborhoods we lived in. Here, Boston was a much smaller city and bussing made people have to go into the other people's neighborhoods, and it was the most viciously racist place. It's the only place, only time I've ever been called a nigger in my life was walking down Mount Auburn Street headed to Dunster House where I was living, which was one of the houses on the river [Charles River], and it's like seven o'clock at night and at the time I had this giant Afro, and a group of kids who undoubtedly were from south of here or Chelsea [Massachusetts] or something like that. They pull up alongside of me, roll down the window and yell out, "Nigger go home." Now, of course if I'd had any presence of mind I would have said to them, "I am going home. Why the fuck don't you go home?" But of course I didn't say that. I was like completely freaked out that somebody was calling me a nigger, which had never happened in my entire life in Chicago. So this defined everything, you had to be really careful about where you went. So if you took the subway, there was a kid from Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who took the subway to the airport [General Edward Lawrence Logan International Airport, Boston, Massachusetts], and if you missed the airport--so you have to take the Red Line to Government Center, then you take the Blue Line, and if you miss the airport stop, which he did 'cause he wasn't really familiar, he got off at Wonderland, walked around to get on the other side of the platform and gotten beaten bad enough to be put in the hospital. So I was here when they beat the lawyer [HistoryMaker Theodore C. Landsmark] with the American flag in that iconic picture on the steps of Boston's city hall [Boston City Hall, Boston, Massachusetts], the black lawyer. So that was, for all of us, so we lived in this kind of cocoon, but we were all quite aware that around us was--the city was in turmoil over busing. Story_ID: 644582 Speaker 1: So this--so those three things are all within the community--they're all within sort of the black community that you--became your adopted community. I mean that's all the things you're talking about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you know this is--I spent a lot of time, as you well know, interviewing people about their lives or their careers and like many people in my generation, in fact actually somebody I know who I will tell you off the record who it was, when I interviewed him about going to college and going to law school he would say, "You know my only regret is I didn't meet any white people." Dina [Dina Alsowayel Chase], who is Tony's [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase] wife, probably won't mind me saying this, she says this all the time, so said, so she was at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], and remember she's from Saudi Arabia, but we didn't know what an Arab was so she kind of looked black, so therefore she had only two choices, to try to pass for white, which wasn't going to work, or she was going to be black. So therefore, she just hung out with us. Plus she was gorgeous and so all the brothers, they didn't know what Saudi Arabia was either. She looked like a sister. So she was dating all these guys that went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and she would always say, "You know like for the first year I was at Wellesley, for two years, I thought Harvard was a black school because the only people I ever saw were black people. The only people who came to the parties at Wellesley were black people, the only people who I went to see and the only parties there was nothing but black people." So again I say it wasn't that you couldn't talk to a white person, in fact I did make some white friends when I was there, but the world was a black world and it was a big world. So because there were so many people and for somebody like me who had come--I thought thirty black students in high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] was a big world, now there were 250 and that was just at Harvard. So, yeah it was a black--I--my college world, you know even more than my law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] world, although my law school world was sort of like this too, it was a black world. Story_ID: 644583 Speaker 1: Now what are you doing summers, David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins]? Speaker 2: I, I went home to Chicago [Illinois] and I worked for the electric company. I worked for Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company], in fact I was just--I tell the story all the time when I talk in my current job about the, about the changes that have happened to the world and how they are restructuring the world, one of which is the rise and the speed and sophistication of information technology. I always tell people my first job was in Commonwealth Edison, I got the--how did I get the job? Because my father [Julian Wilkins] was friends with--his last name was Dugas-- Speaker 1: Oh Lester Dugas [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Lester Dugas, who was on--was like a senior executive at Commonwealth Edison, and so my father asked Lester Dugas, and he was the only black, if I could get a job. "My son needs a job in the summer." That's actually not quite true, my first job was, I was flipping burgers at McDonald's like pretty much everybody on 67th [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue]. Why? Because the guy who owned that McDonald's was my father's client and he was the first black person, Herman Petty, to ever own a McDonald's--to have a McDonald's franchise at least in the City of Chicago. So but then when I was in college, I got the job at Commonwealth Edison and I worked in the file room and one year I worked in the computer room, which I say, when I tell the story it was like a giant floor, five times bigger than the floor of this building filled with enormous big white machines with big tape drives spinning around. You had to dress up like a hospital orderly to go in there, literally with gloves and a hairnet and all that. All of it had less computing power than my iPhone right, so. But that was what I did, and that was one of the best things, you want to talk about formative experiences, so I worked essentially at blue collar jobs. I didn't have any fancy internships, I worked in the electric company. Why? Because it paid a lot of money, I was making union wages. So I think in nineteen seventy--in the summer of 1973 I probably made fifteen dollars an hour, in fact I made enough either between freshman and sophomore year or sophomore and junior year to buy a car. Now a car costs three thousand dollars then. I got a brand new Plymouth Valiant Swinger, which was just the same as a Dodge Dart and I paid I think twenty-eight hundred dollars for it, and I saved up enough money from working a couple of summers at the electric company. Then I drove it back to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was a big deal to have a car. But those jobs were great for me because I learned how ordinary people worked and what it is like to have a job, a real ordinary job, and what it's like to be treated like you're stupid just because you have an ordinary job. Because these people--the bosses would treat them like they were stupid and they would treat me like--they didn't know who I was and they would treat me just like they treated them and that was incredibly--I kept that lesson my whole life. I've tried at least--you have to ask the people of the world, but I've tried never to judge someone by the kind of job they have, or not treat somebody with respect just because they have a blue collar or a basic office job, and to recognize every day that no matter how hard I work and no matter how much pressure I have and all that, that I am so lucky because I have a job where I get to use my brain and where people respect me and all those things that are really hard for people who work in regular ordinary jobs. And many of those people were incredibly smart and funny and nice and I made good friends and it was a great--it was, that was a very important experience for me. Story_ID: 644584 Speaker 1: When do you start thinking about law school then? Speaker 2: So, you know I, I suppose--I became a government major, which is, you know at Harvard we call political science government because we think we should be running the government, so, and you know I could see that law school was where--the natural place I would be heading. Then kind of--I forget, when I was a junior I had a little bit of a crisis of--I really started to worry that I was just doing this because it was easy and it was the thing that I knew I could do. I suppose maybe at that point, I'm thinking a little bit about it because that's what my father [Julian Wilkins] does. So I almost switched majors as a junior and I took these psychology classes 'cause I thought maybe that would be really interesting and maybe I'd try something totally different. I took like a couple of psychology classes, and then it turned out I didn't like them anymore. It's not that I didn't like them, but they didn't really get me any more excited than when I was in my government classes, and I couldn't really imagine--there were too many numbers and I was no good at numbers. So law school seemed like the natural thing to do and back then no one took time off. Now the one thing I did try to do because in--I don't know if I talked about this one of the formative experiences of my life, which again how these things come back. So I went to Latin America in 1971 with my family and I went to Brazil and so when I came to Harvard, I had this idea that I would do a junior year in Brazil because Brazil was like a paradise, the girls were beautiful and I thought, oh wouldn't that be a cool thing to do. But again this is what Harvard was like they said, "Sure, you can do your junior year abroad, you just have to do your junior year again back at Harvard" (laughter). There was no study abroad program, no idea that this would be a good thing for people to do. So the idea of taking time off sort of never really occurred to me and especially because that meant like work and the only work I'd ever really known is like working in the electric company [Commonwealth Edison Company], that didn't seem like a good idea. And everybody else was applying to graduate school, and the choices were medical school, which was out because I didn't like the sight of blood, and business school, which actually people like Tony [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase] and others were applying to these joint programs or to business school. I never did numbers or math, never really thought of myself as a business person, and law school or some Ph.D. program, I never thought about that, that was egghead academics you know, never thought about doing that. So law school just like for many people became the default, and again I was lucky I was a good student. Harvard, again remember I'm following this cohort through, so now Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] is--now wants to have a bigger cohort of black students, so I'm kind of following the wave. I know how to do Harvard, I applied to Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], I applied to Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California], I got into all of them, but I go to Yale and it's like got five black students there or something like that. I'm saying the whole fun thing about being at Harvard was all the--why would I do that? Plus it's in a crappy town and again California seem too far away. I never really was a California person. So Harvard was easy, but I did say to myself, "Okay, if I'm going to do this I really need to decide whether--I really need to apply myself," which I would say I had not applied myself at all throughout Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Again I don't mean to say I'm arrogant, but it wasn't that hard for me and Harvard made it easy for you to basically cram at the end. But law school, I had a tutor, a guy who was an economics tutor, a brother named Jerome Culp [Jerome M. Culp, Jr.] who became a law professor, who became one of the founders of critical race theory, who eventually went to teach at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], who died very tragically very young, was my economics tutor and I'd see him studying all the time in the dining hall. In fact, that's also where I met John Payton because Jerome and John Payton were classmates. John Payton would come over to study with Jerome because the dining hall at the college stayed open all night and they would be studying all the time. I was like, oh man this stuff is going to be hard. I said I should decide, if I'm going to do this I should really do it and I should really jump into it and really just do it the right way. So when I came I really got into it and I did all the work, I read all the assignments and I decided that I really wanted to do well, and the thing that I really--the kind of goal that I set for myself was I wanted to get an A in Phil Areeda's [Phillip E. Areeda] contracts class. Story_ID: 644585 Speaker 1: So who are your professors [at Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? And you and Tony [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase] co- are at--this is-- Speaker 2: So we enter the same (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Class of '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977], right. Speaker 1: So class of seven-- Speaker 2: We enter--we're 1Ls together and then Tony goes off to-- Speaker 1: To the joint, joint-- Speaker 2: --to the--he does his second year at the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then back and forth. So he graduates in '81 [1981], but if you ask him who he's close to, he's close to his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Class, class of '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that he comes in--and that's why everybody says--I just was talking to, showing that I'm getting old, I was just talking to one of my best friends from Chicago [Illinois], Maurice Arthur's daughter [Morgan Arthur], who's applying to law school and she wants to do the joint program. I said always do the law school first. So that way you have your classes at law school then you do your business school class and you're close to them and then--all right, anyway--so my professors (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so, so, yeah, who are your professors? Don't you--you have Ferguson don't you? Speaker 2: No, I-- Speaker 1: Do you have Fer-- Speaker 2: No, but I work eventually for Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]-- Speaker 1: Oh, I see, so who are your class-- Speaker 2: So my first year professors, and again this is the kind of stuff you never forget. I had Buffalo Bob Keeton [Robert Keeton] for torts as we called it, 'cause he was like a big Texan you know, and that was the first class I ever had at eight a.m. in the morning, scared to death in one of those giant 150 person rooms at Langdale [Langdale Hall]. I had Phil Areeda [Phillip E. Areeda] for contracts, I had Charlie Nesson [Charles Nesson] who was a young kind of hip professor for criminal law. I had--who did I have for property? Oh, I had Lance Liebman for property, which turned out to be a good thing because Lance was into all sorts of unconventional kinds of--like urban planning and stuff like that. He wrote a book ['Property and Law'] with Charlie Haar [Charles M. Haar], and then I had, for civil procedure we had Betsy Bartholet [Elizabeth Bartholet], which was her first year teaching, and I feel so much for Betsy when I had my first year of teaching 'cause she was coming totally from the outside, never taught before, it was a totally terrifying experience for her and my class was really mean to her because they had all these alpha male professors and Betsy was the only woman and she was clearly not experienced and they basically just took it out on her. Again sections were, we had 140 people in every class and Betsy was the first semester and then Abe Chayes [Abram Chayes], who had been away in Washington [D.C.] being the legal advisor to the state department [U.S. Department of State] I think, so this would have been nineteen seventy--under--would that have been right? This would have been 1977, or he--maybe he was doing something--maybe he was on sabbatical or something, I forget what he was doing. But he wasn't there, he came in and taught the second part of civil procedure. Story_ID: 644586 Speaker 1: You know, these were great professors; and rumor had it that, that, that Phil Areeda [Phillip E. Areeda] had never given an A to a black person. Now who knew, you know it's one of those kind of urban myths, who knew, but no one knew anybody who'd gotten an A from Phil Areeda and you know of course there were lots of conspiracy theories and people thought, oh he's a racist and that will never happen. So I was determined that I was going to get an A from Phil Areeda, and at the end of my first year I did the single most anal compulsive thing I've ever done in my life either before or since. I wrote something like a 250 page contract outline by hand that had every case, every rule, and every, every hornbook thing, you know. It was like coordinated--you want to stop? Speaker 2: Unh-uh-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so-- Speaker 2: --you got to let me do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, it had every, every rule, every hornbook, every, you know every case. I had like the treatise, you know Wilson on contracts [ph.] or whatever coordinated in there because I was determined that I was going to get an A from Phil Areeda. And I have to say, I did get an A from Phil Areeda, but that contracts outline actually turned out to be way more important to me than getting an A from Phil Areeda, although that turned out to be very important to me, 'cause Phil Areeda wrote my clerkship letters of recommendation, which turned out I'm sure have a big effect on me being able to get a job with Chief Judge Feinberg [Wilfred Feinberg] of the Second Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit] and Justice Marshall [Thurgood Marshall]. But when I graduated, I gave the contract outline, in fact I probably gave it after my first year to BLSA [Harvard Black Law Students Association] or maybe I gave it to somebody I knew who was coming in the next year and they gave it to BLSA. Anyway to make a very long story short, I graduated in 1980, my wife comes in, Ann--my future wife, Ann Marie [Ann Marie Wilkins] then Woodridge, comes in as a first year student in 1980 and she's taking contracts as all students have to do. She doesn't have a readout, but it doesn't really matter 'cause I had everything in the world in there, and somebody hands her the outline, that they'd Xeroxed the outline and it had been circulating among all the black students. I had no idea this had ever happened, and so I meet her when I come here in November to interview students, in another story which is not worth probably telling, why I'm there. So I come there and one of my best friends from Chicago [Illinois], John Carr [ph.], is in her class at law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. This is in 1982, so they are now third year students about to graduate, and John goes to pick me up--he says he is going to pick me up from the airport. But (laughter), and maybe we should edit this out, John can't come because his then girlfriend, he had a fight with her and she has thrown the keys to his car in the Charles River off the Eliot Bridge. So John, probably well deserved actually, you can edit that part out, but John then goes to his best friend, Ann Marie, and says, "Can I use your car to pick up my friend from the airport?" So she picks me--he picks me up from the airport and we have to return the car, so we come back, she's living across Everett Street, and what are those things called? Something Terrace [Terry Terrace, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or something they're called over there, and (cough) in an apartment and comes in and then we give her keys back and John introduces me. She says, "David Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], oh I know who you are." I said, "Really?" And she said, "Yeah, you wrote that contracts outline," which she and every other black student apparently had been using to study contracts because it was the single most anal compulsive thing I'd ever done in my life and so there it is. So the contracts outline turned out to be very valuable to me. Story_ID: 644587 Speaker 1: So I did very well the first year of law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I--so I really set myself (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So wait a minute, so you, so you set your goal, but you set in Phil Areeda's [Phillip E. Areeda] class-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but I set my goal to do--and I really wanted to make the law review [Harvard Law Review]. Now at this point you could say to me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now, now why? Where is the-- Speaker 1: Why-- Speaker 2: And then let me ask you, because your father also leaves Jenner and Block in '76 [1976]-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know, and that, that caused--that was a-- Speaker 1: That's a very traumatic ti-- Speaker 2: Period in the family's life. Speaker 1: This was a very traumatic time, and so that is I guess--so he leaves in the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that's the year before you go to law school, so can I ask-- Speaker 1: Go to law school. So is it 1976, is that the year? Speaker 2: That's what you said in your other interview. And you know the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think researchers, fact checkers, we may need to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it's around that period. The reason, I think it--I think you're right-- Speaker 2: Father left Jenner and Block in 1976 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy-six [1976]. Yeah, I think that's right because by the time I'm a first year--the summer after my first year-- Speaker 2: 'Cause that may be why you're even thinking about psychology, I don't know I was-- Speaker 1: You know that would be--I mean again I'm sure there's some kind of deeper thing going on, but that isn't the way I thought about it. Speaker 2: Right, at the time. Speaker 1: Although you know, I now know that my father suffered from depression, a deep depression, and I'm sure at some level I was aware of that because that was a very much, a ever present part of our lives. But I, but I never put those two things together, just like it was not until I went back to Chicago [Illinois] and met people who were old friends of my parents [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins and Julian Wilkins] and when--this is when I was at the American Bar Foundation [Chicago, Illinois], this is when we reconnect in 1995, and I'm teaching at Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] and I'm at the bar foundation and I'm doing this project where I'm interviewing black lawyers in corporate law firms. Somebody said, "Well of course you're doing that just because of your father." And that was the first time that it ever fully occurred to me that was probably why I was doing it. So just like that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so you do well in all your classes. Speaker 1: I do well in all my classes actually, except civil procedure, which ironically I end up teaching, because you know I never got what Betsy Bartholet [Elizabeth Bartholet] was trying to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was having a hard-- Speaker 1: She was having a really hard time. Speaker 2: I can't, I can't even believe, I'm thinking I know her name because I had Arthur Miller [Arthur R. Miller] so you wouldn't (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had Arthur Miller, you had the opposite right, yes. Speaker 2: Opposite. But, but you know he made it very entertaining-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, and then you had-- Speaker 1: He was a showman. Speaker 2: Right, and you had Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.], you know people-- Speaker 1: So Clyde had a--you know but again it was hard to be a woman, to be a black person (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right. Story_ID: 644588 Speaker 1: I missed making the law review by like half a percentage point on grades. Speaker 2: On that first year (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On that first time, and so then you could write on to the law review. And at first I wasn't quite sure whether I was going to do it, but then I said--because you had to do it right after your exams. It was really torture, you had to take your exams and then do the writing-- Speaker 2: Meaning af- so you're talking about after your first year exams, then you have to-- Speaker 1: Yes, so this was when the law review was switching from being all grades, where they just took the top five students in every section, I think I was number six or number seven, you know which out of 144 or whatever it was, I was very proud of it, I got very good grades. But then they had a writing competition where they would take up to five (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you're saying a hundred and--a hundred and fo- out of each section? Speaker 1: They took five--in the old days, the law review took twenty students and they just took the top five grade point averages from every section. (Cough) Then starting sometime shortly before I got there, they started taking forty students and they would take twenty purely on grades and twenty on some combination of grades and writing. Because people were complaining to them, "What do the grades have to do with the skills of being an editor or a writer?" So you had to stay after your last exam, I mean imagine this torture, you had to stay after you've just finished the most exhausting thing in your life, because remember we had two exams that were full year exams. One exam was your entire grade, one of which was contracts, and then you had to stay for another week and do this thing where you had to write a case comment and do research and editing and all this stuff. So anyway I did it, I wasn't going to do it and then I said to myself, "I'll regret it if I don't do it." Now people say, "Oh that's because you wanted to be a professor." I had no thought ever of being a professor. I did it because I wanted to be a law clerk, and in particular I wanted to be a law clerk for Thurgood Marshall. So the other goal that I set for myself was I said, "If you do really well, you could be a law clerk on the [U.S.] Supreme Court," and that was held up as being the greatest thing you could do as a law student. For me the greatest--it was not to be a law clerk for anybody, it was to be a law clerk for Thurgood Marshall because back to my father [Julian Wilkins], my father--Thurgood Marshall was his hero, and one of my father's proudest moments is when he was a solo practitioner, is that Thurgood Marshall came to Chicago [Illinois] to argue some case and he camped out in what was then my [paternal] grandfather's [J. Ernest Wilkins, Sr.] office, which my father was working in at the time. I knew you couldn't be a law clerk unless you were--or I thought I knew you couldn't be a law clerk unless you were on the Harvard Law Review. It turns out that was false because Cass Sunstein, who is probably one of the most famous professors in the world as a university professor, he was in law school a year ahead of me and he was the head of the CRCL Law Review [Harvard Civil Rights Civil Liberties Law Review] and he then clerked for Thurgood Marshall a year before me or two years before me I guess. But anyway, so I stay and I do the writing competition and they notify me sometime in July while I was working in Kirkland and Ellis [Kirkland and Ellis, LLP] as a summer associate that I had made the law review and of course everything changed about the way Kirkland and Ellis thought about me, about the way people treated me once they realized I was going back to be on the Harvard Law Review. That was clearly a huge moment for me because I never would be able to do what I'm doing now if I hadn't been on the law review because I wouldn't have got the Supreme Court clerkship; and when Jim Vorenberg [James Vorenberg] went to look for smart black people to bring back to teach at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], I wouldn't have been on the list. Story_ID: 644589 Speaker 1: David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], so your clerkship that, that summer, now who is also at Kirkland? 'Cause Kirkland had a reputation for being like not very-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was not-- Speaker 1: --conducive to the black experience (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was not--yes not conducive--it was not con- it was a tough place and they were proud of being a tough place, and I say to people all the time, I say to my students today, Kirkland Ellis [Kirkland and Ellis, LLP] is either the best law firm or the worst law firm. It's the best if you are that kind of person and you can succeed in that kind of environment. When they like you, they love you, and if not they will crush you. They decided they loved me and they decided they loved me really for I think maybe three kinds of reasons. One, I was from Chicago [Illinois]. My father [Julian Wilkins], even though he left Jenner and Block was somebody that people knew. He had been the librarian in the bar association so you know I was kind of like--going to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. Second, I worked my tail off 'cause I decided, again I was in this mindset where I was going to work hard and decide whether I really liked this stuff or not. So I as a summer associate I'd pull all nighters, I worked really hard. And the third thing is, I got on the law review [Harvard Law Review] and I was--the guy who ran the summer program, a guy named Don Kempf [Donald G. Kempf, Jr.] and he was a kind of--all the people who went on to run Kirkland and Ellis were, when I was there as a summer associate, were like rising junior partners. So Don Kempf became the head of litigation, Jack Levin [Jack S. Levin] became the head of the firm; I met him as a young guy. I say all this to say that (cough) nothing good has ever happened to me in my life without getting personal notes from people who were at Kirkland and Ellis when I was there in--and I was there one summer, the summer of 1978. In fact the reason why I became the Kirkland and Ellis Professor of Law was I had gotten tenure in 1992. The standard thing is that it takes many years to get a chair and it's some combination of seniority and who the dean thinks has merit, okay. So they say--the kind of the ethos was, it was seniority, but it was never only seniority, and people who they thought were stars would get chairs before other people and it still works this way today. Kirkland and Ellis, which is a very entrepreneurial firm, decided in 1995 or '96 [1996] they were going to do something that no other law firm had done before. They were going to go to their top five law schools where they recruited, which were Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois], Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] and maybe NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] or Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], I can't remember. And--I think Georgetown, and they were going to go to each of them and they said, "We'll give you a million dollars, we want a chair, but here's the catch, it has to be the Kirkland and Ellis chair." We had never named a chair after a law firm. The only other chairs here were like named after people, so there would be like a, you know there'd be a Ropes chair, but it wouldn't be the Ropes and Gray chair [Ropes and Gray LLP]. It would be whoever Ropes was you know [John Codman Ropes]. John Chipman Gray, that's the Gray of Ropes and Gray. They had never named a--and that was true of almost all law schools, and Kirkland said, "Well, you have a choice, you want my million dollars," and back then a chair cost probably $200,000 or $250,000. They said, "We'll give you a million dollars." So not surprisingly all five law school said yes and then the question was who was going to get those chairs and I basically--what I pieced together, though I don't know this for a fact--so one day I get a call from Bob Clark [Robert C. Clark] and he says, "I'd like to make you the Kirkland and Ellis Professor of Law," and I'm like a third year professor and there are many people much more senior than me that don't have chairs. Basically what Jack Levin has said to me is, "We told them we wanted you to have it because you study the legal profession so that fit with our--," 'cause they were doing this to promote themselves as being this very kind of high status elite firm. They were mad because people thought of Cravath [Cravath, Swaine and Moore LLP] and Sullivan and Cromwell [Sullivan and Cromwell LLP], and they thought of themselves very much in that same league. Quite frankly, they were in that same league but they didn't have the same prestige. So they thought if they bought a bunch of fancy chairs in the law schools in which they were they would--but then they wanted me to have that chair and they basically said we want him to have this. So I got the chair and that's all because I spent one summer at Kirkland and Ellis and I worked really hard and the people who were--I knew, who were kind of mentors to me then rose up by 1995. So it's twenty years later and they were running the entire firm. Story_ID: 644590 Speaker 1: Okay, so David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], were there any other black associates that summer? Speaker 2: There were and there--and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who? And was there any black, black--I mean, sorry, black associates, black partners, black (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Unclear), so there were no black partners, there were, and I'd say you know in the whole City of Chicago [Illinois] in 1978 maybe there were three. I mean I'd have to go back and think about it. I actually know the answer to this, which we can look up, you probably--we could piece it together too. I don't know was Wayne McCoy there-- Speaker 1: Wayne McCoy was there. Speaker 2: (Unclear) was, was the guy at Sidley [Sidley Austin LLP, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Sidley was there, the--he had, he had-- Speaker 2: Oh, the crazy guy who represented Muhammad Ali. Speaker 1: Muhammad Ali, um-hm. Speaker 2: My father [Julian Wilkins] had left; I don't think there was anybody at Jenner and Block-- Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: --because you went to Jenner and Block. Speaker 1: I went to Jenner and Block. Speaker 2: Yep, so, but Kirkland [Kirkland and Ellis, LLP] had a few--a handful of black associates, one of whom was creeping up towards the time of partnership. Again remember partnership was like six years back then, her name was Robin--so funny I can see her-- Speaker 1: Not Robin Charleston [Robin P. Charleston] though (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think it was Robin Charleston-- Speaker 1: It's Robin Charleston? Speaker 2: And she was going through hell because you know it's tough--it was a tough process anyway. She was the first black woman; she was the most senior black person there. There was maybe one other person who was a fourth year--but you know we'd already now by 1978 gotten the first wave of people to come and leave, right. So we were starting to churn the wheel. In my class there were two other black summer associates. One from the University of Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and one from--I'm trying to remember where she was from, some other place I think it was. Speaker 1: You were--but you know with the other thing is that a lot of law firms were not necessarily hiring first year associates. I mean--I mean first year, I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Summer associates. Speaker 1: Summer associates. Speaker 2: Yes, first years. So Kirkland, again Kirkland is a very entrepreneurial firm and again I have great fondness for Kirkland. They have really been good to me, and one of the things they did, which almost nobody else did, was they hired first year students. And in fact they had a program where they were hiring people--they were hiring smart University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] and Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] kids and having them work during the school year. And so they, they were always trying to think about how to jumpstart the system. So in my summer class, there were probably twenty-five or thirty summer associates, and maybe there were five or six first years and they were clearly also using it, which now most firms do, as a kind of diversity tool. They were clearly--you know so again it's a funny place where they were very proud of their tough reputation, high standards but if they found somebody who they thought met that then they loved you. So they were very--also proud of the fact that they would bring in people, and I think they still kind of feel that way about themselves. So yeah I was one of the few people in my class that had a good law firm summer job. Chicago [Illinois] was better than other cities. There were more law firms that hired first year students, but still you know it was a big deal and I remember I could not believe it. They were paying me something like $350 a week, or four hundred dollars a week. I could not believe that I was making this much money, it was unbelievable. Story_ID: 644591 Speaker 1: What happens your second year? Are you--so you come back--I mean 'cause your second year, you're taking con law [constitutional law]. Who do you have for con law? Speaker 2: I had Richard Parker for con law who is still here. He was a young gun, kind of radical hippie like. I mean hippie was--I mean what I didn't--what I now realize in looking back was this was the whole beginning of critical legal studies. I had no idea what critical legal studies was. Nobody was talking like that at all. But it was the beginning and Duncan Kennedy and Morty [Morton Horwitz] and all the people who create critical legal studies are doing it at that time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So can you talk about that? Speaker 2: But I was oblivious to it. Speaker 1: Can you talk about what critical legal studies are? Speaker 2: Oh, what critical legal studies is? So you know it was a kind of critique of law that said that act- you know the normal thing says that law is neutral and objective and it's--you know if it's not coming down from the heaven it's basically--it's an objective standard that produces correct outcomes. The crits, the people of critical legal studies, said that's crazy. It's about politics and social class and hierarchy and race and gender and they built on something that had been said thirty years ago or forty years ago by the legal realists in the 1920s and the 1930s, but people had forgotten about it by the 1960s or the 1970s. (Cough) So by the time I come back to teach this whole thing is roiling the entire law school and everything is--people aren't speaking to each other, and when I interview at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] for my job, I find out that people seem really tense and stuff. And I find out that they are all tense because the faculty has just voted to fire one or two assistant professors, and everybody is all upset and it's because, at least the people who are supporters, think she's being fired because she's a crit. So that's just between 1978, '79 [1979] and '80 [1980] and then 1986, all of these things kind of explode on to the scene. Story_ID: 644592 Speaker 1: Your focus is then thinking instead of going into a law firm, you want to clerk. I mean at this-- Speaker 2: Well it's not--I don't view it as one or the other, I assume that I'm going to go work in a law firm. Why? Because that's what everybody does, they go work in a law firm. So my second summer I worked at Covington Burling [Covington and Burling LLP]. I said I should try another city. Kirkland [Kirkland and Ellis, LLP] again they give me a full offer, I don't have to come back in the summer. So I said let me try something else and I always felt Washington, D.C. would be nice and I always thought I was interested in politics. So if I thought twenty years from now what would I be doing, maybe I would be running for office or I'd be working in government or something like that. But I fully expected to go to work in a law firm, and so I work at Covington and Burling my second summer and then I work at Morrison and Foerster [Morrison and Foerster LLP]. So I finally get to California because I now have a clerkship. I get a clerkship between my second and third year with Judge Feinberg [Wilfred Feinberg], who is the chief judge of the Second Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit], it's a very prestigious clerkship and I know I'm going to live in New York [New York]. So now I kind of have--and he doesn't want me to show up until September or late August, so now I have another summer to play. I say oh let me go to California. So I go out and live in San Francisco [California], I actually live in Oakland [California] and I have a great summer in San Francisco, but I never feel like I'm going to actually live there, even though it's a beautiful place, but I keep having the feeling that I'm waking up three hours behind the rest of the world. It's just the total East Coast orientation towards life. But if I had not gotten clerkships, I would have just gone straight into a big law firm. I probably would have gone back to Kirkland. They were trying to recruit me like crazy. They were telling me things like, "You'll be a superstar; we'll put you on the fast track." A guy named Phil Beck [Philip Beck], who was my associate mentor, who now is the senior partner in Bartlit Beck [Bartlit Beck Herman Palenchar and Scott LLP], actually he used to work for Fred Bartlit [Fred Bartlit, Jr.] at Kirkland, and he told me things like, "Oh yeah, I'm a third year associate but I campaigned more than most junior partners and I'll be a partner next year." They have a star system and if you're a star--and he said, "You'll be a star, we'll make you a star." So I probably would have gone back there. Why didn't I? Because by the time I finished two years of clerking, this is something I tell my current students all the time, in fact I was just telling Morgan Arthur, my friend's daughter, by the time I came back from clerking, I'm in the middle of my second clerkship, I realize two things. One is, there are a lot of really good lawyers who don't work at big law firms. I had no idea. We thought they were either solo practitioners, who were like my dad [Julian Wilkins], who did little cases like wills and divorces, or there were people who worked in big law firms who were held up as the best lawyers of the world. When you're clerking, you see, there are lots of people who come and argue cases and some of them are from little firms you've never heard of and they are like the best lawyers you've seen in the briefs. Then the opposite was also true, that I'd see some of these lawyers from these big law firms and they were terrible and the judges didn't have any respect for them, and their briefs were terrible. Both the judges I worked for didn't mince words about when they thought the lawyers were bad. So I said oh there's like a whole other world and then because you're surrounded by other people going through exactly the same experience, especially in Washington, D.C., where I was obviously for the [U.S.] Supreme Court clerkship, there are all these little boutique litigation firms. The last thing that happened is, all my friend who had gone to big law firms, by their second year were miserable, and they would all say things like, "All this isn't what they told us it was going to be," and, "Oh my god, there's so much work or pressure," or, "I don't get to do anything," and especially I wanted to be a trial lawyer, right. I wanted to be in court and they were like pushing paper and doing discovery and interrogatories, and plus it was getting tougher and tougher at those big firms by the time we get into the '80s [1980s]. So I then--my co-clerk introduces me to somebody who was her professor at the University of Virginia law school [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] who taught her the equivalent of a kind of trial practice course, who was a partner at this little trial law firm [Nussbaum, Owen and Webster]. I never will forget she went out to lunch with him, 'cause he'd known her and he was trying to recruit her but she wanted to be a tax lawyer and so they didn't really do tax. She came back and she said, "You know, I just met the nicest people at this great little law firm, they all seemed really smart and they are doing this really good work and I don't want to go there 'cause they don't do tax, but I think it would be perfect for you." Her name was Virginia Wittner [ph.] and we're still friends, she's a lovely person. I said, "Really?" 'Cause I was kind of wondering what am I going to do, this big firm thing now I'm not quite so sure of doing. I thought about--I probably would have gone into the government, except now Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is in the government so I don't want to go work for the government. So she said, "Yeah, you should go, just go have lunch with them. I'll bet you like them." I went out to lunch with them and I loved them and the rest is history; that's why I went there. Story_ID: 644593 Speaker 1: So David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], talk though back--just one thing about the clerkship with Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall], 'cause you skipped over that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And Feinberg [Wilfred Feinberg], I mean I would like and then we'll get into--okay, sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So Julie, you're going to--either--I can stay here-- Speaker 1: What time is it? Speaker 2: --until seven so it is now--is it six o'clock? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, it's five o'clock, it's five o'clock, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Just real-- Speaker 2: I can stay--I don't have anything to do 'til seven o'clock. Speaker 1: No, no, no. Okay, just--okay if you could just talk about those two (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so listen, I'd rather--look first of all it's an honor okay to have Julieanna Richardson come and talk to me for The HistoryMakers. It's an honor and, and I finally feel like maybe I deserve to be in your archive, which I did not feel like the first--when you kept telling me and I kept saying no. So I understand why you're doing it and I should do it and as much for the stories about these other people as they are about me. So, so you know the rest of my time at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] is sort of uneventful. I will skip--I'll just say just a couple of things that might be of interest. So one is because I was just with this person just a few days ago. So mostly the Harvard Law Review I hate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you know, your experience on the Harvard Law Review. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't like it, not because-- Speaker 1: You didn't like it? Speaker 2: No because-- Speaker 1: So can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Because mostly-- Speaker 1: You're the only black at that point. Speaker 2: No, actually-- Speaker 1: No, no, tell me who else-- Speaker 2: So this is actually important. It's not--it has nothing to do with the people. In fact I'm actually--well (laugher), there's one person who I'll have to decide whether I'll tell this on tape or maybe you can decide to edit it out. Does this go into a vault until we're all dead or something (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well it can. Okay, go on. Speaker 2: I'm just teasing. So I come on the Harvard Law Review (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you come on in your second year. Speaker 2: My second year and it is the first time in history there are ever three black people on the law review. And the three are; Bayo Ogunlesi [Adebayo Ogunlesi] who is in the joint J.D./M.B.A. program and who has come within a whisker, like one or two votes, of being elected the first black president in the history of the Harvard Law Review. That is, the president should be very lucky that there were a few people who weren't prepared for this and therefore what was brought up, allegedly, I was not there, but people said, "How can we put this guy on the Harvard Law Review? He can't even spell. Look he spells color with a U" (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Because he's trained in Nigeria. Speaker 2: Because he got a first at Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], okay. So you know, so he's a genius but they just weren't ready and Bayo is a confident person. Bayo, to his credit, he never held it against them or whatever, he came in second. And the guy who became the president was a wonderful guy who became a great mentor to me and we're still friends, his name is David Leebron and he's the president of Rice University [Houston, Texas]. He was the dean at Columbia Law School [New York, New York] and now he's the president of Rice. But Bayo, and then Bayo came on with another brother named Randy Eaddy [W. Randy Eaddy] who is a partner at a major Atlanta [Georgia] law firm [Kilpatrick Townsend and Stockton LLP]. So then I come, and now there are three of us and that is amazing, it's never happened before. There had never been more than two and the time before there were two was my [paternal] uncle [John R. Wilkins] and William Coleman [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.] in the 1940s when they overlapped for a semester. But why didn't I like the law review? Because mostly it's a bunch of really crummy work. You spend a lot of time--lots and lots of hours doing cite checks and you know line editing and whole bunch of stuff that was really boring (laughter) and then the part that people like, if you like it, is sitting around arguing about [U.S.] Supreme Court cases and why you're smarter than Justice Holmes [Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.] and they would sit in the editor's room and they would have these arguments. But the thing is I was never all that interested in that stuff. So the work I didn't like very much and you had to work really hard, and I did perfectly well and I wrote a perfectly mediocre law school note and I became, because I think I had a lot of friends, I became the Supreme Court editor, which was a kind of a prestigious position. Though by the time I was it, there were three of us not just one. It used to go to the person who was second in the presidential election. I didn't even think about running for president of the law review. This is what I told the president president when I first met him in this very office I think 1991 maybe, no, I think I was in my old office. I said to him, "Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], I can't believe you did this." I said, "It wouldn't even have occurred to me try to run for president of the law review," 'cause I thought that--that was only for those you know genius brainiacs, and so I said, "Whatever else, I admire you not even for having done, for just having had the courage or the commitment to do it." Little did I know, you know, he would have the courage to do many other things thereafter. Story_ID: 644594 Speaker 1: So, anyway, the work wasn't--but I made a lot of good friends there and I'm still very good friends with a lot of the students. And I would say those are some of the closest people, other than the black students who were here, are my classmates for the law review 'cause we all went through this together and none of us liked it very much. It was made unbelievably more difficult because of the fact that the managing editor of the Harvard Law Review was none other than John Roberts. (Laughter) And so, and John Roberts was a tough taskmaster and maybe that was his job. Managing editor, your job is to just whoop all the 2Ls up and make them do all the work. So John--and he was a tough taskmaster and he was not very popular among our class of students, though apparently he was very popular among his class of students. But therefore we all bonded around it and I'll tell you one more story about the law review then we can take a break and your friend [Matthew Hickey] can flip the tape. Is that the other person who I'm very close with who was on the law review with me was Harold Koh [Harold Hongju Koh] who went on to become the dean at Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], the legal advisor to the state department [U.S. Department of State] and Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], and hopefully in another few weeks, will be one of the most powerful people in the world because he's very, very close to Hillary Clinton. The thing that Harold and I always laugh about, but this is very much apropos of what you're interested in. So one day we're sitting around, it's like ten o'clock at night, we've got some assignment that we're supposed to be doing, cite checking some stupid article and we're both bored and we don't want to do it so we're talking and somehow the conversation turns to race. I say to Harold, I don't know why I said it, I said, "You know Harold, I'm the sixth black person ever to be on the Harvard Law Review." And I could actually name all five who went before me. You know, it was Charles Hamilton Houston, William Hastie [William H. Hastie]--no I'm the eighth, I'm sorry. William Coleman [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.], my uncle [John R. Wilkins], Chris Edley [Christopher Edley, Jr.]. No was Chris on the law review? I'm not so sure about that, Bayo [Adebayo Ogunlesi], Randy Eaddy [W. Randy Eaddy] and me, and so maybe I was the ninth, I'm not sure about Chris, check that before we publish that 'cause I don't want to demote him if he--but he was the first black person hired back on the faculty. He might have been on the--no I think he was on the law review, so I must have been the ninth. So I turn to Harold and I say, "So how many--what number are you? Like how many Asians have ever been on the law review?" I said, "Harold, are you the first?" He says, "I don't know," and so he said, "Well let's--." "I bet you you are. I bet you you're the first." I said, "Let's go find out." So how are we going to find out? Well in Gannett House [Cambridge, Massachusetts] there's a photograph of every class of editors at the Harvard Law Review since the first one, and they start at the basement with the first one and they go up all the way along all the walls and all the stairs and all the way up to the attic. So we started in the basement and we walked and we looked at every picture, and we tried to look to see if there was an Asian face or an Asian name, the names were on there. By the time we got up to the attic, we had satisfied ourselves that Harold Koh was the first Asian ever to be on the Harvard Law Review. Now here's the amazing thing this is 1978 okay, and the first black person is Charles Hamilton Houston in nineteen twenty what? Six [1926], '5 [sic.], whatever it is, okay. It took fifty more years before there was an Asian--that's an amazing story. Story_ID: 644595 Speaker 1: You literally couldn't do all your work on the law review and go to all your classes; it was too much work. Speaker 2: I see (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so, and this is partly why the rest of the student body hated the law review because they had their own little club and they didn't share with anybody else-- Speaker 2: Well, see we don't really know what's going on with the law review except that you're on-- Speaker 1: But we were a kind of a crazy rebel class, so, I mean one other law review story if you want to know about this. So every year there's a banquet and they usually invite some supreme court justice or famous professor to be the banquet speaker. So we had, again remember most of the people I'm in school with had grown up in the '60s [1960s] and a lot of them had been kind of crazy, drugged out hippies, you know from all over the country. They just happened to be really, really smart. In fact, a couple of them were older, so they had really grown up in the '60s [1960s]. And I don't know how this happened, but somehow we invited Ken Kesey to be our speaker. Ken Kesey who wrote 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest,' who was a complete whacked out, druggie from San Francisco [California] and he showed up, no joke, in a, like a Hawaiian shirt and a like, like a beat up old tuxedo jacket, 'cause it's black tie, okay. You can imagine, the thing is filled with alumni who come back for this banquet. They were shocked. And he gives this rambling speech, which I don't even really remember anymore. But it was--we just mostly did it just to stick it to the establishment because we were still kind of into that. All right anyway, so, so--but being on the law review, so I'm still very close--Bayo [Adebayo Ogunlesi] and I are very close. In fact, actually no one has been more supportive of me in my getting the center [Harvard Law School Center on the Legal Profession, Cambridge, Massachusetts] started and the work than Bayo and Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault]. Two people who I met, one in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], one in law school, who believed in me and who have supported me in everything that I've done ever since. Speaker 2: So David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], so Bayo was a year--so between Bayo and Eaddy [W. Randy Eaddy], were they a year ahead of you? Speaker 1: So Bayo was two years ahead of me, but he did the--because he did the joint J.D./M.B.A. program and he had actually already been to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England]. So I think, I can't quite remember, I think he goes to college in Lagos [King's College, Lagos, Lagos, Nigeria], then he goes to Oxford, then he goes to Harvard J.D./M.B.A. So he ends up being in the class ahead of me. He graduates in 1981 and then he clerks for, I want to say, Spots or McGowan or somebody, but then he clerks for Marshall [Thurgood Marshall]. So he clerks for Marshall the year ahead of me. So I've kind of been following Bayo my whole life, and Randy was, and Randy was actually in the class ahead of me. So that's why they ended up as two black people on the law review. It was actually, they were admitted in different classes, but they ended up being there at the same time. Speaker 2: I see. And has there been--how often consistently have there been black--? I mean you talk about you were number eight or nine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, I was either number eight or nine; it's only whether Chris Edley [Christopher Edley, Jr.]--Chris must have been on the law review, I think. Speaker 2: It's sort of sometimes hard-- Speaker 1: I think when he made the law review, I think it was in the newspaper again or maybe it was just when he got hired at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], it was on the front page. Speaker 2: But I'm saying--what I'm asking is that--how often has that been--how many like today when we look--? Speaker 1: Well, today, but now they've moved--so I'd say between me, so I'm trying to remember, I don't think there was anybody in the class below me and then maybe there wasn't even in the class or two below that. The next person, I can't say this for sure, but the next person I know that was on the Harvard Law Review, and actually this is a person who has gone on to be an incredible person, I meet--so I come here for Ann Marie's [Wilkins' wife, Ann Marie Wilkins] graduation and this is in 1982 and--no 1983, that's right, this fits, 1983. And the law review is having a barbecue at graduation for the people who are graduating. But because they--remember they run this writing competition after the end of exams, so there are a lot of other people there. So it's a kind of thing for law review kids. There, somebody tells me, or maybe I just meet her, they say, "There's a black woman on the Harvard Law Review. There's a sister on the Harvard Law Review." I say, "Really?" And I say, "I've got to go meet her." So I go to the barbecue and there she is and that is Annette Gordon-Reed. And I meet Annette Gordon-Reed in June of nineteen seventy--1983, and this must be between--she's starting her third year--I mean she's ending her second year and she's probably there running the writing competition for the incoming second year students. I remember how impressive she was then, and then I kind of forget about her, then the next thing I look up she's changed American history with the Monticello (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: I gave a talk--I got to write something for her when she got a chair [Charles Warren Professor of American Legal History]; she just got a chair a couple of, a couple of-- Speaker 2: A couple of years ago (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Weeks. No, no. She just got a chair-- Speaker 2: Oh, just a--oh, she just got a chair? Speaker 1: She just got a chair. It's either this year or last year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Time runs together when you get to be my age (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 644596 Speaker 1: So your, your [paternal] uncle, did he say anything? Or was there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, because-- Speaker 1: --a family celebration that, that you know Uncle Jo- John [John R. Wilkins], right? Speaker 2: John. Speaker 1: John had been on the Harvard Law Review-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --and, and nephew David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins] is now-- Speaker 2: No. So here's the--this was, the sad thing is that he died, he dies in 1972 [sic. 1976] I think--no, no-- Speaker 1: That's right, you did say-- Speaker 2: He lives long enough to see me go to Harvard--get into Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and one of the most moving and poignant experiences of my life, so he has a brain tumor, just as my father [Julian Wilkins] does, and the brain tumor, back then there were no CAT scans [computerized axial tomography scan] so they suspect he has a brain tumor but they have no idea whether he really has one, and the only way to find out is they put you under anesthesia and they open your brain. They put him under anesthesia, they open up his brain, he has this massive brain tumor which has spread. They come out, they tell his wife [Constance Wilkins] he's not going to survive the operating room. And she says, "Yes, he is." They say, "There is no point in keeping him alive," and she says, "You better keep him alive." So they keep him alive and he lives for like five more years and he teaches himself how to talk again, a little bit of how to walk again, and then he falls and the thing is still growing. It's an incredible story, you talk about--it's an incredible story and my aunt, who is one of the most amazing people in the world, who I'm going to go see in another month, I try to go see her at least once every six months, keeps him alive. He has these two young kids [John Wilkins and Maria Wilkins] who are at the time like six and four and he wants to live to see--and he lives to see his kids graduate from high school, I don't know what it is. But when he finds out that I've gotten into Harvard, this is in 1973--in the spring of 1973, he makes his wife call our house in Chicago [Illinois], no cell phones and he gets on the phone, he can hardly speak and he just tells me how proud he is of me. You know halting, you know he could hardly speak, but she tells me to this day, it was one of the happiest days of his life. Now to answer your question it meant a huge amount to him, but by the time I got into Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], he had died. I remember thinking when I got out of the Harvard Law Review, wouldn't it have been nice to have talked to him and then when I come back to teach, so he goes on to become a professor--the first black professor in Berkeley at Boalt Hall [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California], and I wish that I could talk to him. So, partly what I'm going to do when I go there, I'm collecting his papers; and I'm going to try to write something about him. Story_ID: 644597 Speaker 1: How does the clerkship work? Speaker 2: So clerkships, you know again are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You go, and interviewing-- Speaker 2: Yeah and it's a big--you know because you went here [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it's a big presence here and if you're on the law review [Harvard Law Review] all anybody talks about is clerkships (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Clerkships. Speaker 2: It's a very competitive process, like who you get to clerk for and all of that and, and so you know, so I knew I would do well, but I didn't know how well. So I applied to a bunch of clerkships and I didn't know whether I wanted to do a circuit court clerkship, which everybody said was more like law review, which I didn't really like so much. So I really thought I would like to do a district court clerkship, which was more like being a trial lawyer which is what I thought I wanted to do. So applied to both, but I also wanted to clerk for Thurgood Marshall, and I knew that if you wanted to clerk for Thurgood Marshall you would be a whole lot better off if you were in a circuit court clerkship. So again these processes, the resumes get whittled down and you go to interview and I had a few interviews, one of which was this guy Wilfred Feinberg, who is the chief judge of the Second Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit] and he was just a wonderful man. Again, I think this is part of the story you want to tell. So he was literally sitting in Thurgood Marshall's old chambers. He had--you know he was literally--because what happens is you get--so Marshall had been a Second Circuit judge you remember briefly before he becomes solicitor general and then he becomes a [U.S.] Supreme Court justice. When he went to be SG, Feinberg who had been a district court judge, was elevated to the Second Circuit by President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and so he just took over Marshall's old chambers. I think because of that and because of being a kind of liberal Jew of the generation that knew the Holocaust and the Civil Rights Movement and he was always a very progressive guy. Not a radical guy, he was quite a cautious and some ways judicially conservative guy. Not conservative in the left/right sense, but always wanted everything to be buttoned up, but he also really cared about these issues. Still, with my credentials if you didn't care about these issues, you weren't going to pick me, and it turned out he had already had a black law clerk, which was exceptional for 1981. He had Lovida Coleman [Lovida Hardin Coleman, Jr.] who was Bill Coleman's [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.] daughter, had been his law clerk and then she'd gone on to clerk for Thurgood Marshall. So he gives me an interview and he gives me an offer, and frankly I had always thought I wanted to go live in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but he was a very nice man and it just seemed like--and it would be a year in New York [New York], and I never lived in New York so I said yes. It turned out to be a great year for me. It turned out to be a--you know personally it was a tumultuous year. I went through lots of things with lots of girlfriends, but it was a great year in the sense of learning that I could work in that kind of environment and he was a great judge to work for. He was very patient with my tumultuous girlfriends, some of whom were kind of crazy, and it was great fun to live in New York. I lived with, for the first three months, I lived with my then probably eighty something year old Great Aunt Marjory [Wilkins' paternal great aunt, Juanita Robinson Jackson] who is the one who I talked about in the early part, who is the one who inspired my sister [HistoryMaker Carolyn Wilkins] to do the family history and she was the keeper of all the family records-- Speaker 1: Oh, so you were living with her then? Speaker 2: I lived with her because I couldn't find a place I could afford in Manhattan [New York], and so she lived in Crown Heights, Brooklyn [New York] and you could take the 4 [4 Line] in, and I was just in Foley Square [New York, New York] so it was really easy. Those were some of the most precious months of my life because I lived with her and I would take her all around, and again it was living in a real neighborhood with real people. By this time it was nothing but people from the Caribbean and you know that was very good for me I think. You know, it's always good to come down-- Speaker 1: Balance (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from the rarified heights, yes. Story_ID: 644598 Speaker 1: So is it an easy thing once you work on the law review [Harvard Law Review] to clerk? Is it (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's an easy thing to get--almost everybody gets a clerkship-- Speaker 1: Clerkship. Speaker 2: --but then it's incredibly competitive about which clerkships you get, and the most prestigious ones are on the D.C. Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit] or on the Second Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit], and particularly those which were thought to be quote feeders for the [U.S.] Supreme Court. Meaning that they send--judges who sent a lot of law clerks up to clerk on the Supreme Court. Speaker 1: So Feinberg [Wilfred Feinberg], he was a feeder? Speaker 2: So he was--I didn't fully realize it at the time, but because he was sitting in Thurgood Marshall's seat and Thurgood Marshall was the circuit justice for the Second Circuit. He would take often a Feinberg clerk, not always, it wasn't quite like a Skelly Wright [J. Skelly Wright] and Brennan [William J. Brennan, Jr.], where Brennan would just take all of Skelly Wright's clerks. But it was a very--it turned out to be a very advantageous clerkship for me to get, my ultimate dream was to clerk for Thurgood Marshall which was an incredible experience (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so can you talk about that? Speaker 2: So, you know people ask me-- Speaker 1: 'Cause at that point what age is he? Speaker 2: So, he's old, he's like seven- well, I mean he's getting younger every day because now as I turn sixty, seventy-eight I think he was or seventy--he was in his seventies, it doesn't seem all that old to me actually. But I think seventy-eight sticks out in my mind. And when people ask me what he was like I say he's kind of like your grandfather, meaning he had a lot of--your grandfather lived an amazing life. So he was really smart and he had lots of wisdom, but he also didn't have a lot of patience and he pretty much knew exactly what he was going to do and what he wasn't going to do and he really didn't put up with much. We'd be arguing with him and we'd be--the law clerks would be saying, "Judge, you have to do this," or, "You have to do that," and he would say, "You know, I only have to do two things; stay black and die" (laughter). That would kind of be the end of the argument. Or he'd turn around and he would point to the wall and he'd say, "President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] signed my commission. Who signed yours?" (Laughter) So again that was sort of the end of the argument, right. People say, "What do you remember most?" And, "What's the best thing?" And of course there were these amazing arguments and I saw these amazing lawyers including--Larry Tribe [Laurence Tribe] came and argued a case. Walking up the steps to work in this marble building [Supreme Court Building, Washington, D.C.] was just incredible. But the best part had nothing to do with the law, although I realized it had everything to do with the law, because the best parts were the stories. Everyday about four o'clock, just like your grandfather, he would kind of walk into the office, so he--the way the office worked was each of the justices has a kind of a suite. It's a really weird building, so basically each of them occupies a kind of corner of the building and there are all these separate stairways and elevators and stuff. So actually they hardly ever see each other and you hardly ever see another human being walking in the halls, 'cause there are only nine people that live there and it's a building that's as big as an enormous city block. Most of the people who aren't justices work in the interior of the building, like the clerks and the clerks' office, and then the rest of it is just for these nine what were guys until my first--the year I clerked it was Sandra Day O'Connor's year and so then it wasn't just nine guys anymore, and they stopped calling them Mr. Justice, which I always regretted. I always thought the coolest thing in the world would be to be called Mr. Justice (laughter). So it was a weird building, but anyway Marshall's office was on the--the justice's office was on the corner of course, and then there was a middle office where he had--there were two secretaries and a messenger and then the far office was where the law clerks sat. And there was a big overstuffed chair at the corner by the door and--by the interior door and everyday about four o'clock the judge would kind of walk in and he'd sit down in the chair and he would just start telling stories. He was a master storyteller. All kinds of stories, stories about Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], stories about escaping lynchings. But also stories about his son, John [John W. Marshall], who is a Virginia State trooper and how they would set speed traps for people, or stories about the custodians who he knew the names of every single custodian who was in the building, or about his marshal who had been with him since the solicitor general's office. His name was Mr. Gaines [ph.]; we called him Gaines. When I first started telling people, I was always kind of sheepish about--I should be talking about the great decisions that were there. I don't even remember--if you press me I could remember one or two cases that were decided and one or two cases that I worked on that I'm proud of. But we only wrote dissents and when we got majority opinions they were like stupid cases, you know that were nine nothing because by that time Burger [Warren E. Burger] was in charge, and it was the Burger court and Marshall and Brennan were totally marginalized. Story_ID: 644599 Speaker 1: So it wasn't about the law and I'm, you know, I'm not really interested in law. It was about the people, and it was--and this incredible human being; and at some point I realized that actually, well that is the law. So I wrote the first piece I ever wrote ever. It was a little piece for the Harvard Blackletter Law Journal [Harvard Journal on Racial and Ethnic Justice] called 'Justice as Narrative: Reflections of a Master Storyteller' [sic. 'Justice as Narrative: Some Personal Reflections on a Master Storyteller,' David B. Wilkins] and this was at the time--I wrote it in 1989, the first thing I ever published. This was at a time in which the law and literature movement was getting big and the whole idea that the law is narrative, it's a story, right. It's a story we tell about ourselves, about justice, about fairness and I realized that the same thing that made Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] such an amazing storyteller and had the ability to tell stories about the most powerful--like he'd tell these stories about being with Kwame Nkrumah in Ghana you know writing the Constitution of Ghana, or he'd be talking--some story about some guy getting his car fixed who he had ridden up in the elevator with before. And I realized that that same quality is why he was the world's greatest lawyer and the world's greatest justice because law is just storytelling, and he was a master storyteller when he was a lawyer and he could tell a story that could convince nine people to change the world in Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and he was a master storyteller when he was a justice. If you read some of his dissents and a few majority opinions which he got to write in the early days there; master at capturing the stories of everyday people. Speaker 2: Did you get a sense that he really enjoyed his time on the [U.S.] Supreme Court, I mean status wise, or do you ever think he missed being a lawyer? Speaker 1: Well he missed the people because it's a very lonely life. This is another thing that convinced me totally I had no interest; zero in becoming a judge because it had two things that would be really bad for me. One is it's all about law. You better actually know about cases and law and you better really like arguing about it and decisions and reading precedent and all of that. And the second is it's incredibly lonely because--especially, I think maybe it's a little better now, but the whole thing before was a judge wasn't supposed to socialize with people. They tried to disqualify Marshall from all the cases that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was a litigant. Why? Because you know he was bias because he was--they really wanted to get him off any case which a black person was a litigant, right. But you can't go out in the same way, you don't socialize, you have to watch everything you say. Now of course we all know everybody has to watch everything that you say, but that isn't--it's a very isolating existence and that is a particularly isolating existence and I think it was especially isolating for him because it became isolating--first of all the first black person there, although he was quite friendly with people who you'd be surprised--like he and Powell [Lewis F. Powell, Jr.] were pretty good friends and he liked Burger's wife [Elvera Stromberg Burger], Marshall just liked--if he liked you, he liked you, right. But still then he became isolated politically so that he was always in dissent, and I think he became very bitter, and probably appropriately so, about the direction the country was taking and the direction the law was taking and what was happening to the cases that he had worked on and what wasn't happening with the cause of civil rights. Although, you know he was very tough on black people too and he felt like he didn't want to hear a lot of whining or complaining because he rightly said it had been way tougher in the 1930s and the 1940s or the 1950s. But it was a--I think it's a weird job. I'll be curious what Elena Kagan says in twenty years or something. It's one thing to have a job for life, I've kind of had a job for life, but mine is a very social job and it changes all the time. I reinvented what I've done at least three or four times since I've been here [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. That's not really the case when you have that job, and you know it's going to be the last job you ever have. Story_ID: 644600 Speaker 1: David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], so you work for--you come out after your clerkship-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you work for--? Speaker 2: Michael Nussbaum. So I work for this little, I go do the thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. A boutique, a boutique. Speaker 2: Right. And I do what in some way I always wanted to be when I went to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is roughly speaking the black Perry Mason. I wanted to be a trial lawyer; I wanted to be in court just like Perry Mason. My father [Julian Wilkins] loved 'Perry Mason,' I grew up watching 'Perry Mason,' in fact we used to read the Erle Stanley Gardner version of 'Perry Mason,' and my dream, as I often tell my students only half jokingly, is to be--was to be cross examining somebody on the witness stand and have somebody in the audience stand up and confess, which if you watch 'Perry Mason' used to happen routinely, never happened to me. I loved the people who I worked for and it's just this really quirky oddball place [Nussbaum, Owen and Webster], but after a few years I begin to realize that's not what really this is all about. I go to court way more than anybody who's my peer who's not at a U.S. attorney's office or something. But most of my time is spent pushing paper and fighting with people about, "Are you going to produce this witness first?" Or who's going to have their deposition taken and it's not that those fights are unimportant, because actually they are very strategic, but I don't like fighting with people for the sake of fighting with them. I'm not actually all that confrontational, but if it's important I don't mind fighting with them. But this I begin to worry wasn't so important. So by the time I'm there, like three years I'm sort of thinking what else can I do and still Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] in the government so that's--I mean Harold is working in the government, Harold Koh [Harold Hongju Koh], but I just say to myself I don't know if I can go work for the Reagan justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. Story_ID: 644601 Speaker 1: So then I started thinking maybe U.S. attorney's office, I'm not really sure what I want to do. And then one day the phone rings and on the phone is Jim Vorenberg [James Vorenberg] and he says, "David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], this is Jim Vorenberg." And I said, "I know who you are," and I said--in fact he said, "You might know I've become the dean at Harvard." And I said, "Yes, congratulations. I'm really happy for you." He becomes the dean in 1984 [sic. 1981] I want to say, and he says to me, "Have you ever thought about teaching?" I'm kind of stunned because--and this is important to your story, I was a very good Harvard Law student, I was on the Harvard Law Review, I had a good clerkship before I left, I knew I was clerking on the Second Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second District], I get a [U.S.] Supreme Court clerkship [with Thurgood Marshall]. This is the first person ever to say to me, "Have you ever thought about teaching?" And I had been a teaching assistant, we skipped over this part, for David Shapiro [David L. Shapiro] who's a brilliant guy and who had been very nice to me and wrote my letters of recommendation, and for Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]. Speaker 2: That's what I thought, you had a relation- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. So that's the connection to Clyde Ferguson. So he was--I was his legal methods instructor, which you may remember was at that point taught in connection with civil procedure under the supervision of the civil procedure professor, and Ferguson hired me after my first year of law school to teach in the second year. And that was a--turned out to be a big deal because by the time I came back to teach, I'd actually taught something before, other than that I'd never taught anything before. But I'd known Ferguson since I was an undergraduate [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so maybe this is relevant for you and then we can go back to the law firm. So I first met Clyde Ferguson and again this is a Jim Vorenberg story. I first met Clyde Ferguson when Jim Vorenberg brought him to live in Dunster House [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Dunster House--Harvard undergraduate house. Vorenberg was the housemaster as we called them up until this past year. They've now banned the term like they've banned the shield even though parenthetically it had nothing to do with slavery; it's an Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] term. I lived in Dunster House, so me and Tony Chase [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase] and my roommates lived in Dunster House, and Ferguson came either our junior or our senior year. He wasn't married because his wife [Dolores Zimmerman Ferguson] had died very tragically, I think he had married a French woman who was an artist and I don't think he ever recovered quite frankly. But therefore he--Jim said, "Why don't you come?" So he's coming to teach at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Jim says, "Why don't you live in the house." They had these kinds of palatial things that they had in the house for faculty members. Because we were the few black people who lived in Dunster House, there was this black professor here, we got to know him. And it turned out Clyde Ferguson liked to have fun and he liked to drink port, and we liked to drink port (laughter), and so he would go over and do his thing and he would have all this fancy wine and we would all drink together and we introduced, this is no joke, I suppose he won't mind me telling this, we introduced C. Clyde Ferguson to Richard Pryor who he had never heard before. I had the album 'That Nigger's Crazy' and we brought it over and we played it in C. Clyde Ferguson's room--in his fancy Dunster House room in the stereo after drinking several glasses of port together. And Ferguson howled, he just couldn't believe--it was the funniest--he didn't know you could have comedy like that, and with that kind of formed a bond. So then when I came to Harvard Law School he was very nice to me, I didn't have him for civil procedure, which was probably good 'cause he was tough by all accounts. My wife had him actually, Ann Marie [Ann Marie Wilkins] had him. But when I made the law review he hired me to be a legal methods teaching instructor that next year. Then we kind of stayed close until he died and it was a very tragic thing as you know. It was very tragic because I think he never really recovered from his wife's death, but it's only afterwards that we realized what a brilliant man he was. I'll just say one more story about him. Ann Marie tells how when she was a first year student, so this would have been the fall of 1980, Ferguson was teaching civil procedure and he would talk about his experience. He was an ambassador to Uganda or something like that. Speaker 2: Uganda. Speaker 1: And he would say to them, "You know what? The problem of the 21st century is going to be food." And all the students would say, "This guy has lost it. What are you talking about? Agriculture production is going up, we're going to defeat hunger by the end of the century," blah blah blah. Well what is the problem of the 21st century? Food and water. And why is it that the Saudis are buying up all the arable land in Eritrea and, you know, food and water; what's causing wars and you know. So, he was a brilliant man, he was a brilliant man. Story_ID: 644602 Speaker 1: So Jim Vorenberg [James Vorenberg]--I get this call from Ji- and he, and he asks me if I'm interested in teaching, and as I say it's the first time anyone has ever asked me that question notwithstanding that I have all these credentials. And why I say this is, I don't think they--they liked me, they were always recommending me. Phil Areeda [Phillip E. Areeda], Dave Shapiro [David L. Shapiro] lots of other professors, the people in Kirkland and Ellis [Kirkland and Ellis, LLP], right but I didn't fit their image of what a law professor was. Now partly that's because I didn't see myself that way, but partly also I'm sure it has something to do with race in a complicated way. Because these people were all incredibly good to me and it's not until Jim Vorenberg calls, and my first reaction is, "No, of course not." That's for those brainiacs, that's for those people who like to sit around the editor's room arguing about cases, which I never liked to do. So I come home and I tell Ann Marie [Ann Marie Wilkins] and I kind of (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, you had gotten married? When did you-- Speaker 1: No, we were living together-- Speaker 2: Living together, okay. Speaker 1: So we were living in sin (laughter) in Washington, D.C. in an apartment in the Crestwood--on 16th [Street] and Arkansas [Avenue], which has this spectacular--two huge bedrooms, gorgeous, enormous living room, windows overlooking Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.], garage, rent control, I think was three hundred dollars a month. It was unbelievable, yeah. (Laughter) It was the best place--the best deal I ever lived in, okay. So I tell her, and I say, "You know come on, I can't do that." So I didn't really think about it. Then he calls maybe three months later, and then he calls maybe three months later, and finally Ann Marie says, "Maybe you should listen to him. He thinks you can do this and you don't really like what you're doing. So maybe you should think about this." And the thing that tipped the scales, which I think I told, and that thing was that Tree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree], he had done the same thing to Tree and gotten Tree to come and teach. So by this time, 1985 Tree is teaching at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I'm saying wow, well gee, if Tree can do it then maybe I could do it. I call up Tree and he says, "Yes it's kind of fun," you know right. So I say, "Okay, maybe I'll think about it." He says, "Why don't you come up here and meet some people." Now I always pause at this moment and say this is affirmative action okay. It's not that--I had all the credentials, but nobody had affirmatively reached out to me and said, why don't you think about this. If Jim Vorenberg had not made that phone call, I would never ever--and not just one, he called me three or four times before I agreed even to come up for a visit, because I had to get over my fear and my image of what it meant to be a law professor, which was roughly speaking Phil Areeda. Phil Areeda was my image of being a law professor. So much so that when I finally get the job and they ask me what I want to teach I say two things. The one thing I always knew I wanted to teach was something about the legal profession, because I knew that the legal profession was changing and that no one was talking about it, and all my friends were talking how law firms were changing and suddenly they were asking you to get business and there were women coming into law firms and even making partner sometimes, and everything was changing. So I said oh that would be fun because I'd been in this little quirky law firm [Nussbaum, Owen and Webster], which had been made up of people who had left big law firms, like thirty or forty, and then they started this thing so I wanted to do that. But then I told them, I said, "I want to teach contracts." And I came home and I told Ann Marie and she said, "So what do you want to teach?" I said, "I want to teach contracts." And she looked at me and she said, "You don't know anything about contracts; you've never did anything in business. You've been a trial lawyer and done civil--what are you thinking?" Then, it was only then I realized I'm thinking I want to be a great law professor and my image of being a great law professor is Phil Areeda, and a contracts professor in Kingsfield [Charles Kingsfield] in 'The Paper Chase' and all that, that's where it's at, it's easy contracts. But I would have been a complete disaster teaching contracts. And so I call him back and I say, "Gee, I've thought about it more, maybe let me teach civil procedure." And I'm sure they probably breathed a huge sigh of relief (laughter). But to his credit Jim Vorenberg was like, he said, "You want to teach contracts, you can teach contracts." Story_ID: 644603 Speaker 1: Jim Vorenberg [James Vorenberg] didn't just do this with me, he didn't just do this with Tree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree]; he did this with Chris Edley [Christopher Edley, Jr.], he did this with Randy Kennedy [HistoryMaker Randall Kennedy]. So he--by the time I got here, it was already Tree, who was here on a kind of a visiting thing, and then there was me, then there was Randy and then there was Chris. That's more black people than any other law school had. Now why did this happen? Well because Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] had left and Derrick had left to go be the dean of Oregon [University of Oregon School of Law, Eugene, Oregon]? Speaker 2: Oregon. Speaker 1: Oregon and then because we loved--and Derrick has been my professor, as he had been everybody's professor, and then Derrick had quit Oregon because they wouldn't tenure a young Asian woman. But the point is, Vorenberg becomes dean, Derrick Bell leaves shortly thereafter or maybe he even left right before and Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] dies. Now there are no black faculty members at Harvard, and of course this is the famous Jack Greenberg incident who just died, you saw this right a week ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, ninety-one. Speaker 1: So this is when Vorenberg totally well intentioned says, "Well, we should have a class on civil rights. Derrick's not here anymore, Clyde's not here anymore. Jack Greenberg is my buddy," in fact they wrote a cookbook together. Do you know this? It was called 'Dean's Cuisine' [sic. 'Dean Cuisine: Or the Liberated Man's Guide to Fine Cooking,' Jack Greenberg and James Vorenberg], because by this time Greenberg had become dean of the Columbia public policy school [sic.] maybe and Vorenberg was the dean of the law school and so it was called 'Dean's Cuisine.' And you know, Jack Greenberg was a legend of the Civil Rights Movement, but for reasons that I understand, though we could have a whole discussion about them, not Kim Crenshaw [Kimberle Williams Crenshaw] and even more Kenyatta right. What was his name--Muhammad Kenyatta. They say, "What are you doing? There should be a black person teaching this course." And I think their real point was not no white person could teach civil rights, but we don't have any black people here, and here's a course that--you can't tell us we can't teach about the Civil Rights Movement, go find a black person to teach it. Vorenberg gets caught in the middle of this and this is deeply hurting to him. As deeply hurting to him as what just went on here at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] has been to Martha [Martha Minow], because he lived his whole life--he was in Mississippi summer [Freedom Summer], he rode the buses, he was picketing Woolworth's [F.W. Woolworth Company] in the '60s [1960s]. His father [F. Frank Vorenberg] which ran Gilchrist [Gilchrist's, Boston, Massachusetts] which was the--there was Filene's [Boston, Massachusetts], Jordan Marsh [Jordan Marsh Company, Boston, Massachusetts] and Gilchrist, but actually Gilchrist at the time was maybe as big as Filene's. And his father had owned Gilchrist and in the '50s [1950s] they caused a huge uproar in Boston [Massachusetts] because they'd hired the first black store clerk in a downtown Boston store. So here's a guy now being called a racist and his friend Jack Greenberg is being called a racist, for people who had struggled their whole lives in the Civil Rights Movement--now there's two ways he could have reacted to that. He could have become a Reagan conservative [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and said that's exactly what's wrong with you people. We coddled you. He could have become Clarence Thomas, but no he got on the phone and he called every smart black person he knew who had grad- and even some he didn't know. Randy he had just heard about, because Randy had been a top graduate at Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], clerked for Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] and Randy actually clerked--I met first met Randy when he called me up and said, "What's it like to clerk for Marshall?" I'm older than Randy, but Randy went straight into the teaching. He called up every black person he knew including some very unconventional choices like Tree and like me and put them on the faculty. Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause Tree would have been unconventional. He didn't have the same--he was totally unconventional. Speaker 1: Totally. Speaker 2: You, you had-- Speaker 1: I had the pedigree (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you had the law--you had the pedigree. He didn't have law re- I mean he didn't have the Harvard Law School review [Harvard Law Review]. Speaker 1: He did not have that conventional pedigree. What (background noise) Tree was was the greatest trial lawyer in the world. Story_ID: 644604 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this: Vorenberg [James Vorenberg] though, he's the one who was in fight with Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], right? Speaker 2: So what happens is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so let's-- Speaker 2: Now, okay so here I'll--let's roll the tape forward again. So finally, I agree to come up here and meet people. So I come up and I meet people and they say, "Okay, you need to develop a job presentation, which will be something that you're going to write about and come give a presentation to the faculty." That's how you get a job here; it's still how you get a job here. Now I hadn't written anything other than a very mediocre Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] note six years ago. I had no idea about how to think about doing a presentation. So--that actually comes later in the story. So the first time I come up, Vorenberg says, "You should meet the head of the appointments committee," and the head of the appointments committee is Frank Michelman. I never had a class with Michelman. He had a reputation of being a brilliant guy, not a mean guy but just like a brilliant guy, which he is, right. So I'm kind of nervous and I'm walking here and I'm coming through--somehow maybe I parked in the parking garage or I forget why I was over there, but I'm walking to Griswold [Griswold Hall, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is where Michelman's office is. I walk and I look by the Hark [Harkness Cafe] and there's Derrick Bell. And I said, "Professor Bell, it's so good to see you." I told you he was my professor. We all took his course 'cause he was the only black person here and he took an interest in every black student. We could do three hours on Derrick Bell, he was an amazing person. But this story will suffice for now. So I hadn't seen him probably since I graduated and it wasn't that I was--there were people who were really close to him and worked with him, I was not one of them. So he recognized me right away, and we start talking and I say, "Professor Bell, what are you doing here?" He said, "Well, they're trying to get me to come back to Harvard Law School because I've quit now the Oregon deanship [at University of Oregon School of Law, Eugene, Oregon] and they say to me I should come back and I'm here to meet with a few people and I haven't decided whether I'm going to do it." Then he said, "What are you doing here?" I say, "Well, Jim Vorenberg called me up and he said I should apply here and I'm meeting the head of appointments committee as part of the first step of the application committee." He says, "Who's that?" "It's Frank Michelman." Now we're walking right, now we're walking in Griswold, Michelman's office is on the second floor of Griswold I think or third floor of Griswold, I think it's still there. So we go up--we walk up the stairs and we're talking, and so we get to Michelman's office and there's his secretary sitting out in front and he's in his office with his door closed. So I say, "Are you Frank Michelman's sec- Professor Michelman's secretary?" And she says, "Yes." I say, "I'm David Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], I have an appointment at ten o'clock or whatever to see Professor Michelman." And she says, "I'll tell him." I'm still chatting with Derrick, Michelman walks out, he looks at me then he looks at Derrick and he runs over to Derrick and he says, "Derrick, Derrick, it's so good to see you. I didn't know you were going to be here today." And he gives him a big hug and then he says, "Derrick, you have to come back, you absolutely have to come back, we can't live without you here. I know what happened in Oregon, but we miss you, we need you. Please, what could we do to get you to come back?" And Derrick says, "Well, you know I'm thinking about it, a lot of things I'm thinking about, but here's one thing you could do that would really mean a lot to me and make it more likely that I might come back." Michelman says, "What? Anything." He says, "Hire David Wilkins okay." I tell that at Derrick's memorial service to Janet [Janet Dewart Bell], that's how Derrick was. He said, "Hire David Wilkins." Now how do you think my interview went after that? Okay (laughter). You know that's just, that's what Derrick did, that's what he gave--everything, he--all his credibility, everything to help other people. Story_ID: 644605 Speaker 1: So you know anyway now--I mean if you want to fast forward, so then I get you know, (laughter) by what seems to be a miracle, I get this job [at Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I had no idea how hard it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, but--wait, but you get the job, but I thought they--you get the job as a test. Speaker 1: No, so I get the job-- Speaker 2: See this-- Speaker 1: Well, it depends on how you look at it as a test. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I come in a different way than Tree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree]. So Tree comes in as a kind of visiting lecturer because Tree (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Isn't that how most of-- Speaker 1: No, most people come in as assistant professors. And so I'd say the classic way you come in is, you come in as an assistant professor. You--at the time I came in it was like six years--you get six years and then you're considered for full professor. Speaker 2: Okay, then I remember David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], I just have to take issue with this. I remember a lot of women, I remember a lot--people coming in as visiting. Speaker 1: Yes Speaker 2: I remember even--Clark, I mean I remember--was that before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes so, but that's different. No, no, these are people, and the people--like you're thinking of like Regina Austin and like a lot of--there was this succession of black women, which will take us to Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.]. But these are people who are already teaching. See I wasn't teaching, so I was coming in the entry level. What you're remembering, even Bob Clark [Robert C. Clark] or let's say-- Speaker 2: Bob Clark came in as a--I have him as a-- Speaker 1: But he came in as a visitor because he was already a professor at Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] and then he came in as a visiting faculty member and after a year or a semester, we vote visitors tenure; and when you get voted in that way typically you then get voted in as a tenured faculty member. Story_ID: 644606 Speaker 1: So Tree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree] and I and Randy [HistoryMaker Randall Kennedy] and Chris [Christopher Edley, Jr.] and--so Randy, Chris, me, Scott Brewer, Ken Mack [Kenneth W. Mack] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wait, so wait, wait, can I understand-- Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: --so it's first--I mean not first, but its first Derrick--no, it's first Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] then Clyde [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Yes, Derrick Bell gets hired in 1969. He is the first black person in Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and probably the second or third ever in an elite white institution. You know the first is--Bob Ming [William Robert Ming] is in Chica- at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois], is hired in the '40s [1940s]. So Derrick, I can't remember whether he comes in '67 [sic. 1969] and then he gets tenured in '69 [sic. 1971], I can't remember. So there's Derrick, then there is Clyde Ferguson, and then there's Harry Edwards [Harry T. Edwards], which no one ever remembers because he only stayed two years and he left because Boston [Massachusetts] was the most racist place he'd ever been. He said, "I don't want to raise my family here," and he went back to Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and that was actually a big disappointment for the law school 'cause they really recruited him and Harry Edwards was--he's the Harry Edwards of today, he was brilliant. So again, the faculty--it's not like the faculty doesn't deserve the blame, but they actually have hired a bunch of black people here and then various things have happened. So, but anyway I come in as a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so Harry Edwards and then who's next? Speaker 1: Chris. Speaker 2: Chris Edley. Speaker 1: Edley I think, yes because Chris was here--Chris I think gets hired in 1979 when Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] loses. So I think Chris graduates from law school in like '75 [1975] or '76 [1976]. He goes to work in the Carter administration and then he is booted out. Everybody thinks Carter is going to have another term and then Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] gets elected and then he gets hired. So maybe he shows up in 1980. Speaker 2: Was he here when we were here? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, I don't remember. Speaker 1: No, no, no he wasn't here when we were here as students. So he probably comes in '80 [1980] or '81 [1981]. It would have been '81 [1981]. He probably came and he probably came in the fall of '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: Okay, and so he comes. Speaker 1: Yeah and he comes--the classic way to come is as what we call a junior faculty member or as an assistant professor without tenure, and you get six years to make tenure. Tree came in a slightly different way and he can tell you this because Vorenberg [James Vorenberg]--I think Tree always thought he was going to go back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and be the head of the public defenders office [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and become the mayor of Washington. In fact still when I got here, Tree was still talking about going back to D.C. and running for mayor, partly because he was so pissed off, rightly so, about what the last mayor had done to him. But in any event, so Derrick comes back, I can't remember whether we start--we might actually start the same time or maybe he comes back the year after. I think we start the same time the fall of 1986. So now there is Derrick, there is Chris, there is Randy, there's me and there's Tree who then gets tenure or goes on the regular system. He decides he's not going to go back to Washington at some point, but that's five black faculty members, but they are all male. And Derrick, again being Derrick and rightly so, says gee we should be thinking--there's by the way no other women of color on the faculty at this time. There are very few women, so Harvard, again this is a classic Harvard story, in some ways proportionately has always been better on blacks than it has been on women until at least very recently. So Derrick starts raising this and he's raising it in faculty meetings and now he's agitating for it and then there's a steady stream of black women or women of color, 'cause they are not all black, who come for visits, meaning they have oftentimes tenure at some other place like Regina--is her name Regina Austin--she had tenure at Penn [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I think it was Penn. I think Mari Matsuda might have visited and none of them got offers and Derrick got upset and Derrick went on strike. And you know, that was what then led eventually to Derrick leaving in--leaving the second time, and the last time, for NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 644607 Speaker 1: What is the process of onboarding, like you know, you did your presentation, you said you did-- Speaker 2: So I did, you know you do this faculty presentation, it was one of the more terrifying things of my life (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what is it? What is--? Speaker 2: So these are all my--you give a--you present like an idea that you're going to write. Today, it's you present a paper you've already written and people read it and then you give a twenty minute presentation and then they ask you questions. But I hadn't written anything, so it was really just an idea about some cases that I had worked on when I was a lawyer. And what they are really trying to do, I don't know, three things. I'm now sitting on the appointments committee so this is the kind of stuff I have to do. They want to know how--they want to think if you're smart, you have interesting ideas, excuse me, they want to see whether you would be a good teacher, because people ask you questions, how do you respond to questions, will you be a good kind of colleague. I mean they are trying to gauge all these things about you, right. But for me it's sitting there giving some talk with all my former professors in the room. Yeah, it was a very scary thing. This is why there are people who I've always had great affection for like Larry Tribe [Laurence Tribe] who came to my talk. Now Larry Tribe is probably at that time, still today, but certainly at that time, the most famous law professor in America. First of all, I was shocked that he even came to my talk and then he asked me a very nice question and then afterwards he told me, "I thought your talk was really good." He may have even come to a little reception for me. I mean he was just very--he went out of his way to be very nice and that meant a huge amount to me because those were all the people I was intimidated by. Phil Areeda [Phillip E. Areeda] was there. So Phil Areeda, now here I'm back on the faculty, in fact my funniest Phil Areeda story was after I get the job, I'm coming on my very first day of work and I'm taking Ann Marie [Ann Marie Wilkins] around to show her where my office is and there comes walking down the hall, in what is now Areeda Hall, I often say to my students, "Phil Areeda is the first person I ever knew who started out as a person and ended up as a building." I see him coming and I say, "Oh, Professor Areeda, let me introduce you to my wife, Ann Marie." And he goes (imitates), "Ha ha ha," he's got this laugh, he says, "Call me Phil." And I'm thinking, anything you say Professor Areeda because he was a scary guy (laughter). Anyway, but that's kind of what it was like, they're all my old former professors, but they were very welcoming to me. And I think they were very welcoming to me because the school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was getting a really bad reputation as being a terrible place for young people. So the day that I did my presentation was--I don't know why I was just telling this story to somebody. Everybody seemed very nervous and on edge and I was going around, you know, you meet faculty in their office and stuff before the presentation. Everybody was really nervous, well I find out everybody is really nervous because the faculty has just voted to fire Clare Dalton who is a crit and the left is up in arms and the right is--everybody knows it's going to be on the front page of The New York Times and they turn down--she was the second person they turned down for tenure after having never turned down anybody for like fifty years or forty years. So it was a big--and it was getting a reputation of being a terrible place and sometimes that's the best time to come, because everybody was on their best behavior and people could not have been more open and welcoming to me. Story_ID: 644608 Speaker 1: Now I did some smart things, which turned out to be smart, which I never--you know, I tell--this is the advice I give people now. I didn't--it turns out, you know I wasn't like the kind of student that went out to meet all their professors and stuff, I never met my professors 'cause I figured the less time you spend with your professors the better off you were, 'cause it meant if you were with--like in the dean's office, you were probably in trouble. So I didn't know a lot of people, so I just decided I was just going go ask every faculty member out to lunch one by one, and there were only about sixty people here and so I just went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How many? Sixty? Speaker 1: Sixty--six zero, yeah something like that. The faculty when I joined in 1986 probably was sixty. Just to put it in perspective, today it's probably 110. It's much, way bigger. And so I just went around and asked people out to lunch. Really what I was trying to do was just, A, make myself feel a little more comfortable with people I didn't know. And B, I would ask them questions about what do you do and what are you working on and any advice. Well little did I know, some of these people hadn't been asked out to lunch for like twenty years (laughter), and certainly not by some junior person, and many of them had been typed as being people who were bad for juniors and whatnot. So the first time I ever did a presentation to the--like I had a paper I was working on and I did a workshop, like two thirds of the faculty came 'cause all those people I'd gone to lunch with wanted to show me they supported me. I mean it was just, it was just one of those--so if you ask me what my experience has been, and certainly what my experience was during those years including Derrick [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] going on strike, I never had a bad experience around race really. I mean little this and that, but I'd say people went way out of their way to make me feel comfortable and that was particularly important because I was not a typical assistant professor. I didn't dream about the job, I had no idea whether I could write anything that was worth anything. I knew I could teach. That was the other thing, so I came in and I was a good teacher from the first year. In fact, down here someplace is a letter that all my students wrote--first year, first class students wrote to the dean saying they should keep me. And in fact, that cup there is called the civil procedure cup that my students in 1986 gave to me; I'm very fond of that class. Speaker 2: This was your first one? Speaker 1: My very first class-- Speaker 2: David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins] that's extraordinary. Speaker 1: Well they were very--I think in part-- Speaker 2: No, but that's extraordinary. Speaker 1: And they were rooting for me, but I was a good teacher and I--there's an old saying in teaching that students really don't care how much you know, they want to know how much you care, and I cared about them. I think they appreciated that and they knew I was young, I was thirty. I had a student in my first class, the first day, you know how you're sitting in the thing and you look up and on the top row there's this guy who looks like he's fifty years old and he's in a suit and tie and he's sitting in the last row. I'm thinking to myself, oh my god, are they sending people to look at my teaching already or something the very first day. I looked down on the seating chart and there's his picture, no he's a student and he wasn't fifty, he was like forty something, but he was way older than me. But it turned out he was this amazing guy who was--he had a second career and he'd been a drug addict and he turned out to have a fascinating story. But I just say this to say you know it was a scary thing to walk in to be a professor. Lots of people helped me along the way including this guy David Trubek who was visiting at the time, and who has become one of my great friends and mentors. Before I taught my first class, I'm reading Goldberg vs. Kelly [Goldberg v. Kelly, 1970] over and over again. Do you remember Goldberg vs. Kelly? That was a first class case we used to teach in civil procedure, and I'm totally scared and it's like eight o'clock at night, and I hear a knock on the door. I'm in my office in the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because that's what I used to do. I didn't work at home, I was in my office. A knock on the door and there was this guy David Trubek who was a visiting professor from the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin] and it turned out one of the big people in critical legal studies although--again at this point I don't really know what critical legal studies is but I just know we're teaching--he's teaching--they had divided the first year civil procedure section into thirds and I had a third, Trubek had a third and Al Sacks [Albert Sacks] had a third, the former dean. So Trubek had gone out to dinner or something and come back to get something and he sees my light on and he knocks at the door. He says, "Are you nervous?" And I said, "Yeah, I'm scared to death. What if I screw up and I've never done this before." Then he says this, he says, "Just remember this: the lion tamer knows that the lion can eat him, but the lion doesn't know that and that's how the system works. Meaning you know that your students could actually destroy you," (laughter), "but when you walk in there you're the professor and they're going to pick up their pencils and they're going to write down everything you say." And that was the kindest thing anybody ever said to me, and I never forget that and I tell any first year professor that story. Story_ID: 644609 Speaker 1: So I thought when I came to teach that they were going to hand me a syllabus and a teaching plan and say on day one you do this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Turn down your iris, okay go on. Speaker 1: --day two you're going to do this, no. They hand you--they don't hand you anything. You go pick your case book, now I was lucky because by the time I started teaching, there were many things that were lucky about me. This may be less interesting than what you're interested in. They decided that what they did to Betsy Bartholet [Elizabeth Bartholet] was like cruel and unusual punishment, meaning they gave her a hundred forty-four students and she'd never taught before. So now every first year teacher, then I should say, only got a third of a section. Speaker 2: So that's why they divided them up. Speaker 1: Yes, and you got two established teachers who could help you, and so I had a little teacher, professor's study group because-- Speaker 2: So that's Sacks (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Al Sacks [Albert Sacks] and David Trubek, and we all taught the same book and so I had people to ask questions to. Undoubtedly that made a big difference. Speaker 2: And they divided the class size or-- Speaker 1: Only for first year--they gave--this was their attempt--by 1986 they were trying to make a--was the beginning of the kinder, gentler Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], that now we see coddling the students in that (laughter) amazing student center [Caspersen Student Center] that looks like the Four Seasons hotel (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, it's true. Speaker 1: Yes, isn't it? I mean, you go back--all the alumni they bring back they say, "What?" Speaker 2: I can't believe that. Speaker 1: They have fake fireplaces, you know leather sofas, you should go in the Harkness gym; the gym is beautiful. Yeah it's a whole different thing. But the first thing they did was they said, "Well, maybe we should try to reduce--at least give students [sic.] at least one, quote small class, in the first year." They took one of the big sections for one class and they would divide it into thirds and they would usually give that to a new junior professor or a visiting professor to make it easier for them. Story_ID: 644610 Speaker 1: How did you know that you could be a good, a good teacher? I mean, you said that when you were working with Fergu- I mean with Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]--? Speaker 2: I taught for Clyde Ferguson and I taught for David Shapiro [David L. Shapiro]-- Speaker 1: No, but when you said you taught for them, how did you teach for them? 'Cause I don't remember that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--you don't remember? You've blocked out the legal methods course. Speaker 1: I hate-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) So when you took (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I hated that and the ethics course. Speaker 2: Yeah right, which is of course the things I teach. So when you took civil procedure there was a kind of a research and writing course that was adjunct to civil procedure. If you had Clyde Ferguson, you had this-- Speaker 1: No, no I had--remember I had-- Speaker 2: Oh you had Arthur Miller, so Arthur Miller you might not have had this (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't think we had this. We did not have this. Speaker 2: So David Shapiro and Clyde Ferguson were doing this, and maybe this was kind of an experiment. Eventually it became mandatory for all civil procedure sections. But it was like, think Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Brandeis college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] where you have a big lecture class and then you had like a little twenty person section where it was usually taught by a graduate student. That's kind of like what this was. I had twenty students and David Shapiro actually had designed these problems that people would do writing assignments and little simulations and little oral arguments. The whole idea was to teach you a little bit about being a lawyer. Now we have a whole course that the students have to take. But they're--so I'd done that and I'd been very successful at that, and you know teaching is talking and relating to people. So I thought I could do that and then I'm sure somewhere in the back of my mind, and again this isn't--I don't think I ever surfaced this, was that my father [Julian Wilkins] was a great teacher and I think my father would have been so much happier in his life if he could have been a teacher, professor. In fact, I find out much later in life from my mother [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins] that at some point when he was relatively young, he thought about taking a position at the American University in Beirut [American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon] teaching law. Isn't that amazing? So I never knew this until ten years ago my mother tells me this or fifteen years ago. He doesn't do it because he feels that he needs to take over his father's law practice [Wilkins, Wilkins and Wilkins, Chicago, Illinois], and after all it is Beirut [Lebanon] and they'd never been out of the country. But anyway I guess I was confident that I could teach. Now I was still scared as to whether I'd be a good teacher or great teacher and what I realized on early on is that I had to be my own kind of teacher, 'cause if I tried to teach like Phil Areeda [Phillip E. Areeda], it just would have been a disaster because I'm not Phil Areeda. The lucky thing was I wasn't twenty-five, I was almost--I was thirty-- Speaker 1: You were thirty, that's still young. Speaker 2: Yeah and it's still young, but I'd been on my own--I'd been out for six years, I'd argued cases in court, I'd done a bunch of stuff. So I think that helped me to realize I had to be myself in the classroom. What was harder for me was to learn how to be myself writing, which is why it took me a very long time to write a significant piece and why that little piece on Justice Marshall ['Justice as Narrative: Some Personal Reflections on a Master Storyteller,' David B. Wilkins] was so important because that I knew I was writing from my heart. It then took me two more years to write and I realized I had to--there was all this pressure, if you don't write you're going to get fired [from Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I was writing stuff over and over again and ripping it up and I probably wrote five thousand pages to get something that was eventually, you know, I don't know, sixty pages or something. But that was a much harder thing for me--that was a much harder thing for me. Story_ID: 644611 Speaker 1: I mean, how many classes in do you feel like I've got this or--? Speaker 2: Well, you know my students were very good to me after this first class so, and people were going to the dean and you know here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Saying that they liked you? Speaker 2: Yeah, and here is where Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] is different than other law schools; teaching still matters here. And back then, 1986, if you were known as a good first year teacher-- Speaker 1: You were (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --pretty much you could do anything. And in fact that's all we really knew, that the reputation was being a great first year teacher. So when after the first semester I got very high--and of course they published your teaching ratings in this book, which everybody says they don't look at, and then people came up to me and said, "Oh, we see you did very well and you got very high marks from your students." So in other words they did look at it, right and that set the tone, and that was a huge relief for me that it at least meant something that I would be able to do. Because this was--in the same year I changed jobs, changed cities and got married [to Ann Marie Wilkins] all in 1986. So it was a big year of transition for me. But people like Randy [HistoryMaker Randall Kennedy] and Tree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree] and Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] were all incredibly helpful and supportive. I felt like I had people--and Martha Minow who I've known. So Martha Minow clerked the year before me for Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] and her family is from Chicago [Illinois] and so her parents knew my parents [Elizabeth Sweeney Wilkins and Julian Wilkins] and she always took an interest in me right from the beginning. People looked out for me and I was very lucky that way. Speaker 1: But can--now what was Martha Minow's role at that time? Speaker 2: So Martha was just a professor. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was--she didn't even have tenure yet. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Martha was a junior professor. Story_ID: 644612 Speaker 1: So Tree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree] taught criminal law. Tree was--I, you know again I don't want to really speak for Tree on this, you'd have to ask him, but so Tree's--the story about how Tr- I mean there's so many funny stories about how Tree just got started was--so he was hired basically to kind of come up here, spend the year, get away from the craziness in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] where he had been--this woman had forced him out [of the Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], and I think their anticipation was he was going to help Charlie Nesson [Charles Nesson] teach criminal law. So this I've heard from several people who were students in the class. So the idea was Tree would kind of be there--he would chime in about what the real world was like, and Charlie had great respect for Tree because Charlie had left teaching after we were in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Or no, maybe this was after he first started teaching, before I had him for criminal law; he'd gone and worked in the U.S. attorney's office or the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] for two years or something. So he really actually thought of himself and still thinks of himself as somebody who cares a lot about the real world. So they thought Tree was just going to come and hang out in class and be a resource. So first day they come in and Charlie is teaching something, I forget and then he turns to Tree and says, "What do you think?" So Tree starts talking, and so Charlie says to the class, "Why don't you ask Professor Ogletree some questions?" And they start asking. So Tree kind of ends up sort of doing the class. And then the next day the same thing happens, but the students are loving it because Tree's got all this real world, really interesting practical--and Tree's really good with students. Apparently like the third day or the fourth day, Nesson doesn't show up--he just literally doesn't show up, and so they wait for him a little bit and Tree starts teaching the class. Rumor has it that Nesson just says to Tree, "I think you're ready and you can do this" (laughter). So Tree was always a student favorite because he was always so good with people. The other story about Tree I'll tell on him is, and this came out so, so because he doesn't start out--he starts out as a kind of lecturer and then he becomes a junior professor. By the time he's going up for tenure, I'm already a tenured professor because I come straight in as a junior professor and go straight to tenure, and this is like one or two years later and, or maybe this was when we were going to put him on the regular faculty. So he had to have a vote of the faculty to go from being a lecturer to an assistant professor. This young white woman student, I forget how she does this, she either writes a letter or she stands up in some public meeting and she says, "Professor Ogletree has been the most important professor in my life." She's asked why and she says, "I'll tell you why. I was in class," and this must have been--Nesson would periodically pop back or something, "and I said something and somebody went after me. They went after me and then maybe the professor piled on and I felt like--the other students piled on and by the end of the class I just felt totally humiliated and I held it together. I went back to my room and I just broke down in tears, and then like half an hour later the phone rang, and it was Professor Ogletree and he just says, 'You know, I just want you to know I thought what you said was really smart and you have a lot of guts.'" Okay. That's the kind of person Tree is. So again you know it's very emotional for me now, but a lot of that stuff--he did a lot of that stuff. Story_ID: 644613 Speaker 1: I honestly thought, you know to this point because I remember visiting professors, they would come through, I didn't know that they were professors (unclear)--well I mean 'cause usually you recruit professors (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You didn't know, yeah-- Speaker 1: Well, that's the other thing, is that to become a law school professor a lot of times--first of all it's not that easy. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's very competitive. Speaker 2: And it's gotten more and more competitive. I often say I would never, ever be hired today. Speaker 1: Right and then--so it's competitive and then a lot of times you do--you're being tested in these places and I just remember people either it was like they failed the test, so they were here and then they were gone. Speaker 2: Well for a lot--so listen, this place has always been tougher on women, and I think for women of color it was particularly bad, and when Derrick [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] made it an issue, he didn't do this on purpose but it made it even harder for these women who visited because now the spotlight was on them and the--remember there was a rising conservative student movement. So the Federalist Society [Federalist Society for Law and Public Policy Studies] gets invented in this time-- Speaker 1: The--I mean--you're talking about the mid-'80s [1980s], mid to late '80s [1980s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the '80s [1980s], the mid to late--so it starts when we were there but then it, you know the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]-- Speaker 1: The Reagan years. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is the Federalist Society; this is the creation of the Federalist Society. Speaker 1: Okay, but David [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], what I'm trying to understand is how do you become--like you meet all the--you go and you invite all these sixty faculty out for lunch and what are you learning about them? Because the other thing we used to laugh about the faculty that some people were hidden from view and they were--especially your second and third year they felt like they dusted them off. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But what are you learning about the faculty? Speaker 2: So again this just happens to be my personality, which turns out to be very helpful for this. I'm just curious about people. So I'm just asking them--I remember, he's no longer with us so I can tell this story, so I take John Mansfield [John H. Mansfield] out--I ask him out for lunch, and again you get the impression nobody had asked John Mansfield out to lunch for a very long time. It turns out--what do I ask him? I just say, "Gee, I don't know much about what you do. What do you work on? What's your area?" Usually I try to know at least one thing about them. So I think for Mansfield he taught, I forget, property or something, but it really--it turned out he was like an expert on India and he'd been to India ten times or twenty times and he was like an expert on the Indian constitution [Constitution of India]. He actually was an expert on Indian art and Indian food, and actually I went out to lunch with him several times and he would take me to all these different Indian restaurants and he'd order all this stuff. So again you know I like people, which is why I couldn't be a judge and that's why I said to you I cannot be someplace where I don't get to be around people. I think that's why I'm a good teacher because my students know I'm curious about them. I would go out to lunch with every student, or at least offered to go out to lunch with them. I would, and even when I was teaching 140 students, I would take them out to lunch two or three days a week. I'd go out to lunch with groups of ten students. We'd go to Changsho [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and we'd get a table and I would just say, "What's your name? Where you from?" And just little things like that at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] could go a long way. So I think my personality made it easier for me. I think the fact that not just that I'm a man, but the way I teach is not as likely to engender the kind of resistance. So first of all I wasn't teaching critical race theory, I wasn't teaching race, racism and the law, I'm teaching civil procedure and in fact there was always issues of race that were in the class, but it was never that that was the focus. I think also--I've known this my whole life, if you're light skinned when people look at you--first of all, some people didn't know I was black. Eventually everybody figures it out. But it's not something that confronts people all the time. So my experience here has been a really good experience and to the extent that I've had issues which from time to time I've had, is very rarely I think had anything to do with race in a kind of obvious or straightforward way. That I think is probably--I always say to people that's just my experience. I'm not saying that's your experience and I can understand when people say their experience has been different. But I also say to people you shouldn't assume that all black people have the same experience. But also I was more--I had more--I was more like them except for being black and being younger, I had a lot of the same resume, law review [Harvard Law Review], clerked on the [U.S.] Supreme Court [for Thurgood Marshall]; I had a few years of law practice [at Nussbaum, Owen and Webster]. Then I had some powerful--so Jim Vorenberg [James Vorenberg] brought me here, he was the dean and so he clearly had a stake in my success, although as the years went on his deanship became more of a tumultuous one. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But he was always somebody I knew that I could go in and talk to and then Bob Clark [Robert C. Clark] became a good dean for me. Story_ID: 644614 Speaker 1: One last question, that's when Derrick [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], when he decided, you know, that he was going to take on the wom- the female faculty, you know minority--where, where were you in terms--I mean the other black faculty were you-- Speaker 2: So here's the thing about Derrick again that I've always really respected. He never told us that it had to be our fight. Now I think--by this point he's feuding some with Randy [HistoryMaker Randall Kennedy], which Randy is writing about, so I'm not telling tales on the school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], because Randy actually had been on the appointments committee that had turned down some of the people that Derrick wanted to hire. And Derrick, I mean there was a certain oedipal thing here because Derrick brought Randy in to be his successor and then it turned out Randy had different views and so it was complicated. But I think he always felt like me and Tree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree] and Chris [Christopher Edley, Jr.] while he was here, we were all sympathetic to what he was going to do, but none of us were going to go on strike and he didn't expect any of us to go on strike. In part because we didn't have tenure and in part because he realized I think that this was his way and his approach to dealing with things. And I was at that rally that the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] spoke at when he was only the president of the Harvard Law Review and Derrick was on strike and it was replayed endlessly on FOX News. I think we were all supportive of the idea but no--it takes--I think this is why Derrick was a rare person because he realized that if he pushed everybody to do what he did then actually you know we might not have any black men either, you know. And that as long as he felt that we were trying to do something and try to be engaged and that I think he was fine with it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's a very special guy...