 Story_ID: 22136 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interview today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Let's see, Conrad, middle name, Malcolm, Williams. And that's C-O-N-R-A-D, M-A-L-C-O-L-M, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 1, 1936, and I was born in Warsaw, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, Warsaw, North Carolina. And, what is that near in North Carolina? We wouldn't know, I mean that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess, you know, one, a person asked me once, you know, coming through North Carolina--coming through Warsaw, asked me where was Warsaw. And it sort of reminds me of a story that my wife told, who's from Oxford [Mississippi]. Her father said a man came through and asked, where's Oxford? So he told him, don't move or you'll miss it (laughter). And Warsaw is that kind of town. "Don't move or you'll miss it." I don't know what the population is. I just happen to have been born there. In fact, with the exception of my sister, all of my first cousins, we were all born in the same house, my grandmother's house there in Warsaw, North Carolina. And Warsaw is near, it's between, going down Route 117. It's between Goldsboro and Wilmington [North Carolina], along that route. And I think it's sort of, it's in Duplin County, if I can remember. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And let's see, sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: At the present, I'm a professor of physics, at Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And enjoyable, of course. Speaker 1: Now, aren't you chairman of the department? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Or, you used to be, right? Speaker 2: No, not chairman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All of those positions, there are people that are better qualified than myself. That's always, we went, went without a chairman for about three years. And I always said, no, not me. I think there're better qualified people. Actually, I'm not qualified to be chairman (laughter) in an academic institution. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So, well, let's--so you're at Morgan State [University], right? Speaker 2: Yes, at Morgan State, yes. Speaker 1: And you, are you still working on any projects for the National Science Foundation [NSF] or the [U.S.] Naval Research [Laboratory, Washington, District of Columbia] or-- Speaker 2: Well, I actually normally worked at the Naval Research prior, prior to coming to Morgan [State University]. But, no, I think currently, Keith [Jackson, also a HistoryMaker] and I have a grant from AFOSR [Air Force Office of Scientific Research] in the area of nano-science technology, directly related to ferromagnetic material, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I think it's July 17th, 19--or I'll go up a year, 2012. Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at 1440 New York Avenue, not 1400, and in Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 22137 Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, warm-up questions that just require a short answer that we always ask. And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Fish and perhaps yogurt. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No, no favorite color. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think the fall is the best time of the year, fall and spring, not particularly fond of the kinds of summers we have around here. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, in general, I guess I usually go off to maybe--I haven't been recently, but Thailand as well as Malaysia. I always, I like a little island there called Langkawi in Malaysia, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, I think you'll pick it up as we go through here, and it's, when you can't think of what you wanna say, it's "like, you know." (Laughter) So that's probably the favorite phrase (laughter). Story_ID: 22138 Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family, and your family history. And we're gonna keep 'em separate, and then we'll put 'em together at some point. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: It's Lillian Fagan Williams, and that's L-I-L-L-I-A-N, first name, middle name, F-A-G-A-N, last name Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 6, 1907. And she was born in Plymouth, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: About the same size as Warsaw, [North Carolina] I would guess. Speaker 1: Is it nearby? Speaker 2: No, it's on the East Coast, eastern coast of North Carolina, but further--it's more north. Warsaw is further south. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right, now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Let's see. My mother's grandfather owned probably the only black grocery retail store in Plymouth, North Carolina. And his store was situated down on, I think Water Street. And he was surrounded by stores owned by white proprietors. And he had that store for years. And actually, (laughter) my grandmother told me he bought, he had the first Model T Ford in that, in that town. But then after his father died, I think he was forced to move to the black neighborhood and set up his store, and which when he passed on, he left that store to my Uncle Frank. And my Uncle Frank did not--he was kind of a high roller, so my uncle was old enough. So he let him run it, and he could send him some of the proceeds in New York for the most part. So in other words, he was, my grandmother, grandfather--my grandmother's father managed to leave them all of his estate. And so it was a good situation for my grandmother. She inherited quite a bit of the property. And that's about as far as I can go back, although I did kind of remember my grandmother's mother because I was very young at that time. But I do remember my grandmother's aunt, and I knew my grandmother well, on my mother's side because I would spend my summers in Plymouth, North Carolina. Speaker 1: I wanted to go back and ask you about your great grandfather and since he owned his store on the white side of town, was he related to the, a white person at some point? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: That's what that, okay. Speaker 2: I think when his father died, he had to move (laughter). Speaker 1: So his father was white. And-- Speaker 2: That's where I, that's, as near as I can tell, that was the case, yes. Speaker 1: So his father's white and owned property, and does the relationship go all the way back to slavery? Speaker 2: I think it does. I don't know definitely, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, there's always a question historically, wonder how black people acquire property. And it's often through relationships like that, through the owner of the plantation or of the property-- Speaker 2: Yeah, on my father's side, it's clear, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered. That's why I asked that. So, when his father died, he had to move the store. He was considered then completely black, I guess-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --after his father died-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --the white influence being gone. Speaker 2: That's right. So, and then it was still profitable. In fact, when my uncle took it over, it was still profitable. And I think that store only sort of slipped out of the family because I think my uncle had three girls. And I think none of them wanted any interests in it. So they eventually sold it, I think. Speaker 1: So these are the Fagans? Was your great grandfather a Fagan? Speaker 2: No, these were, no, my great grandfather was a Moore. Speaker 1: A Moore, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Can you give us his full name? Speaker 2: Dan Moore. Speaker 1: Dan Moore, okay, M-O-O-R-E? Speaker 2: M-O-O-R-E, yes. Speaker 1: Oh, Moores with an 'S' on the end? Speaker 2: Moore. Speaker 1: Moore, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: M-O-O-R-E. Speaker 2: --R-E, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah. Okay, all right, so, well, we, yeah, you were continuing to tell stories about that side of the family. Speaker 2: Yes, okay, and, you know, my grandmother had eleven children. And I think the twins died at, early, I'm not sure how old, maybe a couple of years. And then the younger one passed on. So she had nine survivors out of that. My mother was the, the third oldest, I think, because I think there were two brothers ahead of her. And my grandmother was a school teacher. And-- Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Cymera, C-Y-M-E-R-A. Speaker 1: C-Y- Speaker 2: --Y-M-E-R-A. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind that name? Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge. Speaker 1: Do you know what it means or where it comes from? Speaker 2: No, I've never--she was always Grandmother Cymera to us, you know. And never gave it, given it any thought. And outside of--and I guess we could have really learned a lot from her about, ancestrally, but back then, I guess, she wasn't interested in talking about much of that stuff. But anyway, she taught school for fifty-five years. Story_ID: 22139 Speaker 1: And my mother [Lillian Fagan], although she was born in Plymouth, North Carolina, the schools were poor. So my grandmother [Cymera] sent her, with my, to live with my cousin Fannie who lived here in Washington [District of Columbia]. So my mother was educated in Washington, and the, or the District of Columbia. She went to the Lovejoy Elementary School. I'm not sure what high school, what, what junior high school she attended. But then she went to Dunbar High School here and then onto Miner Teachers College, and she graduated from Miner Teachers College. And-- Speaker 2: Now, that was adjacent to Howard [University, Washington D.C.] or near Howard? Speaker 1: That's right. There was, no, there were, you know, Howard--Miner was right on Georgia Avenue. Howard was kind of behind Georgia Avenue, but with Georgia Avenue address, of course, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. I've heard about that. Now, Lovejoy is named after Elijah Lovejoy-- Speaker 1: Elijah Lovejoy, yes. Speaker 2: And Dunbar for-- Speaker 1: Paul Lawrence Dunbar. Speaker 2: Great poet. Speaker 1: Yes, Speaker 2: And he died the year before your mother was born. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, now, did she become a school teacher? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, in fact, that's why I was--she was, she went to North Carolina, back to North Carolina to teach in a town called Four Oaks, North Carolina. And that's another one of those "don't move" towns, yeah. And that's where she met my father, who was principal of the school. Speaker 2: Okay, now, that brings us--well, before we leave your mother, did she have any stories about growing up in Washington, D.C. that she shared with you, people she met or activities that she was involved in? Speaker 1: Well, I must confess, I can't remember any. I can just remember she, indeed, my cousin Fannie and Mr. Smith became old, older. They really liked her, and actually, they left the house to her when they passed on. And amazingly enough, the bed that both of them died in, I have at my house now. It's a brass bed. It was made at the turn of the century (laughter), yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, now, was the house in area around Howard University? Speaker 1: No, the house was on Capitol Hill, twelve blocks due east of the [U.S.] Capitol. Speaker 2: Now, that area I've been told at one time was a, had a mostly black population, the area around Capitol Hill. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: A lot of black people lived there. Speaker 1: Well, when I lived there, I grew up there, when I--I don't wanna get ahead of the story, but I think it was predominantly white. There was just this one street, you know, that we lived on which was between 'B' and 'C'. 'B' eventually came to be Independence Avenue. And the street was called Walter Street, W-A-L-T-E-R. And because the neighbors behind us on 'B' Street were white, and I guess most of them on--I'm not sure about 'C' Street. But on 12th Street, it was just about all white. 13th Street was all white. And I must confess, you know, I, interestingly enough, I never saw any minorities other than African American, you know, I'd never seen any Hispanics when I was growing up as a kid. And only one oriental and this was the Chinese guy who owned the laundry on the corner. And that was about it. So, it was pretty isolated, and the street was, you know, had many professionals in it for the most part and some excellent football players who played, that's actually where the first NFL [National Football League] referee, Leo Miles, grew up in that street. He played with the New York Giants [American NFL team]. And his brothers were good football players for the most part. I don't know how much of this you really wanna know, you know. But I love to talk, you know, so I guess you gathered-- Speaker 2: That's good. That's what-- Speaker 1: I guess you gathered that by now. Speaker 2: That's what this is for, so I'm writing this down. Speaker 1: And off the record, when I wanna listen, I go home (laughter). You can scratch that (laughter). Speaker 2: So, there are no other stories about some of the neighbors that your mother grew up around or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, well, I think she knew everybody because my--I think Mrs. Diggs and Aunt Elsie, they lived across the street. And they weren't my, we called them Aunt Elsie and Aunt Edna, but, and Mrs. Diggs was their mother and Mr. Diggs. So she knew them reasonably well 'cause those girls grew up together on the street, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 22140 Speaker 1: All right, well, let's go to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Let's see. It's Opie, O-P-I-E, Hanibal, H-A-N--I'm not sure, H-A-N-I-B-A-L, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story behind his name? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't, I don't know, you know. It's hard to tell why people name their kids what they name them, you know. Sometimes I wonder whether some of these names are names or handicaps. I'm not sure (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so, anyway, I know the only, Opie, I think the most popular one is the one on television, the son of Andy Griffith. Speaker 2: Yeah, Andy Griffith. Yeah, he passed just recently from what I understand. Speaker 1: Yeah, Andy Griffith did. Yeah, he died about two weeks ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And then Hanibal. Speaker 2: Well, I guess that's his, I mean my father was born in the South, you know. So I guess that was a typical southern name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what is your dad's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 13, 1891. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was born in Kenansville, North Carolina. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: I think it's K-E-N-A-N, K-E-N-E-S, I think, -V-I-L-L-E [Kenansville]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if my cousin, who is a writer sees this, I'll get my wrist slapped (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in Kenansville, North Carolina? Speaker 2: North Carolina, yes. Speaker 1: And is that anywhere near-- Speaker 2: That's near Warsaw [North Carolina, where Williams was born]. Speaker 1: Near Warsaw. Speaker 2: About seven miles east of Warsaw. Speaker 1: All right, now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: Well, my father's grandfather was Frank, no Francis Williams. They called him Frank. And he was white. And he and his brother were slave owners, big time, you know. And he co-mingled with a mulatto named Harriet. That's my great grandmother. And I think she was out of New Orleans [Louisiana] or some place, and we still haven't cleared that one up yet, as to where she's from. The early on, and I think I have another cousin, along with Narissa, who's the writer, who's the historian. And they've been trying to put the pieces together in this particular, in that particular case. And he sired, I think, seven children, or maybe eight. And my grandmother was one of them. Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name is, was Martha, M-A-R-T-H-A, Elizabeth Williams. Speaker 1: Now, was she born during slavery or after? Speaker 2: No, she was born right after. She was born in 1867. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I'm not sure and some of the earlier siblings may have been born in slavery. Speaker 1: No doubt. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they kind of lived in the big house, you know, so I don't think it matters very, meant very much. Speaker 1: 'Cause they-- Speaker 2: Well, they had a house. He, he built a house for them, Frank. And Frank was considered--they used to call him, you know, Judge, Judge Frank. I'm not sure whether he was a judge or not, you know. But that hasn't been clarified. But now, when he passed, he left all of his property to his children. And, you know, some set up businesses, some in Goldsboro, North Carolina. And then their offspring were either, all went to school--actually, my grandmother, my grandmother also--both of my grandmothers graduated from university, on both sides. My grandmother on my father's side graduated from Barber-Scotia [College, Concord, North Carolina]. And she also taught school for fifty-five or sixty years. Speaker 1: Barber-Scotia, now, that's, I've heard of that college before this. Speaker 2: That's in Charlotte, North Carolina. Speaker 1: In Charlotte. Speaker 2: Down near Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina], I think. I think. I'm not sure. It's probably still in existence. I would guess. Speaker 1: Okay, now Barber-Scotia, is that a black college? Speaker 2: Yes, it's a black college, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, down there, it would have to be, you know. Johnson C. Smith, okay. Well, it's interesting. Now, these stories are always interesting to me, that you find someone who has children through a slave relationship, initially, anyway, and he gives all of his possessions to his children. Speaker 2: And, and it was reflected in the generation after that because out of that, out of that offspring, his grandchildren were like physicians and dentists and I think--My grandmother was a teacher, so I guess I came up on the poor side of the family (laughter). Speaker 1: So the rest of them had bigger professions than she had--. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. In fact, so that was a reflection of the bequeath of, in his last will and testament. Story_ID: 22141 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, so your father was born down there in that town? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what were the stories your father told of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, he, I mean a lot of the, some of the things that I knew about, you know, the family, I got, I got from him, you know, actually where he was born, where his grandfather, you know, built the house for his mother and her siblings. Speaker 1: Okay, so the grand--his father or was his grandfather that built it? Speaker 2: His grandfather built that house, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't know very much about his father. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so, did he pass away early or something or did he-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, both of my grandfathers, on both sides, passed away before I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, now, I take it your dad, he finished school too, if he was a principal of this-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I forgot. He graduated from [North Carolina] A&T [Agricultural and Technical State University] back at the turn of the century, yeah. Speaker 1: A&T is in Greensboro [North Carolina]. Speaker 2: Greensboro, yeah. Yeah, he graduated with honors. Speaker 1: Okay. So around, about 1910 or something. Well, he would have to be-- Speaker 2: Let's see, he was born in 1891. So I guess around 1908 to 1910, some place in there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay, and did he go, did he have a graduate degree too or did he-- Speaker 2: No, not to my knowledge. Speaker 1: And do you know what he majored in, in school? Speaker 2: I have no idea, but he was an excellent mathematician. Story_ID: 22142 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how your parents met and fell in love? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Lillian Fagan] graduated from Miner Teachers College [Washington, District of Columbia], and she was looking for a job. So she went down and started teaching at the school [in North Carolina] that he was principal. And then my siblings and I are the by-products of that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, there was some kind of other story in there somewhere, but they didn't talk about how they-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: I guess they had on-- Speaker 2: Yeah, because you see, my parents separated when I was approximately seven years old. And so actually, it was my mother that really raised us for the most part. Story_ID: 22143 Speaker 1: Okay, so, you knew your father [Opie Williams] growing up, right? Speaker 2: I would go visit him sometimes during the summer but not often. Speaker 1: Now, did he continue to live in Four Oaks [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: My father moved from, my father, physically, I guess he lived in Warsaw [North Carolina]. But then he moved go Goldsboro, [North Carolina]. So that's where he lived for the rest of his life, in Goldsboro, North Carolina. Story_ID: 22144 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you consider your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their interests, their hobbies, their talents, their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I'm not too sure, probably a mix of both because my mother was a good mathematician as well. And the, although, I guess she was more literarily inclined. Probably, I guess, genetically, both of them, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have one brother, older, and one sister, four years younger. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So you're in the middle? Speaker 2: I'm in the middle, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you grew up in the house on-- Speaker 2: Walter Street. Speaker 1: On Walter Street. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 22145 Speaker 1: And what, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I guess the earliest childhood memory was when cousin Fannie and Mr. Smith were living. We used to visit, come up from North Carolina where my mother was teaching and visit there. So I remember the house, and I remember the layout of the house and the fact that there was a very nice grapevine in the backyard, and the grapes were some of the best I've ever tasted, I guess (laughter). And I do remember that. And I remember the hedge in front of the house and getting pushed in a stroller by the little girls on the street, you now. They thought I was some sort of baby doll or something, I don't know (laughter). That's my earliest memory. And then, outside of the fact that I really grew up in the house, so, you know, following that, I guess when my mother [Lillian Fagan] and father [Opie Williams] separated, all three of us came to Washington [District of Columbia]. I mean she brought all the three kids [Williams and his two siblings] to Washington. And we moved into the house because she owned the house, you see, so. We didn't have to worry about any extra board. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 22146 Speaker 1: And, now-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: And I went to the same elementary school my mother [Lillian Fagan] went to, Lovejoy Elementary School. And I went to, I didn't go to--I don't remember what junior high school she went to because I went to, I think these--I may be getting a little ahead of you here, but-- Speaker 1: A little bit. I'm gonna ask you about school. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, I'll-- Speaker 1: But before I ask about that, we always ask this question. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: And it could include school and the neighborhood, and other things that you saw when you were growing up. But what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, in growing up, I lived twelve blocks due east of the [U.S.] Capitol. I could walk from my house at age seven or eight to all the museums that are on the [national] mall here. I was, and I spent so much time in the museum, particularly, the Castle, the oldest one there, that I knew all the artifacts, you know, like the Wright brothers' plane, the 'Spirit of St. Louis', you know, the plane that, oh, what's his name? I've forgotten now. Speaker 1: Lindberg? Speaker 2: Lindberg, yes, was there, and other artifacts. And I was there so often, you know, I knew many of the guards by name. And, you know, sometimes, you know, they would ask me, you know, do you want a ice cream cone, you know, or whatever. And then I also--the Museum of Natural History, I knew the curator. At age ten, I knew the curator there because we used to bring him, we used to find stones like quartz and stuff like that. And we used to take 'em to him, a friend of mine and I. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: The curator? Speaker 1: The curator, yeah. Speaker 2: I don't remember his name now, but he's a nice, I mean he was a little up in age--well, everybody, when you're a kid, everybody's old (laughter). But, that's above you. No, so we used to carry various stones. And he would explain to us, you know, diamonds and, you know, the transition of coal to diamond and how these things--. So I learned that stuff at a early age. And it was interesting because, you know, he took a lot of time, time with us, you know, the two of us. Speaker 1: This is you and who else went with you? Speaker 2: A friend of mine named Roderick. He's dead now, Drew. And, you know, sometimes I--, and then, and the Capitol, I knew every ounce of, every place in the Capitol building and the House because during the summer, you see, if I got caught in the rain on the way home, you know, the Capitol was like midway. So I would stop there. And there was a big magnolia tree behind it that had big petals, big leaves on it, I can remember. And we could stand under that tree and not get wet if we didn't get a chance to make into, inside of the Capitol building. And on the hot days sometimes, I used to ride the subway in the Capitol, from the Capitol building to the Senate office building. There's a, I don't know, I guess that train is still there, that subway is still there. And so I met a lot of, many of the congressmen. And I was a kid, you know, more or less, you know. So I guess I was tolerated or something. I'm not sure. And after a while, I guess I became an icon around that place, Roderick and I. And so, we knew who knew all the chambers and that sort of thing. Story_ID: 22147 Speaker 1: So did you know the, I think there was only one black congressman in at that time. Speaker 2: Well, Adam Clayton Powell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I can tell you some stories about him. Interesting. You see, Walter Street [where Williams lived in Washington, D.C.] was one short street, but there were, at the end of the street, there was a alley. It was called 'Guestfort Court'. And we used to always say, "Guess What Court" (laughter). And Adam Clayton Powell, unbeknownst to most, had a carriage house back there in that, in Guestfort Court. And I'd see him sometimes, you know, because it was a corner--, right on the corner of that alley was a grocery store. And he would come out in his bedroom slippers and, you know, to get some refreshments from that store, and speak to all of us, you know. And so I guess he found Guestfort Court was a nice place to mind his business, you see. And so, yes, I met Adam Clayton Powell on several occasions as a kid because he lived back there in Guess What Court. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you know William Dawson from Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, I didn't know him. Speaker 1: Yeah, William Dawson was the other black Congressman. Speaker 2: Yeah, but see I stayed mostly on the Senate side because that's where the train was, that's where the subway was. I don't believe there was one going from the [U.S] Capitol to the House office building, to the--at that time, I guess, I think it was the Long-, the Longfellow or the Longwood Building. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then they built the Rayburn building. I remember when they built that. And, and actually, I learned to play tennis on the, on the [national] mall because behind the Capitol, behind the Capitol were tennis courts, about sixteen of them, clay courts and very well kept. And I think they were originally put there for the congressmen, you know, to come down and play. And I used to hang out by the fence with my tennis racket. And I would get invited in to hit with congressmen that couldn't hit anyway, you know. But, you know, at nine or ten, I could, you know, hit the ball pretty good. So that's where I actually learned to play. And then a few years later, those courts became public courts. And actually, that was the origin of the Washington, D.C. 'Mall Tennis Club', which was an all-black club at that time, you know. And that's where most of the mall tennis club played. We used those courts. And the only other courts that were available at that time were the courts at Banneker, but they weren't, they were not like these courts which were very good clay courts. So, so if you want to consider the Capitol and the mall and Lincoln Park and my neighborhood, those were some of the sights and there were no smells, you know. And, but at that time, you know, you could send your, you could send your kid downtown [Washington, D.C.] or you could take your kid downtown, for example. And we had the trolley car. I remember the car barn was at 14th and East Capital Street. And sometimes, during the summer, you know, I used to, you know, play around the car barn. And occasionally, that car would go from Lincoln Park to Mount Pleasant. And then, you know, if I wanted to go for a ride, I'd just hop on the car. You know, some of the conductors, who were all white at that time, you know, would say, "Conrad, you wanna go for a ride to Mt. Pleasant?" And I'd hop on, and I'd sit behind the conductor and get a nice ride to Mt. Pleasant and then, then back, you know. And, and I don't think--and then right out, right by (laughter), right by Lincoln Park, I used to shine shoes because there was a People's Drugstore there. And Roderick and I used to shine shoes, but the police would always chase us away. And you didn't wanna get caught because he would take, they would take your shoeshine box. And, you know, you could start again. You'd have to build another shoeshine box and stock it again. And, you know, for a kid who only got a dime for a shoeshine (laughter), you know, that's not economical to hang around and let them take your shoeshine box. But I remember one day, we were out there when it was hot, about just like this, you know, today. It's a hundred degrees out there now. And so we decided, the stores, the counters were all segregated. And you couldn't go into People's Drugstore and get a soda at the counter. So I remember Roderick and I said, look, let's go in the store. We were about eight or nine and, and get a, and sit down and order a soda. Speaker 1: Now, this is about 1945, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there, yeah. Yeah, and so we went in there, and we sat down. And the, the white soda jerk, she said to us, "You know we don't serve any niggers in here." And so Roderick said, "Well, ma'am, I wasn't aware that we had ordered one." And we flew (laughter). Speaker 1: So you hadn't ordered one, huh (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). And that was very interesting, you know. But that was our first Civil Rights sit-in (laughter). Story_ID: 22148 Speaker 1: So, is there anything particularly memorable about the war [World War II] and being in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] in those days with the War going on? Speaker 2: Yeah, when the war was going on, there were rations, you know. There were sugar rations. You know, you had these little ration books. And then the only sugar you could get was brown sugar. It wasn't processed sugar. And it's-, and it took me until this day to appreciate brown sugar again (laughter). The other thing was that we had air raid wardens that would walk the streets. And then following, and then--you could not have a light on your house unless you had what we called black-out blinds. In other words, these were black shades that, because at night the city was dark. The city was dark, okay, I mean, there were no lights during the war. I remember that. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. So at night everyone had black shades to prevent-- Speaker 2: That's right or no lights at all. Speaker 1: --an aerial attack? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So did they light the [Washington] Monument up or the [U.S.] Capitol in those days? Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: Nothing. Speaker 2: That's right, during the--that's my recollection. Speaker 1: I never heard that. That's- Speaker 2: Yeah. And, but the city was fairly safe during that time. We lived on that street, and nobody had air conditioning like we have now. And, you know, we had the storm that came through here a couple of weeks ago. And (laughter), with high temperatures and no one had air conditioning. But I can remember as a kid, there was no air conditioning on my street. In fact, the, I remember the ice man delivering ice for, to ice boxes. And the fish man on Fridays--I grew up in a basically Catholic neighborhood, coming every Friday to peddle his fish. And, but at night, but nobody ever locked their doors. If it's hot, it was hot, you had screens in the window. You had a screen door. You had the hook on it. And, and you weren't in harm's way. And I don't think until I became an adult that I ever had a key to the house. As, and going to school, we just didn't lock the doors. And, but I think the situation changed when, I guess, drugs became more prevalent. Speaker 1: Now, when you--yeah, things have certainly changed now, but when you were growing up, did you ever get a glimpse of the president [Franklin D. Roosevelt] or Eleanor Roosevelt or-- Speaker 2: Let me recall. Yeah, well, no, I didn't. The only, in fact, probably at that age, I didn't even think it was important (laughter). The only thing that I do remember was Roosevelt's funeral procession. And this building is located right at four--the building we're in now is located right at 14th and New York Avenue. Well, we're right at 15th and New York Avenue. And that procession came down Pennsylvania Avenue to 15th Street, and made a right, and then it came down to New York Avenue to continue on Pennsylvania Avenue and made, when it made a left. But right at that intersection on this corner side, to see, I climbed the lamp-post. And I had a seat up there at the top of that lamp-post. And, you know, the lamp-post is a light here and a light here, and if you can go out there and look at it now, they're made exactly the same way. And in the center, you know, there was this arm. So I sat right in the middle of that arm, and it's a wonder someone didn't say, "Well, look at those little monkeys up there now." (Laughter) But nevertheless, that's my only connection. And you couldn't miss it because when he died, there was so much publicity. Everyone was talking about it. So as curious kids, you know, we said well, let's, you know, let's go see this funeral procession, although we'd seen funeral processions because I live right around the corner from St. Cyprians (ph.), and they would have--and I lived across the street from the veterans funeral home. And I remember they used to sometimes park the hearse in front of our door. And my mother would get mad and go over there and says, "You know, she's not ready to go, she's not going any, anyplace and anywhere any time soon. So you park that hearse over there in front of your, your door." I remember her specifically telling George Bedders (ph.) that, you know. "Don't park that thing in front of my door." So, and I guess I could go on and on because I, I guess I'm not quite senile yet, you know, but-- Speaker 1: Now, your friend, Roderick Drew, is he related to Charles Drew? Speaker 2: No, no, he wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. I thought I'd ask (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, he wasn't, yeah. Speaker 1: Because he was a D.C. resident too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 22149 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about school now. You started school at Lovejoy, right? Speaker 2: At Lovejoy, yes. Speaker 1: And did you go to kindergarten? Speaker 2: No, when I came, when we moved to Washington [District of Columbia], I went to the second grade, I think, the second grade. Speaker 1: So you actually started school up in-- Speaker 2: In North Carolina-- Speaker 1: North Carolina. Speaker 2: --'cause my mother [Lillian Fagan] was my first-grade teacher. Speaker 1: Okay, is that the same school in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, at Four Oaks [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Four Oaks, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. My mother was my first-grade teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, well, see, now was there any--what particular subject matter at school did you like the most or did it matter at that age? Speaker 2: Recess (laughter). I wasn't the best student in the world (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --for the most part. Speaker 1: Well, you sound like you really enjoyed learning, though, you know, especially here in D.C., going to the [national] mall and having access to the Smithsonian [Institute] and the Museum of Natural History. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, in spite of the fact that my mother's background was English, you know, I was a very poor reader. I could never keep up with my brother who was older. So I got my reading from the funny book and the funny paper (laughter), more or less. And, you know, school was not one of my top priorities for the most part because, I guess I was more--and my wife says, probably still am, you know, not very well organized in that, in that sense. You know, I, I guess in school, particularly, I, in exams I guess probably never finished anything in elementary school, you know. I remember the arithmetic exams or whatever we'd have, you know, I'd never work all of 'em, you know. So, I remember the third-grade teacher asking me, "Well, how come you, you only worked half of these." So I said, "I didn't see the point of working all of them because they were all the same, you know. I mean, I got, all I work I got right, you know." And when you looked at the rest of 'em, they were all the same, just the numbers were changed, you know. So, in fact, I almost failed the fifth grade. I think I passed the fifth grade in three weeks, I guess. And I guess those were the three weeks that I showed up, you know. Speaker 1: So, would you not go to school sometimes? Speaker 2: Yeah, I found school boring, you know. And actually, I flunked the, flunked the eighth grade straight out, pretty much, because, see, my school was right next to the river, okay. And the Langston Golf Course, and I used to catch some of the biggest catfish that you, that you ever saw, you know (laughter), from that, you know, I'd just check in the home room, get my rod and reel out of the locker, go down to the river. Speaker 1: So this is the Potomac or the, one of the-- Speaker 2: Anacostia River. Speaker 1: Anacostia, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was probably pretty clean back then. And so I remember the, and my mother sent me to North Carolina for the summer, the principal really had a fit with her because he told her that I belonged in summer school. So, then I went to the same high school my mother did, Dunbar High School. I started out there. Speaker 1: Now, did you have to repeat the fifth grade. Speaker 2: The fifth? No, I passed it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I took the exam and passed it in two weeks, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: All right, so, and so you're at Dunbar. Speaker 2: So I'm at Dunbar, and, in fact, you know, I believe I had the same math teacher my mother had, Mr. Smith, yeah. But then I left Dunbar because, see, Dunbar was designed for, for students who were going to the university. Then we had, well, we had four systems here. We had a school for college bound, a school for people who wanted to do the trades, like electrical and plumbing. And then we had another school for people who were interested in the business, going into business. That was Cardoza. And we had Phelps for those who wanted to do bricklaying and automobile mechanic. But then they built Spingarn High School. And, so Spingarn High School was in my neighborhood, was my neighborhood school. So I went, so I left Dunbar in 1951 and went to, and I was, you know, transferred to, to Spingarn. And Spingarn had a little of everything in it except, you know, automobile mechanics and bricklaying. You know, they had a sheet metal shop, print shop and academics and my math teachers there, I mean Dr. Sears, she had a Ph.D. in mathematics. And many of the, many of my, my chemistry teacher had a Ph.D. My physics teacher and most, most, at that time, almost every teacher at that level had a master's degree. And Columbia University [Manhattan, New York] was probably one of the first schools that created a lot of Ed-type or educational doctorates and masters because I guess, I would say that at least 35, 40 percent of the teachers at my high school got their degrees from Columbia [University], yeah. Actually, my uncle who was the dean at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], he got his educational doctorate from Columbia. And so in high school, I kind of fumbled around and managed to, to get out, nowhere near the top of the class, of course, you know, probably closer to the bottom. And I was fumbling around there, after graduation, and (laughter) the biology teacher asked me, he said, "Well, Conrad, where are you going to school next year?" I said, "Well, it doesn't look like I'm going anywhere," you know. So my, I had an ultimatum, you know, from my mother, you know, that I may not be going to college, but I'll be going somewhere (laughter), you now, either to a job or, or something of that sort. Story_ID: 22150 Speaker 1: Okay, I was asking about, you know, role models. Are there any males, scout leaders or guys at the 'Y' [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] or friends of your mother [Lillian Fagan] or anybody in the neighborhood that took an interest in you, you know, on a regular basis, you know, 'cause your father's [Opie Williams] in North Carolina? Speaker 2: Well, I was pretty much a roamer, you know. I didn't stay in the neighborhood much because I could go down to the [U.S.] Capitol. I could go down to wherever, but then there was a person next door to me, George Coleman. George was a contractor, okay. And very interesting guy, you know. I liked George. And he used to park his truck out in the alley, and (laughter), we used to keep it clean for him. Now, you can interpret that any way you want (laughter). And so George asked me if I wanted to make a little money, extra money, you know, I guess, rather than sell stuff off his truck, you know. But, so, I went to work with him, George and Charley, Charley Johnson. Charley is still living today. George is dead. Charley is ninety, and he's still a contractor, okay. But I just thought I'd throw that in. But, you know, so I learned all of the trades from those guys. I think the first job they gave me was when they used to renovate houses, you would knock down and tear out the plaster and stuff like that. And my mother told me it would cost me more to send you to that job than you bring home because I was so dirty and what have you, you know. And, but I learned to do plumbing. And back then, we didn't have the sweat, you know, the copper and, or the PVC [polyvinyl chloride] that we have now days. You actually had to thread iron pipe, you see. But even though the technology has changed, but the codes are still pretty consistent. So if you wanted to be a master plumber, you had to know this sort of stuff, you know, vent pipes and where they need to be placed and all of that. But I learned all that stuff from these guys. Then I also learned electrical wiring from, from them and, and how to, you know, do framing and other stuff. And I must, and then, so what--and then I also learned painting. And I used to come home on the weekends from the university, since I learned these trades. And I could make a lot of money on the weekend back then because I had the skills. And I was kind of interested in those things. And I still do that stuff today. And, you know, and I think the important thing is that I put a thousand square feet onto my house, okay, along with the help of two other people. But all the wiring and plumbing and, you know, amenities that, you know, you'd really have to pay through your arm and leg. So it was educational in that sense. And I enjoy tinkering with things, and that's one thing that--and they were skilled enough that they always kept me from reinventing the wheel. And sometimes when I reinvented the wheel, it sort of surprised them, you know, but because they hadn't thought of doing it that way. But in many instances, you know, they sort of kept me on the beaten path. So, George, we remained friends until he died. Charley, I just ran into him because I, I didn't know where he was, and so, but I ran into his son. And I said, "Well, how is your father," 'cause I thought his father was long dead, you know. He says, no, no, he's helping me fix my house here. And I said, "Well, how old is Charley?" He said, Charley will be ninety-two and he's still lifting four by eight sheets of (laughter), of drywall. And so Charley had some electrical problems over there, that I went over and straightened out for him. And, and I said, "Charley, well, I thought you knew this. You were the guys that taught me." He says, "Well, your eyes are better than mine." (laughter). I said, "Not my skill." (laughter). But, so he's still around. He's ninety, ninety-one or ninety-two, maybe ninety-three. I'm not sure. So if you ask if there's a, male models, it would be those two guys because, you know, in many instances it was a lot of discipline associated with it because--and I liked doing what I was doing, you know, because you had to be there, I mean they had to be on the job at seven o'clock. You know, I mean that's the time they got started. So, I mean you couldn't be lying around in the bed or you'd miss a day and you wouldn't get paid (laughter). Speaker 1: So you worked with them off and on throughout your teenage day? Speaker 2: Yeah, throughout my teenage years, yeah. Story_ID: 22151 Speaker 1: And, now, at school, did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: Physics and math. I was very good in physics and math. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, English, you know, even though my mother [Lillian Fagan] was bent that way, you know, I, I was--well, we spoke well in my house, you see, pretty much. And I didn't see the, I didn't do very well in those areas. In fact, you know, I can remember saying under my breath when we were learning [William] Shakespeare in high school, the English teacher, you know, "Why art thou." And I said to myself, that one day, I'm gonna tell Ms. Sparks, "Ms. Sparks, ain't nobody in my neighborhood talk like that," you know. "Why art thou" and this sort of stuff, you know, but I was afraid that--I was already considered retarded, you know (laughter), so I, I didn't want to remove all doubt (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in high school activities at all? Did you-- Speaker 2: I, I was, I was a good swimmer. I was a good athlete. I swam in high school, and then I also was a good tennis player, and I played football early on, yeah, until I found that, until I decided that, nah, swimming is a little better 'cause all the girls came to the swimming practices, you know. They didn't come to see those guys out there in the mud and rain (laughter). And so as far as I was concerned, swimming was much more profitable. Speaker 1: I see, I see, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, now, now, did you run for class office or do any of that kind of thing when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Not in, not in high school. In high school, I was consid--I was, really, about the only thing that I was good at was photography. You know, I was the newspaper photographer. That was about it. And, no, I didn't run for any office. I mean they needed the bright kids for that, you know. And, not that I felt that I wasn't bright, you know. It was, you had to read. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't strive to be popular. I mean you weren't like the popular kind of person and did you-- Speaker 2: Well, athletically, I, I don't think I--I was, you know, pretty, pretty well respected for my talents and, an excellent tennis player. I still play. Speaker 1: Now, did you play an instrument or anything or do anything artistic? Speaker 2: Well, my mother started out giving us piano lessons, but my hands were never big enough to make the octaves. And so I found a better outlet for the piano lesson fees, namely, candy store and the baseball game. Story_ID: 22152 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, were you influenced growing up by a popular culture stuff, radio or movies? Did you-- Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: --do much of that? Speaker 2: Yeah, growing up I was a ham radio operator. I'm still, I still, on my car now, I still have my license number, K3AMB. And I used to hook school and, and would build these forty-meter transmitters. And I could talk to-- and the skip was in like the sporadic E conditions. Like now, we've got this big solar flare. Well, we used to say that's, there used to be an eleven-year cycle. And when the sporadic E conditions come in, you could, you could talk to people in Japan and in Alaska and all over, just on forty meters because what, you can get, you know a single skip--sometimes you get a double skip. And my brother was a ham radio operator, and so I kind of picked that up from him. And I got a license, and, and I enjoyed doing that. And at that time, there was no voice. You know, it was all Morse code, you know, dot, dot, dot and so forth. And so that, that, that might account for one of my lack of success, part of my lack of success in high school, you know, 'cause that was more fun for the most part. Story_ID: 22153 Speaker 1: --So in your household growing up, it was you and your mother, your-- Speaker 2: Brother and sister. Speaker 1: Brother and sister, and that's it, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and I had a dark room, and we had this electronic equipment, and, you know, I--and I had a nice (unclear), you know, running from the garage to the house that got pretty good reception; used to build crystal sets and with cats' whiskers. Speaker 1: Tell us, I've heard about crystal sets before, but I don't think anybody hardly my age even knows what a crystal set is. What, it's a radio, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a radio. It's for listening, you know. And what you had, it's just an LRC circuit. What you'd have is a, oatmeal box, okay (laughter), and so you'd wrap around that coil, okay. And you had a crystal. And I can't explain in detail now as to how you build one, but I had built several, you know, when I was seven, eight or nine, you know. Speaker 1: So all you need is a wire and an oatmeal box? Speaker 2: And you need a crystal, a quartz crystal. Speaker 1: Okay, a quartz crystal. Speaker 2: And a cat's whisker, you know, that goes on this thing. It's just a, you know, it's a very narrow, and you move this thing around, you know, and try to get the right LRC circuit, you know, which that thing was like a capacitor, you know. And, and basically, the electromagnetic spectrum is there, okay. So you have this big coil. Let me explain--I'll go back a little bit. As a kid you probably wound wire around a nail, right, and put a battery across it and you could pick up other, pick up other nails. Speaker 1: Yeah, a dry cell battery that you could make a magnet, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But on the other hand, the electromagnetic spectra is out there already, you know, all these signals like that cell phone, the cell phone. That electromagnetic wave is passing through you right now. So suppose you had a big coil, you see, and you put it in the way of it, then just through induction, you're going to induce a current in those coils which is directly related to the electromagnetic wave that you, that you're transmitting. And the same thing is true, and a classic case of that is the case of a transformer. In a transformer, you know, on the pole out here, you have one coil that induces a current in the other. And that's the way Niagara Falls, I forgot what kind of voltages they send down. But when it gets to your house, by the time they down-drop it through these induction coils, it's 120 or 220 or 440 volts. So it's kind of the same principle that, you just to have to have some way of detecting these sounds that are going through. Now, if you had a super heterodyne in your head, you could hear a lot of this stuff that's going on, you know. But you don't. You need an interpreter, which happens to be your cell phone or your, you know, iPod or iPad [devices marketed by Apple Inc.] or whatever the case may be. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard stories of people that have had a tooth filled or something and they hear radio signals accidentally (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I haven't heard that one, but that's possible probably (laughter), yeah. But, but, no, I think that's kind of how my childhood went. Story_ID: 22154 Speaker 1: And, see, my mother [Lillian Fagan] worked during the day. She had to be to work early because she left North Carolina and came here [Washington, District of Columbia]. And then she worked in the government as a statistician. And, and this was sort of like near the end of the war [World War II] or during the war, I can't remember. Speaker 2: Okay, you said she was a good mathematician, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --she--so, did she only work during the war or did she work for the rest-- Speaker 1: No, she worked until she died, you know, for the federal government, yes. Yeah. Story_ID: 22155 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So in high school, you managed to go--now, did you go to the prom and all that sort of thing in high school or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, you know. I, I went to the prom, and that wasn't a real problem. It's just which one, you know, that's--and I enjoyed it, you know. I mean I had good relationships with, yeah. I mean I wasn't short of a girlfriend or anything like that, you know, by any stretch of the imagination (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you have favorite music or favorite musicians when you were-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm, I've always been a classical music fan, ever since, from the very beginning. You know, I mean I knew early on, I sort of grew up on it in my house for the most part. Classical music and jazz, and I'm still, I still have that bend. You know, I sometimes, you know, when I used to take my daughter to school in the car, you know, and I had to pick some of her friends, she would ask me, say, "Dad, do we really have to listen to that?" You know, and I said, "Well, what's wrong with it?" She says, "Well, I don't, my friends, you know, and I don't think we like that kind of music," you know, (laughter) classical music, you know. So I said, "Well, you know, I have a suggestion. You can always take the bus." (laughter) And so, so that's what I listen to mostly, even now, on a regular basis. It's soothing and I've always like all of the piano concertos. And when I started playing the piano, I could get some of them, you know, but I could play by ear better than anything else 'cause I didn't like reading music. But there's only a limit to that, you know, particularly if you don't have big hands. Story_ID: 22156 Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in this dilemma. You graduate from high school [Spingarn High School, Washington, D.C.]. You should be going to college, but you're, you're at a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a little dilemma, and as I was starting the story, the biology teacher, Mr. Mason, he saw me in the hall. And he said--Clinton Mason was his name, and he said that, you know, you really need to be going to somewhere. And so I said, "Well, you know, I can't even get in the schools where I have relatives," you know (laughter). So he says, "Well, you know, I graduated from Morgan College [now Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]." And I'd never heard of Morgan College. And he said, "And I know the registrar and the dean over there. So why don't you let me write them a letter if you're interested." I said, "Yeah, I'm interested," you know. And it beats going to work full time. And so he wrote this letter to, I'm not sure whether it was Carter or Grant at Morgan which was the dean, but I met in the dean's office. They wanted me to come over for an interview. And when I get--I was a little late, you know, and when I got, come to the door, he says, "Young man, you are late," you know. I, obviously, it doesn't look like I've gotten out of that habit, you know, but, and said, have a seat. And I sat down, and he had my transcript in one hand and this letter of recommendation in the other hand. And he said, young man, are these two people the same people (laughter) because, I mean it was this flowery letter of all of my, all of my potentials from Mr. Mason. And there was this, you know, that transcript that didn't look like it made it past the trash basket. And so they said, well, you know, based on Mr. Mason's letter, we're gonna let you in here on probation because, you know, you have deficiencies in history and geography and some of those other social sciences. But my math and chemistry and physics grades were pretty good. And so they let me in. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 19-- Speaker 2: 1951. Speaker 1: '51 [1951], okay. Speaker 2: No, 1954, 1954. Speaker 1: 1954, okay. Speaker 2: '54 [1954], yeah. Speaker 1: That's what I was thinking, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 22157 Speaker 1: 1954, so this is the year of 'Brown v. Board of Education' [U.S. Supreme Court ruled that state laws declaring segregation of public schools were unconstitutional]. Speaker 2: Yep, and that May--I got out in June. That May, they made the decision, the [U.S.] Supreme Court passed down the decree. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I had a little problem because, see, this is getting to be close to August [1954], and there was no place to stay on campus [at Morgan College, Baltimore, Maryland which is now Morgan State University]. So I had to stay in town or in downtown Baltimore on Preston Street, you know. I rented a room, had to rent a room because when I, at Morgan, there were only 1,300 students. And they only had two boys' dormitories, Baldwin and Banneker. And they were filled. And then in the park, Morgan Park, which is right close to Morgan [College]--or was it Wilson Park, I'm not sure, they, all those rooms, people had rented them out, you know. And so I had a dilemma. The other dilemma was that all the good classes were gone. And so it looks like for me the classes that I wanted to take in math and physics were eight o'clock in the morning, you know, and nine o'clock, and I had to take two buses to get to Morgan. And I couldn't get to school on time when I lived next door to it, you know. So to make an eight o'clock class was really difficult. So at the end of the first week, I had spent--you pay your rent for the whole month, okay. And, and I spent, after the end of the first week, I spent all the money that I, my mother [Lillian Fagan] gave me to eat on, at the end of the first week. And so then I sat down and I got this scenario of going home. And so I said, well, I don't have any money to eat on, okay. All of these classes are difficult to get to, you know, at eight o'clock in the morning. And so I hitchhiked home. And I got home, and my mother says, "Well, boy what are you doing here?" And, you know, it's an hour's, (laughter), it's an hour's drive, ride, from Baltimore to Washington [District of Columbia]. So that gives me plenty of time to get my story straight. And so I had this story down pat, all the problems. So that next morning, she sent me right back over there and said, here's five dollars. If you spend it all before the end of the week, you starve (laughter). And so I came back and decided to, you know, straighten up and fly right, I guess, because--and I was caught between a rock and a hard place because she wasn't gonna let me come back there (laughter). And so the easy path out this time was, was to stay. And so I stayed, and I did rather well for the four years. Story_ID: 22158 Speaker 1: I've heard great things about Dr. Julius Taylor [was a physics professor at Morgan State University, also a HistoryMaker]-- Speaker 2: Well, he was, he was my, he was my--when I was, I've forgotten what it was, you know. He tagged onto me pretty early for some odd reason, and I remember in his interview, you know, I was surprised to find out that I was his strongest student (laughter). You know, somebody saw it, and I said, no, no, it couldn't be, you know, because I always thought that he thought that maybe I was a little trifling, you know. But I wrote the first paper with him. I remember 'The Conductivity of Mercury at Its Critical Point', when I was an undergraduate student there. I mean I did the research in his laboratory. So, yeah, I was a little surprised to, I mean, I mean that was thirty-some years ago, but he thought I was his best student over all those years, you know. And I don't know how far you wanna really go in this, you know, but I enjoyed, after I got settled there, I enjoyed the environment at Morgan [College, now Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Morgan was good, good for me in the sense that it was small enough, you know, that you're not gonna get lost if you're a mischievous person like, presumably, I was, you know. Or my mother [Lillian Fagan], she used to say, "Oh, I hope you have five just like you." And I was lucky. Both of my kids are great (laughter). But so that's, that was my saga. And then I left Morgan and I-- Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute. I didn't wanna leave Morgan yet-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: --jump out of there yet, but you did well in the sciences. Did you, now we've interviewed a lot of the social science people over there, Roland McConnell and Richard McKinney and some of the others, Sidney (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I did-- Speaker 1: Did you do okay in the-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I was probably ahead of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was probably ahead of them. But I-- Speaker 1: Do you remember Benjamin Quarrels, a historian? Speaker 2: I knew he was there when I was there. I didn't, I didn't, I didn't know him, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was a fun place. And then it got better when I moved closer to campus. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about social life at Morgan? Did you join a fraternity or something or did you get involved in any of the social-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't join any fraternity. You know, I just didn't believe--I didn't think I needed anybody beating on me, dumber than me (laughter). That really didn't make any sense to me, but, and I haven't suffered for it. Speaker 1: Now, two other things went on there, like national kind of things. One, well, there's probably more than that, but I'm gonna ask about two, the Montgomery Bus Boycott of 1956, you know, kind of like shook the country up, the visuals from it and Dr. King making the scene on the TV for the first time. Did you, do you remember that and did the students discuss, you know, were they discussing politics or civil rights [during the American Civil Rights Movement]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I guess my focuses, you know, I mean I must confess, is sort of like maybe the way I still am is that I kind of have my head in the sand because my wife has to tell me, you know, well, she and my daughter, they feel I'm the world's worse because I don't know all of these popular people that they know and who Boo-Ditty Doo is (laughter), and I have no idea. And these things like, these popular, seemingly popular programs like 'Dancing With the Stars' and I mean I don't look at that stuff on television. And but they criticize me because I look at Andy Griffith (laughter), you see and the shoot-'em ups, you know. I mean I still--'Gunsmoke', I still like that, and amazingly enough, you know, I turn it on in the kitchen and I even have my wife looking at it now. And she used to criticize me for (laughter), you know, "Why don't you look at something else?" And I say, "Well, what is something else" and because I look the, they're looking at the 'The Who's Housewives' you know, in Georgia or Atlanta or Beverly Hills which, it doesn't, it doesn't appeal to me at all, you know. And I, when I have the opportunity, if they leave the room, you know, 'Gunsmoke' is on (laughter), yeah. But-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you were pretty much the same then when you were in college? You kind of-- Speaker 2: Pretty much, pretty much, you know. I mean I enjoyed the science aspect when I was in college, you know. I mean I enjoyed dealing with the laboratory there, and I played, I played tennis for Morgan. So I was on the tennis team. Speaker 1: Did you swim too? Speaker 2: No, you know, a little problem with the swimming. See, I was pretty fast in high school. I was pretty fast in high school, but I remember Coach Brown said to me, he says, "Conrad, come here. I wanna have a word with you." He says, "I understand you're a good tennis player." (laughter) Speaker 1: This is the swim coach. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), because the only thing I'd see would be feet most of the time. Occasionally, I would see a half body at the finish line (laughter). Yeah. Story_ID: 22159 Speaker 1: All right, okay. So let's, so Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], at graduation, now, did you graduate with any kind of honors or recognition since you were the best student of Dr. Julius Taylor [physicist at Morgan State University, also a HistoryMaker]? Speaker 2: Well, well, no, I didn't. You know, I think I graduated with a 3.4 or something like that, 3.2, somewhere in there because early on, you know, when I first started getting started there, [my] record wasn't so good. I mean the record was okay, you know, but-- Speaker 1: You had to climb up from a point. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, yeah. Speaker 1: Were there any liberal arts instructors or courses that you found interesting? Speaker 2: I remember Mr. Haywood, not Mr. Haywood, Woodward, was the history teacher. I thought he was a very good history teacher, you know, I liked him. And he was the one that I, that the dean asked to continue to give me exams to get rid of these deficiencies in history and geography. Speaker 1: Now, is this the Woodward, is this the white Woodward or is this a black teacher? Speaker 2: No, no, black, black. Speaker 1: Black teacher. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's, he's dead now. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause there was a C. Van Woodward, a white guy that taught. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, but outside of that, and then I liked the philosophy teacher, Mr. Taylor, I.E. Taylor, Dr. Taylor, I'm sorry. And I liked him, you know, because he was a good philosophy teacher. Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought I'd ask. Story_ID: 22160 Speaker 1: And so, so after graduation, what were your prospects--oh, before we graduate you, I wanted to ask you about Sputnik [first artificial Earth satellite, launched by the Soviet Union in 1957]. We, there's been a tendency for us to ask everybody about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, Sputnik came-- Speaker 1: '57 [1957]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: And the whole-- Speaker 2: Sputnik kind of made it easy for me, yeah. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was a large interest in science at that point. So you could certainly, you know, get a good position, yeah, after you graduated from, you know, high school--I'm sorry, graduated from the university with a terminal degree. Speaker 1: I know [Albert] Einstein was held up by everyone in those days at the example of a genius, right, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, but Einstein-- Speaker 1: This is a physicist. Speaker 2: Yeah, but Einstein never believed that God threw dice. He never accepted quantum mechanics (laughter). And so I think, you know, he kind of fell out of favor. They respected him and, but they felt that he was a little behind, a little behind the times. Speaker 1: So the physicist, you know, felt that he was, maybe a little bit behind? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the Nobel laureates at that time, I think they felt that this was indeed the case. Speaker 1: The average man thought he was the smartest person that ever lived. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I mean, I mean most people, they would quote Einstein's theory of relativity even though they didn't know what it was, you know, but nevertheless, sounded important. Speaker 1: That's right, okay. All right. I just wanted to ask about that, and the, I know the president [President Dwight D. Eisenhower] and important officials would talk about the need to increase science education so the Russians didn't bury us and all that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. Well, well, I think there were, there were a lot of--well, we'll probably get to that, you know, but nevertheless, the emphasis changed on how things worked in the science community. Story_ID: 22161 Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated in '58 [1958], right? Speaker 2: '58 [1958], yes. Speaker 1: And so what did you do immediately, did you work immediately afterwards? Speaker 2: No, I went to graduate school. I went to--, in 1958, I went to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] to, to work on a master's-- Speaker 1: Now, this is when you worked under the tutelage of Dr. Thorpe? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Thorpe was my--I knew, I've known, I knew Thorpe ever since high school. In fact, Thorpe was an undergraduate. He's only a couple of years older than I am. And he was an undergraduate. And I used to come up to Howard [University] when I was in high school and fool around in his lab. In fact, I mean he used to give me rides on the back of his motorcycle. I used to ride with him on the back of his motorcycle. And then he used to come over to my house, you know, sometimes and, so Thorpe and Titus Pankey. Titus is dead now. But so, yeah, I knew Thorpe for, for a long time. And I, yeah, I still know him (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, it's curious, and I just had a question. I wonder why you didn't, did you, why you didn't go to Howard initially, you know, since you knew Thorpe and its' right here in-- Speaker 2: I couldn't get in (laughter). Answer's short and simple (laughter). Yeah, I think we discussed that a little earlier. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I thought he might have been able to make the same kind of plea as your teacher, your biology teacher [at Spingarn High School, Washington, D.C.], but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, probably the biology teacher had more influence, you know. But at that time, see Thorpe was just a graduate student probably, you see, 'cause I think Thorpe must be seventy-eight or seventy-nine now. And-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay, so you're at Howard, and Thorpe is, he's a professor there at this point, right? Speaker 2: Yes. He's a professor, yeah. Speaker 1: This is Arthur N. Thorpe. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't, I didn't work for Thorpe right away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I mean I didn't work with him right away. Speaker 1: Who was your advisor? Speaker 2: Well, Thorpe, well, Dr. Branson was my advisor initially. Speaker 1: This is Dr. Herman Branson? Speaker 2: Herman Branson, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, tell me about Howard. Now, was Howard, was it--how was it different from Morgan [College now Morgan State University, Baltimore Maryland] in terms of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I, I did well at Howard. You know, the--but what I did was, at Howard was I ran into Ed Sokevitz (ph.) who was at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory [Washington, District of Columbia]. Ed Sokevitz and Al Schindler, they would come to--Ed, he taught at, as an adjunct at Howard, okay. And Al Schindler and Ed would come over to use Thorpe's susceptibility balance because it was pretty, it was probably one of the most sensitive, I dare say, I know in the area. And I don't know about nationally. So I met them there, okay. And then I had solid state physics from Ed Sokevitz. And so in 1960, Ed Sokevitz said to me--and I hadn't finished my master's yet, Ed Sokevitz said to me, he says, you know--because he was also the associate superintendent at, of the metallurgy division at the Naval Research Laboratory. So he said to me, "You know, we could use a person with your electronics background in the metal physics branch." And I said to him, so he said, "Well, why don't you, why don't you come out and work for us just for the summer?" So, and that summer, I, I said, "Well, okay. But I'm not finished with my master's degree." I just had a bachelor's degree. And so Ed said to me, "Well, come on out," because I don't live that far from the Naval Research Laboratory. I lived on Capitol Hill, you know. It's just one bus stop (laughter)--not one bus stop, one bus line, you know, if I walked over to 8th Street. And he said, well, so I went over, and I, he said, "Now, what I want you to do is to work with Glenn Bailey" and, who was, we're trying to look at the effects of neutron irradiation on P-type silicon, the transport properties of that. And so that summer, Glenn and I got a paper out, in fact, we got two papers out. So at the end of the summer, Ed came to me, and he said, and Schindler came to me, and they said, "Well, you know, we have a permanent position here. And we'd like to offer it to you." So I said, "Well, you know, I still haven't finished my master's, you know, and I wanna go back." Said, "No, no, no you can finish your master's here. And so why don't you consider taking this full-time position," and something else he said, Ed Sokevitz told me. He says, "Now, I'm sure you, when you finish your master's and even your Ph.D., you're gonna find a position someplace." But said, "Now, we know you here, you see." (laughter)--this was 1960. "So you, to us, you don't have to prove anything, but wherever else you go, I mean, you're gonna be under scrutiny, you know, for obvious reasons." And so I took the position. And, and I finished my master's degree with work that I was doing at the Naval Research Laboratory for my thesis. Speaker 1: Now, what was your title at Naval Research Laboratory? Speaker 2: I was a research, at that time, I was a research scientist, a solid state physics research scientist. Story_ID: 22162 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was your dissertation about? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sounds like all those papers I've written, yeah. What was the title of that? 'The Effects of Neutron Irradiation or Charge Particle Irradiation on the Magnetic Anisotropy of Iron-Nickel Alloy Films'. Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a way to break that down for the uninitiated? Speaker 2: Yes, I guess, well, basically, it was a short--if you have iron and nickel, right, they're atoms, okay. And you have them in a matrix, in a material, okay. Well, they wanna form, I mean they have certain sides that they like to lie on within the symmetry of the lattice, an iron atom here, maybe a nickel atom here, an iron atom here, maybe a nickel atom here. But they're not necessarily ordered. They could be random on the sides. But the magnetic properties, the magnetization or the easy direction of magnetization which as we would call, the anisotropic axis, you know, the axis that is easier to--, you apply a magnetic field, all the spins will point in that direction. It depends upon where they're located and how they interact with one another. So the idea was that if you can somehow change the arrangement of these atoms under some force, some magnetic force, such that they all aligned in one direction, then we could say that that's the easy direction of magnetization. So if we apply a field in that direction, all the spins are just spun in that direction so they're gonna point that way. And we get a large signal, okay, whereas if we applied it perpendicular, it's harder to rotate the spins in that direction because we've already frozen them in, in this direction. So that's called anisotropy, that is, this direction is easier, this direction is harder. So if it were easy all over, in other words, if all the directions were randomly easy, that would be an isotropic situation. So by applying a--so one way you can get the atoms to move is, you put 'em in a magnetic field, okay. And then you knock 'em around with maybe charged particles from a Van de Graaff accelerator or just neutrons. And so the atoms will move. You know, you hit 'em, they're gonna move. They're gonna go to an equilibrium position. But now this new equilibrium position is determined by the direction of the magnetic field. So you're gonna find that most of the spins, the short-range, directional order of these iron-iron pairs, nickel-nickel pairs will be in the direction of that magnetic field. Now, you say well, I mean why can't I just heat this sample up and have the atoms randomly moving. But then you lose the dipole-dipole interaction, that is, the spins aren't as strong. You lose the magnetization if you heat it too high. But if you bombard these things with charged particles, then it's so fast that you don't raise the temperature to get rid of the magnetization. And you, and that is a, that is the vehicle for aligning the dipole moments. That was the essence of my thesis. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But, but for a master's thesis--, you see I designed and built the apparatus to, to measure these effects. And, you know, such as vibrating sample, magnetometer and a torque magnetometer because I had the electronic background to do that. And, and we got a lot of mileage, the branch got--we got a lot of mileage out of those instruments. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is, so you got your master's degree in 1960, is it '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: '65 [1965], yes. Speaker 1: '65 [1965], okay. Story_ID: 22163 Speaker 1: All right, now, when you were in school--now, I know you're not necessarily paying too much attention to popular culture stuff, but the '63 [1963] March on Washington took place while you were here, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess it did, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you go out there or anything? Speaker 2: No, I didn't, no. Speaker 1: All right, just thought I'd check. And so, and how was it work with Dr. Branson? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't remember much because you see, I didn't work for him long, largely because Ed Sokovitz (ph.) offered me a job out at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory [NRL, Washington, District of Columbia]. And so my connections with the research at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was just about finished because in NRL, you know, they gave me a nice sandbox to play in. And, in fact, ultimately, they asked me, you know, like real, what do you really wanna do here? And, you know, it was fun, you know. I mean I enjoyed NRL. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you continue to work at Naval Research as you-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I continued to work there, and then Al Schindler said, well, you know, it's time for you to get a Ph.D. So I got, I was awarded the, the Thomas Edison Fellowship. And that was a pretty good. So it allowed me to go to school, do my research at the Naval Research Laboratory, plus get full salary. And so that's how I got my Ph.D. with the Thomas Edison [Fellowship]. Speaker 1: Okay, and you got your Ph.D. from Howard [University]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, and I asked you--so was your dissertation an extension of what you did with your master's thesis? Speaker 2: It was an extension. First, I did it with neutrons. Then I designed a system with a Van de Graaff accelerator where I moved these things around with helium-3 particles. I moved the atoms around with helium-3 particles and got a pretty good result. And Schindler and I hold the patent to doing that, short-range directional ordering in (unclear) alloy. Speaker 1: So you got your Ph.D. in 1971? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, do you remember the riots in '68 [1968] here when, after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was working at the Naval Research Laboratory then. I remember them vaguely, you know, I mean, I don't mean vaguely in the sense that--I never saw anybody throwing rocks and bricks, you know, where I lived, you know, at that time, you know. But I saw the destruction, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 22164 Speaker 1: At any rate, now--correct me if I'm going too fast, but you had a, an interesting collaboration with Dr. Norman Coon, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about how that took, happened to-- Speaker 2: Well, Norm and I were good friends, you know. And Norm was at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]. And Norm came to work at--Norm is very bright, you know, a very bright guy. And so Norm and I got the, Norm was good theoretically and I was a good experimentalist. And so in 1979, Norm and I shared the Sigma Zi Award for Pure Science at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory [NRL, Washington, District of Columbia]. Whereas Norm did the theoretical calculations, and I did the experimental verification of the origin of the magnetic anisotropy and I think (unclear). I'm just trying to recall, or the magnetic anisotropy and magnetization in the rare (unclear) metallic compounds. So we shared that award in 1979. And actually, I was also the best man in his wedding, when he got, when he remarried the second time. Story_ID: 22165 Speaker 1: But Norm [Dr. Norman Coon] was very interesting because, you see, he, you know, these cordless drills and these cordless instruments. Well, the reason that you're able to do that is that you have a stronger magnet which is called neodymium iron boron, okay. And with the neodymium iron boron, now to get the torque, you either have to have more power, right, plug it into the wall and a weak magnet, or you can have a strong magnet and less power to get the torque. Well, that neodymium iron boron, at least the origin of that stuff came out of the branch that Norm was, that Norm and I were in at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory [NRL, Washington, District of Columbia]. And it was Norm's understanding of how that thing worked. And then there was a big suit as to who was, who was first at it, if I can remember now. And that was whether General Motors had--because they were shooting for the patents to it, and NRL was shooting for the patents for it. I don't remember the, how it was finally resolved, but I think NRL got the patents. But ultimately, I think the patents were sold to the Chinese. And I think one of the reasons is that, I guess that was probably a good match because China probably has more of the rarest materials outside of some places in Africa than anywhere else in the world. Speaker 2: Now, are you saying they were sold to the Chinese during the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 1: Yeah, during the '70s [1970s], yes, or during the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Now, was that, was, yeah, 'cause that was a time when, I'm not sure--I mean was it legal to sell like an idea like that to the Chinese, I mean, I don't know. I'm just asking. Speaker 1: I guess it went to the highest bidder (laughter). Speaker 2: You know, Nixon [President Richard Nixon] went to China in '72 [1972], but, you know, but there was always this, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, when did Nixon go to China? Speaker 2: '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: '72 [1972], so it was probably in-- Speaker 2: It probably was already all right. Speaker 1: It probably, yeah, it was probably all right then, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 22166 Speaker 1: So, as research scientists, do you have to, when you come up with a new idea, do you have to check with some government agency to see if it's all right to sell it to a foreign power like China or the Soviet Union? Speaker 2: Well, actually, you don't own the, you don't--if, I mean, you don't have the IP [Intellectual Property] rights. You don't have the rights, even though you do it. I mean you could-- Speaker 1: Okay, it would be the [United States] Navy would have the-- Speaker 2: That's right-- Speaker 1: In this case, it would be-- Speaker 2: --the Navy or the government, you see, because you use their equipment and their time and their lights and what have you. And I think the same probably goes for the university as well. So if you wanna discover high-Tc, so you quit the Naval Research-high-Tc superconductivity [high-temperature superconductivity]. So you quit the Navy and you quit the university and go do it in your basement (laughter). Yeah. Story_ID: 22167 Speaker 1: So, yeah, Norm and I had, I enjoyed Norm. Norm had, came down with Parkinson's disease. And-- Speaker 2: When did this [happen]? During those days in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 1: During those, well, early, yeah, well, yeah, in the latter days. And he went on a skiing trip in Colorado and went (unclear) down the hill. And I guess, you know, he was in denial, you know, and broke his neck. And I really regret that I was not able to go to his funeral because I was, when I heard about it, I was in Atlanta [Georgia] with my daughter. And she's a tennis player. And then, but, and there was a tournament there. But the next tournament was in Tucson [Arizona], and she had to play in that tournament. So I made the decision not to go, not to come back to Washington [District of Columbia] but to take her to that tournament in Tucson where she got to the finals then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, no, she got to the semi-finals in that tournament. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 22168 Speaker 1: Now, now, so we've--let me go back to an important juncture in life. Now, when did you get married (laughter)? Or did you--you've got a daughter here that's old enough to be in a tournament, so I guess you got married at some point? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd better not stumble on that one, you know. My life might get difficult at home (laughter). I got married in 1967, yeah. And, and I guess my wife says I've known her since she was nineteen. And, and I usually say, "If you say so," you know. Speaker 1: So did you know her that long? Speaker 2: I guess so. And I guess we've been married for forty-four years, I think. Speaker 1: So did you know her from the neighborhood or from high school or where? Speaker 2: I always say I went down to Oxford [Mississippi]. That's where she's from, put shoes on her and brought her up here (laughter). But, no, I met her here [Washington, District of Columbia]. She came up, she was a student. She was at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.]. And she was at George Washington University, and she was teaching in the District of Columbia at one of the elementary schools. And I met her through the guys that I used to--I still know, some of them are dead, you know, but--. So she was like a part of the group, more or less, no particular interest, you know, I guess on either side, I guess. So I, you know, you asked a funny question 'cause I don't really know how I got married, you know. I really have to think real hard about that one, you know. But what the motivation was, you know, because in some instances for some things, I'm not too decisive (laughter), yeah. But anyway, so it must have been a good thing. It's been almost forty-eight years that I've known her now. Story_ID: 22169 Speaker 1: All right, now, you were just commenting off camera about your wife's assessment of your untrainableness (ph.), coming from her sister. Speaker 2: (Laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: So there is a profile, I mean I think we have a stereotype of scientists very organized and methodical and that sort of thing. And there must be some aspect of you that is methodical and, you know, scientific and logical. But you're, there's another fuzzy part of you as I hear you describe yourself. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, it appears to others, you know, particularly, my wife, that I'm not--well, she noticed that I'm, I can hit the nail on the head pretty good in terms of being, you know, the reasoning process, you know. But what it amounts to is, I think as far as home is concerned, she figures, well, I start many projects, but she says I don't appear to finish any of 'em. And, but I'm very methodical in that sense because I think, once I'd figure out how to solve the problem, you see, or how to do this project, as far as I'm concerned, it's done, you know. And there may not be a nail on the wall, but, I mean how do you get around that little intricacy of getting that, of getting, you know, that urinal set and getting it vented properly without tearing down the house. Well, once you figure out how to do it, you know, it's solved. Now, when you get around to doing it, that's another question. Speaker 1: Okay, so the thrill for you is in solving the problem? Speaker 2: Solving the problem. And so it doesn't seem like you're, you know, like I could be sitting like you in that chair and just sort of, you know, thinking or whatever the case may be. As far as she's concerned, I'm not doing anything, wasting time, you see. And I claim that, in most instances, you know, the problems are solved when you have given them thought in a quiet, unanxious moment. I think creativity comes in those quiet moments. If you, you know, have a lot of pressure on you in pending things, I don't think you really have time to be creative and to--and, you know, and I think Google [Incorporated], for example, I use a classic example of, you know, their working environment is not like Wall Street [New York], for example, you know, where you, at Wall Street, if you go to work for an investment banker, you know, and that's sort like the kiss of death, you know, where there's a lot of pressure, you know, a lot of pressure to get this deal done, get it done, get it done. Whereas I think more creativity comes--you may not get rich, you know, but more creativity comes when you have kind of a free-thinking environment where productivity is okay and that's gonna happen. But there's no one, you know, banging you over your head, you know, where you have to be on call 24/7 as if, in the case of an investment banker. Apple [Incorporated], you know, I think, has some of that as well in terms of the relaxedness. And I, and I think that relaxed and unpressured is an excellent environment for creativity. Story_ID: 22170 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 19--now, correct me if I go too fast here. Speaker 2: Oh, you're good, you're good. Speaker 1: But, okay, 1980, you worked at the National Science Foundation [NSF]. You were hired by the National Science Foundation, I guess, as the program director of College and University Faculty Programs. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Now, what does that mean and what does that job entail? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there were, I guess the college and faculty programs. They were programs for, I would call extended education for faculty members. You know, they were grants that they could apply for, you know, to, for education enrichment or what have you, if I can remember correctly. And, but that was at the time, I was there at the time when [U.S.] Congress wanted to close down, it was in the science education directorate. It was at the time that they closed down science education because, I guess somebody thought it was wasteful. And so I, I, actually, I was a, I was not a rotator there. I had a full-time, I had a permanent position. And then I went off, then when they were closing it down, I could have stayed. I think they left fifteen million dollars in that directorate. And I was offered program director of a part of that. I've forgotten which organization had it. But I was asked if I wanted to stay and take that position. So, but then I got an offer at downtown in the Division of Materials Research [NSF]. They were looking for someone in the solid state physics program and in the superconductivity--also to take over the superconductivity part of the low temperature physics program. So, I managed those programs. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1981, it's a year later. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right-- Speaker 2: Particularly, the spin phenomena in the solid state physics program, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're basically doing grant making, right-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --in that position, right. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes. Story_ID: 22171 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, '82 [1982], it says that you worked at the, you were back at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory [NRL, Washington, District of Columbia]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you ever really leave it or did-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I think when I, when I decided to leave--that's very interesting. I told them, you know, I gave them like two weeks' notice, you know, that I was leaving. And my thesis advisor, who was really Al Schlindler, he was the associate director of the laboratory at that time, called me down to his office and he said, "What in the--explicit deleted, are you doing?" (laughter) you know, he says, "You're not gonna like that job, you know." And I said, "Well, you know, I, I mean it sounds like something interesting to do," and he says, "But you're a researcher, you know." I said, "Yes, I am." And he said, "That's an administrative job, you know, where you sit behind a desk all day." And so then he said to me, "Well, why don't you take a leave of absence" and, I said, but I mean I really didn't wanna take a leave of absence. But I didn't want--I told him I didn't wanna burn any bridges, but I, I think the thing to do is just, if you're gonna do it, you go do it. And so I did not take a leave of absence. And then I think George Rado, who was the head of the magnetism branch, you know, asked me if I wanted, if I was unhappy in the group that I was in, if I wanted to come over to his group. And I said, no, no, it's not that--I'm not unhappy in the group that I'm in, you know. George Rado was Mr. Magnetism in the world, internationally, you know. His books are still, his Rado and Shul books are still very popular. Speaker 1: And how do you spell his name? Speaker 2: R-A-D-O is Rado, and Shul is S-H-U-L, I think, S-H-U-L. I used to run into Shul out at--periodically. Rado is dead, but I used to run into Shul. I don't know whether he's still alive or not, out at the University of California, San Diego in their magnetic facility there, every now and then. But so, anyway, I went off to the National Science Foundation. And then, but they got wind that I was thinking of leaving the National Science [Foundation] because it was a, it was really a boring job. You know, it was just as Al Schindler said, you know, you sit there, and you, you know, decide who's gonna get funding here and send these proposals out for reviews. And, but I still had the laboratory at NRL because I would go back there. I--, NSF would give me one day a week to go back and do research at the laboratory. But then I was thinking about the universities, and then I got an offer from University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. They asked me if I would be interested in coming. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So I, so I, so I guess we went down and bought four acres off of, on the other side of University Lake. But when we looked around, the secondary schools were not that good for, for my kids, because my youngest was at Sidwell [Friends School in Washington, District of Columbia] and, you know, the Friends School there [in Chapel Hill] was nothing like Sidwell. Speaker 1: So this is 1982? Speaker 2: 1982, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so then, you know, Schindler asked me if I'd come back to NRL, and I came. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went back, sorry. Speaker 1: So were you the first, now, this is UNC at Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill]? Speaker 2: Yeah, the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, yeah. Speaker 1: Were you the first black physics professor there? Speaker 2: No, no, I wasn't a professor. They offered, made me an offer, but I didn't take the job. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so you went there, but you didn't actually start. Speaker 2: Didn't start. You know, I fiddled around with it for a long time. I actually bought property down there. Speaker 1: And would you have been the first, do you think? Speaker 2: Probably. I hadn't paid much attention to it. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now, I would probably guess that you were. But, so you, so, now, '83 [1983], you-- Speaker 2: Probably so because I think, I think you're probably right. I probably would have been because there wasn't, there weren't any. And, you know, maybe it was, maybe political to get one (laughter), I guess. I'm not sure. Story_ID: 22172 Speaker 1: So did you stay at [U.S.] Naval Research [Laboratory, Washington, District of Columbia] until-- Speaker 2: Yep, no, I went--I stayed at Naval Research until I retired. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then when I went back, when I went back to NRL, I was consultant to the branch head. And then Al Schindler decided he was going to reorganize the magnetism branch, and he asked me if I'd take half of it. And I guess, Gary Prince took the other half. And so out of that came my section which was the Applied Magnetic Section of Naval Research Laboratory. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what year is this when the Applied Magnetic Section is established? Speaker 2: I don't really recall. It must have been--let's see, I left in '93 [1993]. So it must have been '85 [1985] or so. Speaker 1: Okay. We'll make note of that. This is at Naval Research? Speaker 2: Yes, NRL. Okay, all right. So, well, I know that at a certain point you--now, if there's something else before this, let me know, but one significant milestone we have here is that '91 [1991], you co-published another piece with [Dr. Norman] Coon, called 'Giant Magnetic Friction Materials'-- Speaker 1: --Magnetic Frictions Materials, yes, yeah. That's probably out of the same bowl because they were rare inner metallics and I don't remember much about it at this point. I, because I think we wrote a review articles that appeared in MMM [Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials]. I'm not sure that was the one or not. But, you know, I must confess, out of all the papers that I've written, there're only about four or five that, you know, that I figure that were--or six maybe, that will stayed glued in, you know, that I thought were really good, you know. I think they're all good, you know, but nevertheless, that would stay. And that one, I don't remember. Speaker 2: Well, tell us about some of the ones that you do remember that were, you know-- Speaker 1: Well, the one that we got the, for the magnetic anisotropy and magnetization studies on the rare (unclear) metallics. That's the one I remember mostly because that's the, the one we got the Sigma Si Award for Pure Science for. Then the work that was done relating to my thesis, I remember that. But some of the others, I get a little foggy on (laughter), per se. Speaker 2: What you say that your major research contribution is--I know it's in magnetism. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it's the one--even for that one, see, I essentially--I'm just trying to think of what the title of the one is for, that I got the--without a note before me, it's kind of hard (laughter) to remember. If I had the publication list here, I can (laughter) tell you straight away. But eventually, I became, I was nominated as and became a fellow of the American Physical Society. So that was one of the works that got me admitted as a fellow of the American Physical Society. Speaker 2: Now, what does this mean when you're admitted as a fellow to the American Physical Society? You can't just join if you want to like you can-- Speaker 1: Well, you can be a member, you can be a member of the American Physical Society, but you have to, in order to be a fellow, you see, there are fellows in condensed matter and nuclear physics, particle physics. Well, that group has to vote on you. In my case, it was condensed matter physics. So that group had to vote on me, and I think there may be eight or ten on the committee. But the committee changes, you know, every--I mean there are terms for members on the committee. Speaker 2: So, it's like being selected for the NBA [National Basketball Association] All-Star team if you're a basketball player. Speaker 1: That's, right, that's right. Speaker 2: So you're recognized by your peers as being a top, top-flight-- Speaker 1: That's right-- Speaker 2: --physicist? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so, in fact, and I just got an e-mail here in April. I will, I'm invited, distinguished invited speaker in Okinawa [Japan] for the International Conference on Ferrites. So, and then I have a Hall of Fame watch here (laughter). Speaker 2: Let's get a close-up of that (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) You really want a close up? Speaker 2: I don't know if we can do it, but I-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: A Hall of Fame watch, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, you know, not bad for a delinquent kid, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all. Okay, there's a publication that they cited here in this outline called 'Torque Measurements of Magnetic Anisotropy, Energy of Antiferromagnetic--'well, you know what I'm talking? [Torque measurements of the magnetic anisotropy energy of antiferromagnetic-coupled Fe/Cr/Fe layers]. Speaker 1: I remember that. I built the torque magnetometries, you know, and designed them and did most of the measurements. And a lot of my work was in that area. In fact, I built the world's first, the world's first high field torque magnetometer where you could go from--and you could make measurements of magnetic anisotropy from 4.2 degrees Kelvin to room temperature. And it had an uncanny sensitivity, very nice sensitivity. And it employed a superconducting, split coil superconducting magnet to do that. Speaker 2: So with an uncanny sensitivity (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, or good sensitivity (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So that's something. I mean I, you know, somebody-- Speaker 1: Well, you know, they'll pop back every now and then, but-- Speaker 2: The thing about it in the realm of science, I mean only the scientist, sometimes only the scientists know the significance of the contributions. The general public, like us, we, you know, you tell me that and without any context, I just- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, and really, it really was designed because with the rare inner metallic magnetic materials. They had such a high anisotropy that you couldn't measure it with ordinary fields. I mean this field was 70,000 Gauss. You know, that's seven tesla, I guess, and I forget, it's about 70,000 times the earth's magnetic field if my numbers are right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, it's fun, it's fun, you know, designing that and building it and getting it to work so there's no magnetic interference with the sensitivity of the detection to, little (unclear), you know, but getting to work on it and actually get it done. Speaker 2: So, when you work, now, is most of your work, most of your research done in isolation or in concert with other research scientists? Speaker 1: Well, when I, when I went to the Naval Research Laboratory, the, Al Schindler, I think and maybe Ed Sokovitz as well, you know, I think they hired, they hired people as individuals. In other words, most of us worked on different projects. Now, Norm Coon and I worked together because he was a good theoretician on some problems, you know. But I enjoyed working with Norm, you know. Sometimes I just had to beat on him a little bit to get him to crank the numbers out (laughter), you know, but, but if he were interested in the problem, you know, the collaboration was very good because that meant that his priorities were the same as mine. And it's easy to collaborate with people when you both have the same priorities, but when your priorities are different, it a little difficult to collaborate. And, and when I went to the Naval Research Laboratory, not Naval Research, when I went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], I decided that I would put every piece of instrumentation in that laboratory that we needed so that we didn't have to worry about collaborations. We could make the materials. We could characterize the materials, and we could also do any technological, investigate any technological possibilities. But we certain could prepare the materials. We certainly could characterize the materials and I could do the, the theory as well. So that way I didn't have to go to Johns Hopkins for this. The equipment that was put there was first class. It cost enough, you know. I think it's about, right now, there must be close to seven million [dollars] just in instrumentation alone. Story_ID: 22173 Speaker 1: So you start at Morgan [State University] after you retired from Naval Research? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, you started at Morgan, and we were over there the other day. We were interviewing, you know-- Speaker 2: Keith Jackson. Speaker 1: Keith Jackson, yeah. And he was discussing, you know, some of the strains in terms of trying to bring the department up to, you know, research standards because in the past, people were hired to mainly teach-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but they didn't have time to do research. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So there was no culture of research there. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So you're describing--this is 19, what? I mean is this 2000-- Speaker 2: No, this is 1993. Speaker 1: '93 [1993], okay, when you were at Morgan? Speaker 2: When I first went there, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --it was probably a little better than, but I know Keith well. I've known Keith since he was a tenure track faculty at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] because I was an adjunct professor in the physics department at Howard in the graduate school. And so I've known Keith for a long time. In fact, I was the one that talked him into coming to Morgan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I beat him over the head, kicked him in the shins (laughter), and, and happy when he took the position. Keith is good people, you know. Speaker 1: And he was alluding to the fact that it was difficult to, at first, to convince the administrations in the black colleges, not just at Morgan, but to really allow new faculty to conduct research, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with a major portion of their time. And so was it, and you're telling me about the acquisition of seven million in equipment. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, not all at once, not all at once. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: You know, over the course of time. And, the only thing I asked for was space when I went to Morgan and the opportunity to fill it. And, and, you know, they were very kind to me, Dr. Richardson was very kind to me, you know. I got the space. But my advantage was that I only taught one course a semester, you see. So I had the opportunity to write proposals and to, and to build, for the most part. But he's right. You cannot teach a full load and be expected to do research. It's just not gonna happen. And Morgan, I think is in transition, and it has been for some time in going from a four-year baccalaureate institution to a research-intensive university. And it takes more than words to do it. It takes a fundamental effort and a change of the paradigm, I guess, to do that. But I find that, as long as you can bring money in, you can chart your path without too much interference, until recently, I guess, you know. But-- Speaker 1: I would just have, I would imagine, you know, correct me if I'm wrong, that someone had to have emerged in top leadership on campus who recognized this, you know, and could articulate it to the board of the university, and, you know, the powers that be to get them to accept, you know, this new paradigm? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, I think it, I think the, I think the difficulty, I think they understand that, but we're a state school, okay. And even though we have graduate programs, there is funding. In order to have a research intensive university, the state, the amount of money that comes into Morgan and the--and I was gonna say, their impression of us, you know I mean I really don't feel that they feel that, that Morgan's missions should probably be research intensive. And they probably say, you know, why bother? We have the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], and they're research intensive. So let's dump our money down there. And so we almost probably have to have a Nobel Prize laureate (laughter) at Morgan to get this thing going, but it can really be done. It can really be done, but the difficulty, I think, is you have to hire top-notch people. In other words, you have to have people that when you hire 'em, they come there with a reputation, you see. So, and people ask, well, oh, where's so and so, oh, he's at Morgan State. When I went to Morgan, for example, very interesting. They thought Morgan State was some place up in West Virginia, Morgantown, you know. Most of my colleagues never heard of it. What are you going over there for? And then I said, well, I graduated from there. I figured I ought to at least, I mean, they saved me from the doldrums, you know, (laughter). So I may as well go back and contribute. And that's been my mission. Story_ID: 22174 Speaker 1: Well, Keith [Jackson] is absolutely right that it takes--here's what's needed you, you need an injection of scientists that have not been in academia all of their lives, people that have been to the national laboratories, like Keith. People who have had a wide variety of experiences. So you, you know, you kind of know what the lay of the land is like, you see, and where you've done research. And whereas, in many of our historically black colleges and universities, and a lot of alumni get hired. Well, they hired me, you know, so (laughter). Maybe I shouldn't, people in glass houses shouldn't throw stones (laughter). Speaker 2: But unlike a lot of people you weren't directly out of grad school, and you didn't stay there your whole career. Speaker 1: Well, that's right, that's right. So, so you need people that can bring an enrichment, you know, to the university. And this enrichment comes from experiences other than academia because students need this nowadays. You know, I asked a student, you know, well, you know, why are you majoring in engineering? Well, you know, electrical engineers make a lot of money. I said, well, I don't know about that because my daughter came to me, she started out at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] in physics. And she came to me one day, and she says, you know, dad, I don't wanna hurt your feelings, you know, but you know you physicists, you guys don't make a lot of money (laughter). And so she wound up in applied mathematics and economics. And now, she's at, going into her second year Wharton [School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia] because, you know, I guess they like that, that stuff, you know, that's green. But I think ultimately, I don't think she really likes the finance business anymore. I think she likes companies like Google [Incorporated] and Apple [Incorporated], you know, where there's this, for a person who's creative, where they can have room to think and imagine and create which I think is important. But now, you--at a place like Brown [University], you can fool around, you know. I mean you can take this and take that and take this, and each semester, you know, I didn't know what she was in, you know. In fact, she even got a little special scholarship and fellowship in Russian literature, you know. And so I, you know, each time she came home, I was afraid to ask, you know, what are you--where are you making a road nowadays, you know, because I may have to hold my pocket, you see. But, but there, you know, it's sort of full of people, you know, who have had additional experiences. But at many of the historically black colleges, we don't have it. So it's not that, and it's difficult to--you need a nucleus to get people to come. You need to get some stars there so others will come. If there's nobody there, you see, it's hard to attract people, and it's very difficult to attract people who have successful programs. I don't care how much you pay 'em; successful programs where they are and they're doing all right. And they don't have any real good reason to--and you can't, and it's not the dollar sign that you can offer to get them to come. It has to be something special. But you know where that something special is sometimes? Well, my wife wants to be close to her mother-in-law and her mother-in-law lives in--her mother, and she lives in Baltimore [Maryland]. So, you know, we wanna relocate, you know. I've heard those kinds of stories, you now, to get some of these people to move when they're really settled. The wives have a lot of influence, you know. But anyway, that's, I think, one of the difficulties in trying to establish a research. You need people to do the--and you can get these stars. You can't hire young people because if you hire young tenure-track professors to come at the assistant professor level and to move up, well, unless there's some mentor there, that can guide them, and some mentor there that has funding that can show them the ropes of the funding agencies, then they won't survive. I think that's, well, that's my take on it, you know, pretty much. Speaker 2: It makes sense. Story_ID: 22175 Speaker 1: Now, in 1997, you were named a giant in science (laughter). This sounds like a big deal, a giant in science. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I wonder where all that muscle went (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, this was by the Quality Education for Minorities in Mathematics, Science and Engineering network. That's Shirley McBey's group, I guess. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and, you know, I, I certainly cherish that, and I appreciate it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were named such, alongside people like Shirley Ann Jackson [also a HistoryMaker] and Dr. Juliette Bell and James-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that Shirley and I made it at the same time, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, same year. Speaker 2: Same year, yeah, but she's smarter than me, you know (laughter). Well, actually, you know, she went to public schools here in the District of Columbia. She was a high--she grew up here in Washington as well. Speaker 1: Okay. In 2000, you received a grant from the Army Research Office. Now, tell us about this grant and what was it about? Is this significant? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, well, I had an interest in what we call "spin spring" materials or spin spring devices, and in exchange spring devices. And most of our research nowadays is not on bulk materials. It's on thin films in the nano crystalline state, okay. Or thin films in general and thin films in multi-layers. And in doing, and in that case, there is a technique for, well, I don't know how to start in putting this in layman's terms, pretty much. But a spin spring material is one that you can magnetize and demagnetize without hysteresis losses. And I think that was the nature of that grant, is to develop these exchange spring and spin spring materials. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, this is the part of the interview that you should have [done] earlier when I'm fresh (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, these, the characteristics of these films it says here, these films and structures are particularly useful for high-frequency microwave devices. Speaker 2: Oh, that was something else. I remember that. Speaker 1: Oh, this is for something else? Speaker 2: No, no, no, that's the--I got the grants mixed up, okay. Speaker 1: I think you did it. I got this one mixed up myself. This is the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Goddard Grant here. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, in that particular grant, you know, when, when we sent an airplane up, you know, with radar, you see, what happens is that, you know, to spot something out there, a target or something, they will send a radar signal out, and then they get a reflection back, right? Or we send a satellite up and, you know, get, you send information up to the satellite that you want to bounce down in Europe or someplace, right? Or you want some of that information back. So what you'd like to have is some sort of device that you can send and receive on the same device, where you have a signal going out and a signal coming in, in the same detection device, without mutual interference, without destroying because the signal going out may be strong, but the signal coming back may be weaker. So, but if the two collide, they destroy one another, right? So, what you wanna do is to pass one back, okay, the receive signal, without mutual interference. Well, these, the microwave devices and the radar devices that do this sort of stuff, they employ what we call a circulator, isolators and circulators. Now, you're interested in weight load, right, because when you send a satellite up, you know, or you--you wanna reduce the weight as much as possible. So, but now, we can put the electronics on the tip of my finger to do that, okay. But on the other hand, we have to put a magnetic hockey puck--you know what a hockey puck looks like, the thing they knock around, yeah--on that which is much bigger, okay, to make this thing work. So, my idea was to maybe try to get a thin film device, you know, which the thin film is like a mirror, you know, surface, but it has magnetic material or something else in various properties and see if we can make the hockey puck out of a magnetic material and have it be applicable. And that will, first of all, it will, to save some real estate, you don't need this big thing with the hockey puck on it. And, plus, you're gaining weight. I think that's what that grant was about. Speaker 1: So did you develop something from the film? Speaker 2: Well, I studied the materials of the film. You know, I don't build devices. Speaker 1: Okay, so you came up with a material that could possibly do the job? Speaker 2: Well, not quite, not quite because I think the, there was some, there was some--and I studied the possibility, but there were some things that prohibited it because the films needed to be thicker. So what you have to do is now redesign some of the other components so that you can take a film of that, of the thickness, that we can make it without it peeling off of the device. So does that make sense to you, yeah? I mean does this device make sense to you? Speaker 1: Even me, on some level, yes. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: It makes sense to me, but I take it's still, it's an ongoing. So this research is not wasted research. It's research that's contributing towards the goal of having this lighter material. Speaker 2: Yeah, you say, you know, thinking of some research, I had a DARPA [Defense Advance Research Association] grant, you know, maybe a few years ago, where they gave me 650,000 [dollars] for nine months to do a feasibility study. You know, when the war fighter fights, you know, he's out there in Iraq and Afghanistan, we lose most of our fighters because they bleed to death. In other words, we can't get them from the field to a surgical unit where they can stop the bleeding. And so this grant was to do a feasibility study on using super paramagnetic particles, an injection of those into the bloodstream and to the targeted area, particularly, for those areas that are not, that you can't put the tourniquet on. And this is called a magnetic tourniquet. And, and the idea is to take a magnet, since these are super pearl magnetic particles, they won't attract each other and stick together, until you put a magnet there, okay. And then they will be attracted to the magnet. And they'll act as a damn, you see. So it will stop blood circulation as long as that magnet is held there. But when the magnet is released, then the, the ferrite ferra-fluids, that's what I worked with, will basically go and be dissipated in the body. That was the idea, but there was, before you could do that, first of all, you had to be able to develop the super pearl magnetic particles, and we're able to do that. A super pearl magnetic particle is a particle that basically has zero magnetization until you apply a field, okay. Then the particles become magnetic. So they can, next to each other, they can flow through the body, however, they so desire, and they won't stick together. But the minute you put that magnet on, then they'll collect and stick together. So that was principle of stopping the bleeding. But there's a lot of work that had to go into it before that. One, you had to make sure that the particles were not toxic and kill the patient (laughter). And, and so, and then you had to test it on small animals and we call that, toxicities, well, the small animal studies, invivo studies and the invitro studies to see whether or not these things are toxic, okay. Well, we were able to certainly damn it up, you know. We're using, (laughter), using come type of tubing. We could see the effects that we were able, that were actually targeted. And, but, and even the small animals survived. But then they eventually developed liver problems more or less. But they survived for a good length of time, three to five months or something of that sort. So that was interesting. Now, some of these things come back, you know, funding thing that we got from DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency]. In fact, my last-- Speaker 1: You said Dop-- Speaker 2: DARPA, the Defense Advance Research Project office, D-A-R, the Defense Advanced Research Association, yeah, I think that's it. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 22176 Speaker 1: Okay. So what are you working on now? Can you talk about what you're working on today? Speaker 2: What we're working on now is again, the exchange spring materials. And, and well, that's one aspect of it, and then we're working on (unclear) resistance materials. And then we are also working on really spin spring and exchange spring materials, but I think we're interested in another problem--which I'm in the process of writing a proposal for now, which the [United States] Air Force basically would like to have a material, a magnetic material that they can, you know, make motors out of, I guess, wherein it can stand high temperatures. So the magnetic material doesn't lose its magnetization as the temperature of the motor rises. And so we have some ideas about that, how to do that. But I'll be, in--let's see, I'm seventy-six now, and, you know, I'm getting a little too old for this, you know, to tell the truth. The thinking part, no, but the work part (laughter), is questionable (laughter). Story_ID: 22177 Speaker 1: Well, are you encouraged? Does the future look brighter than it did, say when you were in undergraduate school or coming to a place like-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the future may look brighter, but we don't have as many, we don't have many students in the pipeline, not only at the historically black--all over, you know, because, you know, math is a no, no. And I think by the time a student, we're lose 'em in the elementary schools, okay. If they haven't--and we lose them at about the fourth or fifth grade. If they have a distaste for math at that time, it is very hard to recuperate 'em. And I think one of the reasons we--not one, it's just one of the reasons--there are many reasons, I guess, is that, is the calculator, you see. The calculator I believe stunts your analytical growth. I don't allow calculators in my class. Usually, on the first day of class, if I teach freshman physics, I ask, "How many of you guys have calculators?" And the hands go up. And so I say, "Well, you don't need 'em in this class. Leave 'em at home from this point on or in your bag. You won't need a calculator in this class." And one kids raises his hand, and said, "How can I do physics without my calculator?" I said, "You mean to tell me the calculator does the physics? I thought your thinking did the physics, you see." So, and the kids that--and I teach principles, you see, because I figure many students that come to physics, they want to do memorization. You can't memorize physics. If you try to memorize physics, you fail. There's absolutely no question about it. You can't memorize the stuff. And the average student, when it comes to the exam, it's really funny. He says, he works a lot of problems and so forth, but the first thing he does when he comes, he looks on this exam, and he wants to see if there's any problem or look like the ones I worked for homework, you see. Well, rather than sort of looking at, what is the problem asking? What is the principle? Let me, you know, apply the algebra and go and work the problem, he's gonna waste a lot of time trying to figure out whether he's seen anything. Does it work like this? I don't remember. Does it work like this? And so I discourage that. Now, I think if you learn the principles, you can set the problem up, you set the problem up, you can do it. And a lot of kids have trouble with the, the SATs [Scholastic Aptitude Test] and the graduate record exam [GRE], and I feel that, when you see that kid in the graduate record exam in the math section or the physics section or the chemistry section, and he's got his pencil out and he's furiously--feverishly, he's not gonna do so well because those exams are designed to test principles, you see. They give you the answers, you see. All you have to do is say, okay, this problem is Newton's second law, and we've got two bodies here, and they were--and we want to know what is the force between them, and we're given these numbers and whatever you, and the separation is this. So if you see something down there and the answer that goes as one over R-cube, that can't be, okay, or one over R to the fifth, that can't be it. But if you see one over R square, you don't have to work that thing out, right, and they give you, say, okay, the separation is three million miles, right, and you see something down there that looks like it's three cube, three squared, you know, it's got a nine in it, and you check that thing off. And you keep going, you know, you don't work that problem. You understand what I'm saying? And the same thing is--so these exams are designed to test principles, okay. So, and I think that's one of the failings of some of our teaching, is we teach memorization so when the students comes from high school the university, he thinks that what he memorized, he can use that same technique in learning at the university. And so he doesn't do [well]. Oh, I got an A in high school. It ain't gonna happen here. So, it's important that we teach principles because they'll stick with you. I mean that's what that guy's gonna pay you, when you take that job, you know. The answer is not in the back of the book. He wants to know, can you deal with this present situation in an analytical sense. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard also that the teaching of math is basically to understand certain principles. If you understand those principles, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --you're on your way, but if you don't, you'll never be able to do it. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's right. Well, you know, my analytical skills, even though I was a screw-up, you know, were always good. They were always good. And, in fact, they were pretty strong, you know, even though I didn't know anything else, you know, but that's the way it goes. Story_ID: 22178 Speaker 1: Now, now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: I had fun, you know (laughter). In spite of my miss--I don't mean misgivings and sort of my behavior, you know, I, I had fun. You know, I mean I can't complain. I just wouldn't want a kid like me (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: But I can't think of any--I can't think of anything that I, because I think I had a well-rounded, a slew of well-rounded experiences like the Museum of Natural History, the Smithsonian Museum, you know, fooling around in the congress. You know, I had a paper route when I was seven years old, you know. And I'd get up some Sunday mornings, those papers were taller than me. But, but I think you have to, you have to be willing, you have to be adaptable, and you have to be willing to try, have new experiences. And, and you can't, and you have to always be optimistic. I mean you can't be negative, you see. It's always "Yes, we can," as Obama [President Barack Obama] would say, you know, "Yes, we can," you know. And like I, this guy who's helping me, I had to put a new deck on my house. I've been working on it all week, and this is a very hefty deck. You know, it rotted away, and so, you know, I mean I'm out there holding these, you know, three by six's, 18 foot long, you know, putting 'em on this deck, you know. And, you know, I think, I don't think my neighbors know what I do for a living, you know, because they see me out there working all the time. But, you know, this kid who, he came over for, from the Cameroon, for political asylum. I mean I took him in when he was, you know, I took him under my wing. And he's been under my wing for six years or so. I taught him all the trades so that he could earn a living. He's now enrolled in the, at Montgomery College [Takoma Park, Maryland], straight A student; has good analytical skills, good mathematical background and plus, he can write, you see. And, but, you know, he's over at my house now, you know. We got to get those steps in. So I feel comfortable leaving him there because I know he knows the skills. But the difference between him and some of the other kids, he wasn't interested right away in how much money you're gonna pay me. He was more interested, he saw the value in learning the skills. So now, he can go--he's done other jobs for people, and he does quite well. He did get his political asylum, and his green card [permanent residency in the United States]. And so he's doing quite well, but, you know, and this is the other thing is that, a student says, well, I wanna learn, I wanna, I wanna make, I need a good grade in this class because I need to pass so I can get a good job. I said, wait a minute. We've kind of missed the point here. You know, you need to learn something (laughter) so you can get a good job (laughter), you know. But, he says, but I need to pass this course, you know. No, no, no, you have to have your focus on learning something. And then passing the course is automatic. But if you have your focus on passing the course, then you are ultimately interested in just cramming enough to do this thing, you see. So, if I look back, would I like to--I mean I think if I grew up any differently, I wouldn't have all these street experiences and all these other experiences. So I can recognize the pattern in these kids who wanna be lazy and what did they used to say, trifling, you see, that you can sort of, you know, tell them the story that I have told them, and, you know, they found it hard to believe, you know. But then they say, "Well, yes, we can. You know, he did it, yes, we can," you see. And I think that's important. Story_ID: 22179 Speaker 1: Okay, now, here's a question we always ask. And it's, though it sounds big, it's not the last question. This one, when you look back on everything you've done, again, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, it has nothing to do with science. Probably one of the more important things to me is to have good kids. In other words, you know, spend the time with my kids, you know, giving them--no such thing as quality time, but giving them lots of time. I have one daughter that's special needs who's non-verbal. She has to use a--and, one of the things that I enjoy doing is, you know, making sure she has self confidence. You know, self confidence, and she has lots of self confidence, and certainly has a real mind of her own, you know. For me, that's important, you know, is to hear--a person who doesn't really know that she has a special need, you know, then--and she travels, has traveled with us. You know, we go to Thailand, she goes, Japan, she goes. Actually, I've lived in Japan, actually, during the '80s [1980s], the late '80s [1980s], '89 [1989] or so, I was visiting scientist at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. Then Rachel, my youngest, you know, she is, has a lot of self confidence. By the time she was fifteen, she'd covered eighteen countries with me because I'd lectured all over the world. And I had been taking her with me ever since she was six years old by myself, you know. I would take her to England and to France and to China and to Germany and to India and to all these places. And you say why? It's a good experience, even for kids; says, well, she's not gonna remember much. No, no, no, they do remember. Like my grandmother used to say, the best learning period is between the cradle and seven years old because if you don't believe, kids take a lot of skills between that time, you know. They learn to talk, they learn to reason, they learn language, they learn--and, so but what it did was, it basically, it basically showed, you wanted, I wanted to demonstrate to her that the world is not a microcosm, that people of various, like in Calcutta and places like that, you know, to experience that kind of thing as a kid, you know that there're people that have need, you see. And, you know, I know what being, maybe going to Sidwell [Friends School, Washington, District of Columbia] and then to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], I always felt that, you know, she--I know what being to the right of Genghis Khan is, but I don't know what being to the left of left is (laughter). I haven't figured that one out yet. But it's, it's the kind of self confidence and actually, in tennis, in the juniors when she was fourteen, Rachel was Number 34 in the country. But it comes from this competitive and this, you know, self confidence. And I can remember, I didn't know much of my dad, but one thing he says that, you know, in this world, to succeed, you have to be the, almost, not arrogant, but one of the best people that you know, you know, to, to be willing to, you know, step up to the plate and figure you can do the job. And I think that self confidence is a wonderful thing. And I think, if my legacy is, is that, you know, my kids hopefully will clone me into the next, (laughter) the next generation and the next generation. And, and I purposely, I purposely with plan decided to do that so they wouldn't be like me (laughter). So I would say that that would be my legacy. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 22180 Speaker 1: Now, this is another question we always ask. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know where to start, to tell the truth. In the education system, I see a lot of mediocrity where kids just wanna get by. That won't hack it, you see. In other words, they just want the grade, you see. And then the other thing is that it's, I mean that's at the academic level. But if you wanna go even further than that, you have to take a look at kids raising kids. In other words, I just told, we spoke about a legacy and what I thought my legacy would be. These kids will have the wrong--they may have a legacy, but it's the wrong legacy, you see, when you have a 13-year, a 15-year old raising a baby, you see. So she doesn't have enough, and then there's no father to speak of. There's no one to mentor that kid, you see. So what are you gonna get. And this is something that snowballs, you see. This generation is carried on to the next generation to the next generation, and after a while, you see a decay in society. No money can solve that problem because, no money can solve that problem because after a while it gets to be a mental institution problem. When I say a "mental institution" problem, it's a mindset. In most instances, you know, mindsets are like sand, you know, get too involved in it (laughter), it doesn't change, you know. So I don't know how you, I don't know how you resolve this issue. You know, I thought one of the best programs that [U.S.] congress doesn't seem to like is these 'headstart' programs, but you have to be able to put your kid, I mean have the mindset to feel that this is what you want your kid to be, and you want him to achieve. But I think in society, I don't really think that, that we're really attacking the problem on the right end. And, you know, you get kids that come out of high school, and I'm not talking about necessarily African American kids, who just get passed through. That doesn't help them. And then if they get into the education business, you know, they think that that's maybe the trend and the norm, just to--but, you know what the danger of this whole thing is, I mean not speaking of African American kids, is that when you start getting these people who are incompetent in your hospitals, in other significant positions that are life threatening or could be life threatening, I don't know what's gonna happen, you know. You know, I mean I just decided that, I'm in pretty good health, you know, and I don't necessarily don't wanna go to the hospital if I get sick. I just wanna wake up one morning dead, you know, just out of existence and not dependent because, you know, I'm not so sure that, I mean you look at the hospitals nowadays, what do you find? You find that you may be able to pick up some disease there or some malfunction and be worse off than you were when you went in. How many people do you think get the right, I mean mistakes do you think are made in the wrong medication and this sort of thing? So I don't know. I mean you ask a very good question, and I don't think it's necessarily, you know, I mean I don't think African Americans have a corner on the market. I could, what I've said will serve for others as well. I think the best mentoring we could have is coming, comes from parents because we spend the most time with our kids--we should, I mean they're in our environment more often. And if it can't start there, you can't expect any teacher to correct it, what is it? Five hours a day. Is that what they, what the school system is now, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 22181 Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask you anything about church or religion or anything like that? Was that a part of growing up at all? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes. You know, when we went and stayed with my grandmother, you went to church on, you went to Sunday school on Sunday morning. And the other thing was that, I mean, yeah, you went to Sunday school. And even with my mother, you know, we went to Sunday school. I mean I didn't always go, I mean 'cause I, we had to walk to Sunday school and somehow, you know, I always liked Milky Ways [candy bar]. And so I remember the Milky Ways on the way--and then what I would do is to go down to Union Station and watch the trains come in with two Milky Ways. I mean I had a dime. I could get--they were only a nickel apiece, you know. And, but I think the religious foundation was good, and my kids, you know, I'm a member of People Congregational Church, United Church of Christ. And, but I grew up in the Baptist church, okay. Now, with my kids, I decided to take them to the Baptist Sunday school because I thought that was more nourishing. You know, my, my Congregational church is too modern, you know, (laughter) for the--and almost too liberal, you know. But the, so I wanted my kids, even though I like it, you know, I wanted my kids to get a good, solid foundation. And then they could make the decision as they choose, chose. But I, and what I liked about it was they learned the scriptures. They also learned public speaking. And for my youngest--she's a good public speaker, you know. And a lot of that was picked up in speaking before, at a young age, speaking before these big audiences in church. Now, people say, well, you're a scientist, you know, I mean why are you so religious, you know? I say, "Wait, a minute. You know, as a scientist, the more I learn, the less I know." And, and I'm a strong believer. And I may have, you know, gotten away, but as I got older, you know, I got back into the fold. I remember someone once said that [Albert] Einstein said, I forgot what he said as it relates to religious. But, no, I have no trouble with, I--some mornings, I go to First Mattress, that is, I don't get out of bed, you know, but more often than not, I go to Sunday school and what have you. Story_ID: 22182 Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I haven't asked you about before I ask my last question that we ought to talk about? Speaker 2: I don't know, you've covered the bases pretty. In fact, you're pretty good at what you do, you know, yeah (laughter). I don't know how this tape is gonna come out, but (laughter) maybe I don't wanna see it again. Speaker 1: Yeah, you might be infuriated later, but, you know, this is (unclear) (simultaneous). So, all right. Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, for the ordinary man, do you think it really matters? I mean I guess the question is, a thousand years from now, if we still exists, I'm not sure it even really matters, you know, but I think, you know, there's a legacy here in this, in this tape, I guess, that maybe--and I'm speaking from the point of view that there was nothing like this for my great, great, great, great grandfather that was passed on to me. And this thing in itself is sort of somewhat of a legacy, that it will, it, it's now a recording, you know. And you know what I think of it as, it's, a hundred years from now, it's like traveling at the speed of light, you see. In other words, you're gonna have these images. So it's like you've traveled at the speed of light. You've caught up with this image that we have now. And then it's being reflected back. That's what that thing is. In other words, the only way that you can catch that image now is to get in your rocket ship and take off at the speed of light, and, and get every piece of it as it, the picture of it as it goes out, and time, which is a variable, will reflect what we've done today for the most part. But, but that's the way I, that's the way I think of it, you know. So, even, so for the images of my ancestors, I can't travel fast enough to catch up with them. And some people say it's nonsense, you know. I said, well, look, you know how we spy on people nowadays. We have spy satellites up there. All these microwaves they go out and, you know, the cell phone conversations, they're out in space (laughter). The only thing we have to do is have the, a satellite up there that's (laughter) far enough, and we can pick up all of this stuff and tune in on people that, just based on their, on what they're saying because of the electromagnetic spectrum. I hope this has been useful. You said you had another question, yeah. Speaker 1: No, that's it. That's the last question. And it has been useful. And I'd like to thank you for participating-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you're quite welcome. Okay. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 22183 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay so, let's see that watch. Speaker 2: Oh, you wanna see this watch, okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Now, just (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, I see, I see. There it is, yeah. Speaker 1: He's gonna zoom in, I guess. It's a little glare, twist it a little bit. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): There we go. Very nice. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 22184 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Conrad Williams, C-O-N-R-A-D, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Well, currently, I'm professor of physics at Morgan State University, and I have been in this occupation for about twenty years, ever since I retired from the Naval Research Laboratory. Speaker 1: Okay, now, today we're going to be, I guess shooting an addendum to your interview we shot about-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a month ago. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, a couple of things we didn't cover, and we wanna make sure that we cover 'em now. And can, today's date, first of all is August twenty-- Speaker 2: Twenty-ninth-- Speaker 1: --ninth, 2012 [August 29,2012], right? Speaker 2: 2012, yeah, I think that's right. Speaker 1: And you agree with that, right? (laughter) Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and you're younger than I am, so you probably know better (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, and we're at Skadden Arps in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. Story_ID: 22185 Speaker 1: So, the first thing we wanna talk about is your distinguished, you were a visiting professor, a distinguished visiting professor at Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1988. Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1989, I was on, in 1988, I think, I was on sabbatical from the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory [Washington, District of Columbia], and I spent that time at Johns Hopkins University as a distinguished professor, and that was a very interesting experience. They certainly were interested in some of the research that I was, and I was invited by, oh, Cal Walker at that time, Dr. Walker. He was the chair of the department of, of physics, a very interesting experience, interaction with students who are now at leading organizations around the country and around the world, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember what you were working on then? Speaker 2: Well, I was interested again in thin-film physics. And I think at that time, we were more concerned with (unclear) resistance materials. That was the focus of the research going on in the areas that I was interested in at [Johns] Hopkins [University]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Then in 1989, you also served as a distinguished visiting professor at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. Speaker 2: Yes, at TIT, the Tokyo Institute of Technology, that was research, pretty much. And my wife and family, we all went over to Japan at that time and lived in, lived in Tokyo. And I, I worked with Professor Matsemora Abay (ph.), a very interesting person and good, excellent scientist. And during that time, he had developed a technique for, during what we called electroless plating of ferrite materials at low temperatures, which was very interesting. He taught me that technique which I then transported back (laughter) to the Naval Research Laboratory. And it was an ideal technique because you'd really like to make these materials at a temperature--normally, they had been made at elevated temperatures, around three or four hundred [degrees]. Here you could do it at ninety degrees. So it has great possibilities for technological advancements. Speaker 1: So was Dr. Abay the pioneer of that? Speaker 2: Dr. Abay was the pioneer of that technique. And I can't, I'm trying to think of the other person that was doing it with him. But he was, indeed, the pioneer of the technique, yes. Speaker 1: And so were you the person to introduce this technique to the United States? Speaker 2: Well, to the laboratory, yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and as a matter of fact, and I will--and this, these were ferrite materials. The International Conference on Ferrites is gonna be held in April, 2013 and if you look on the internet for that conference, you'll see that I'm one of the distinguished invited speakers at that, at that conference which will be held in Okinawa [Japan], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so there's a follow-through (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's an ongoing relationship because I had a strong interest in ferrites for the most part. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as a matter of fact, even the last, the conference in seven, eight--'97 [1997], that was held in Asia, I was one of the, one of the program organizers, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now there's another visiting professorship you talk about too, and that's in 19-, from 1994 to 1999. Speaker 2: The 1994 to 1999, I was visiting adjunct professor at the Indian Institute of Technology. And that was, I would go to India, I guess in December to fulfill that obligation because it wasn't so hot in South India (laughter) at that time of the year. Speaker 1: And this is in Madras, right? Speaker 2: This was in Madras. It's now called Chennai. The, the Indian government decided to change it from the English name of Madras, and I worked in the, I worked along with Professor Ramarao (ph.). And at that time, he was interested in the rare thin metallics, and so was I. And I gave several lectures on the magnetic properties of the rare (unclear) metallic compounds. One of the compounds for which I, in the early interview, we mentioned that we got the Sigma Zi Award for Pure Science for the work done on (unclear) and the magnetization and understanding of those properties and those materials, yes. Story_ID: 22186 Speaker 1: Now, we also discussed some of your synergetic, synergistic activities, committees and such. Now, you served on many national and international committees, sir, and one is the Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences Advisory Committee-- Speaker 2: Yes, well, the Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences Advisory Committee is short and known as, it's known as BSAC. I sat on that committee for about, about four years or maybe a little longer if I can recall. And that committee was, I guess, designed to review the, the activities that were going on at the national laboratories in the area of basic engineering basic energy sciences. And I was appointed to that committee by the Secretary of Energy at that time. And most, those organizations and the DOD [department of Defense] laboratories that were doing basic energy science, such as Lawrence Livermore, Lawrence Berkley, Oak Ridge, Argonne, Brookhaven, whereas I could go down the list, and Oak Ridge, I guess--I think I said that one. But those, well, the directors of those laboratories would come to this meeting, bring, I guess, their top scientists to tell us a little about the programs that they were doing that had technological interests and where there was perhaps opportunities for scientific breakthrough. It was very interesting, you know. I always liked to go to those meetings largely because of the fact that, you know, it's better than going to the library (laughter). You know, and somebody is coming to tell you about the science that's going on, current science that's being done, and you get an education in addition to an opportunity to make recommendations as to, you know, directions and other synergistic programs that they should, they might want to consider. So that was the essence of that committee. I think, I can't name all the laboratories that came before that committee, but it was an honor to sit there. It was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any, I don't know if I should even ask this, but are there any stories that come out of this long association with the National Science Foundation committee? Speaker 2: So, what do you mean, about the Basic Energy Science Advisory Committee? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, you know, some of them would probably not be repeatable at this point (laughter). You know, since we, since there's no, you know, eraser on this tape (laughter). Speaker 1: No, but I guess we could ask this. Was there ever a time when, you know, a project came across? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was good. There were two African Americans on the committee. It was myself and then there was, oh, I can't think of her name right now. But she was just recently the, stepped down as the president of Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia]. It'll come to me before the end. And it was good to be at the table as African Americans. At least, I could give an African American point of view or a, a particular as it's relating to the funding in some instances of, of what kind of programs, from the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] that could be integrated into their funding scheme, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 22187 Speaker 1: All right, well, tell us about the U.S. National Commission for the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization, UNESCO. Speaker 2: Yeah, UNESCO in short, yeah. I was appointed to that committee back in the '80s [1980s], early '80s [1980s] by George Schultz, the Secretary of State. In fact, my appointment is on the wall with him having signed it (laughter), of course. And that was a committee that basically was responsible for giving advice on the, to the administration as well as to the [United States] Congress and the programmatic and fiscal affairs of UNESCO. And, and I sat there primarily as a person with an expertise in, in science, as to the scientific missions of that, of--that we, to the scientific missions that we enjoyed (laughter), as being a member of UNESCO. And there were certain areas like in, for marine biology and our satellites and things of that sort, wherein, as members of UNESCO, we, and particularly as in the marine activities, that we did not have to worry about the twelve-mile Maritime zone that belonged to the country. And the other thing is, it didn't cost us anything to put our satellite dishes up to detect satellites. And we could do research within those marine waters without having to pay for it, only through our contribution to UNESCO. So that's kind of the capacity that I served--and there were politicians. There were lawyers, there were people from the, the industries who had other expertise that sat on that panel. I think at the time that, that was--it was chaired by the president of the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] when I was on that committee. Speaker 1: I think we, did you have a feeling that the [President Ronald] Reagan administration was really in favor of UNESCO? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, well, no. I do have a feeling, yeah (laughter). I think Reagan always thought that it was a waste of our money and that we should really ultimately pull out. We did pull out, by the way. This was after my tenure there. But the recommendation of the committee was that we, we not pull out because I think when we pulled out several years ago when there was the Israeli question that came up, as admitting Israel to the, to UNESCO, I think there were some objections by some of the majority in UNESCO. And so when we pulled out, you know, then UNESCO got its way, and we came back in. The Israelis asked us not to pull out, but I think we did. I wasn't on the committee at that, at that time. But ultimately, we pulled out again, and I think what we were paying fifty million dollars a year for in terms of our contribution to UNESCO, I think ultimately, we no longer had the rights that we had, the maritime rights. So we had to pay more, I think. But I think now, we're back in. I'm not sure. I think we are, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So that was in '89 [1989], I mean so eighty--in early '80s [1980s], if I can remember correctly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Somewhere between '80 [1980], and I guess, '88 [1988] or so. Speaker 2: Yeah, some place, some place in there, and what is this? This is 2013, I'm surprised I remember any of it (laughter). Story_ID: 22188 Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about the National Science Foundation [NSF] Advisory Panel on Scientific Opportunities and High Magnetic Field Research? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the National Science Foundation, along with the general scientific community felt that the current, the current high-field magnet lab at that time which was the high-field magnet lab at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was getting a little old and could stand a few more facilities such as, you know, 45 Tesla magnets or 70 Tesla magnets or hybrid 45 Teslas. And so the National Science Foundation created this panel which consisted of nine of us, and it was headed by, the Nobel laureate, Sykes. And ultimately, what they charged this committee with is to come up with recommendations as to the need for a new class of magnets and what they would be used for, and what that is in terms of what scientific, what scientific areas could be addressed by higher field magnets in biology and in chemistry and in physics and these areas. So, this panel made a recommendation to the National Science Board as well as to the, to the [United States] Congress for the need for such a laboratory. Now, the laboratory ultimately is now the, in place in Tallahassee, Florida. And I think that the general thinking was that it was going to be revamped at MIT. But that wasn't the case, and I think the reason--there was no recommendation from the committee as to where to put it. I mean that's a political decision. But I think ultimately, it came down to dollar costs. The State of Florida decided that, I've forgot how many billions of dollars, I think, were going to be required to establish that laboratory. But the State of Florida decided that they would go into it with a 50-50 matching fund. So I think that's the reason they, it sits there. It's not for any other, it's dollars and cents, not for any political aspect. And that's what most people thought, that it was political. But I think it was who coughed up the money, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so the state of Florida came up with half of the money? Speaker 2: Yeah, now, I might be wrong on the cost at this point in time, but I'm sure the fact that they did half, 50 percent matching funds. Speaker 1: Now, this was in, this advisory panel was operational when? When was it? Speaker 2: Say it, I didn't hear it? Speaker 1: What's the timeframe for this panel, this last one on the high-magnetic field research? Speaker 2: I think that laboratory's been in operation for more than ten, fifteen years, ten years now. It must have been in the mid-'90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Must have been in the mid-'90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: And is it still the state-of-the-art? Speaker 2: It's still the state-of-the-art, you know. You know, it's, and we were really completing with Grenoble in France, you know, because they're, and we were, I guess, because many of the scientists here were going over to Grenoble and to these other high-field facilities. So why not have one here that, where we had all of the facilities that, and more, you know, that could be addressed with the scientific programs that many of our American scientists wanted to achieve. Story_ID: 22189 Speaker 1: Okay, are you, well, I mentioned you--what panels are you currently sitting on today? Are you doing any of that type of oversight? Speaker 2: Let's see. You know, I tried to make it none, and I think that's what (laughter), and since I can't think of any, I'm not sitting on any, any advisory panels at this point in time. I think that's a job for younger people (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, sooner or later, I guess we have to pare down some of these activities, but at any rate, is there any particular project you're more keenly interested in now than another? Speaker 2: Well, well, right now, you know, I'm interested in, again, I guess exchange couple, lower dimensional materials, and, and I'm really trying to address a proposal now to find a material that has, such as cobalt iron, you know, that has a, a very, very high permanent ability which may be useful in the motor-building industry and sort of, and something that the [United States] Department of Energy might be, perhaps, interested in, and putting a higher-permanent ability magnet within a motor. And so, as a result it would require our transformers or whatever the case, that would require less electrical--well, let me put it like this. I think in many instances, we'd like to switch from diesel engines and other engines and other motors of that torque, motors of that sort, to those that we can run electrically. And I think these materials will support that. That's sort of jumbled up. I didn't wanna go where I was going with it, but (laughter), but I think I'll leave it at that, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's a hope that a lot of people have, and a lot of us who are not scientists, you know, think that, you know, it shouldn't be that, you know, it doesn't seem like that big of a mental stretch for those of us who are not scientists to think that we should have the material available to produce electric vehicles, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, and I think when we wanna produce more electric vehicles, I mean there's certain things we have to worry about. I mean, well, I'll say this. One thing that everybody can sort of observe is that we've gone from portable drills, you know, from electric drills that you have to plug in to portable drills. Now, the reason that they're possible is because--and we can run them off of batteries, is because they have a magnetic material in it that gives them the torque. Before we had a magnetic material that did not have the properties. So we had to, and since the magnetic field was low, we had to apply more current (laughter), and plug it in the wall, that we couldn't get from batteries. Now, with the development of a new magnet, a very strong magnet, we can get the torque with a battery, big difference. So that conserves energy too because, I mean you don't have to, you know, run all that water over Niagara Falls (laughter) to generate the power that we need. And I think it'll cut down consumption, and I think cars, for example, I think there's a battery problem with the cars, but those batteries are getting better now. But then there's also a torque problem, I think, in the sense that, not a torque problem, that it's a torque 'cause, so [if] we had a better magnetic material where we could increase the efficiency of those batteries, I think that would be helpful. And so I'm kind of interested in how we can get a better magnetic material and gain, take advantage of lower electrical power and do, and also eliminate the pollution associated with fossil fuels. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I hope that kind of explains it so the average person-- Speaker 1: That would be like a practical application to some of these materials, in my mind, which is helpful for me, and I know it should be helpful for others. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is there anything then, now, that we have not asked you about. And I'm sure it's a world of things we can think of when this is over, but is there anything else in this session we need to cover? Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think we've, as my grandmother said, "I think we done good" (laughter), oh, well, she wouldn't say it like that 'cause she taught school for fifty-five years, but (laughter), but we've, I think we've done well, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that being the case, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, you're quite welcome...