 Story_ID: 439362 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Stot- Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Josh White, Jr.; J-O-S-H, W-H-I-T-E, apostrophe, J-R. Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: Donald. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: 11/30/40 [November 30, 1940]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Bronx, New York. Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: You are here at my home in Detroit, in Michigan, in Novi, actually, Michigan. Speaker 1: Novi. Can you spell it for me please (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) N-O-V-I. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today is June 26th, nine- 2007 (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 439363 Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna b- begin with what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Actually I have a combination. I love the combination of black and blue. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Gotta be spring and fall. Speaker 1: Um-hm. What about foods that you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: My wife's [Sara White] apple pie. I, I get very possessive of it (laughter). I don't want to share (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination? Speaker 2: I like to be home with family. Home is fine. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Peace. Story_ID: 439364 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother and father [Josh White]. Tell me your mother's name and spell it for me, please. Speaker 2: Carol, well, maiden name, Carol Carr [Carol Carr White]. C-A-R-O-L; Carr, C-A-double-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in the Bronx and I don't know exactly where, but she was born and raised in the Bronx, New York. Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born? Speaker 2: My mom was born in 1916, '17 [1917], I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she share any stories about growing up in the Bronx? Speaker 2: She was saying as she was growing up with her sisters and her brother [George Carr], that there were different areas. There was the Italian neighborhood, there was the so-and-so neighborhood, and every now and then you have to walk through them and then sometimes you have to fight to get through them and they did, but she spoke on it as if that's how it was. It's not that you had animosity or you hated them, but every now and then when you walked into a neighborhood, you might have to fight to get through to school or whatever and it was just, you did or you didn't. It was a normal thing without hatred towards that other group of people. It was kind of a normal thing. Speaker 1: What else did she share? Speaker 2: I never knew my grandfather, her father. She spoke of him well. She said she remembers him liking to read with his, with his suspenders on as people did back then. I mean, they didn't put on their sweats and their shorts when they got home. They normally stayed dressed, again. So, she just remembers her, her dad fondly. There was not a lot of talk about him and her mother lived with us, my family, all of my life. So she had her with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Well, tell me, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Dennis. Speaker 1: Dennis Carr. Speaker 2: Dennis Carr. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I beg your pardon, hold no, Dennis is my father's [sic. paternal grandfather's] name. Robert was my father's--Robert Carr, sorry. Speaker 1: Okay, and, so you didn't know him? Speaker 2: Never, never saw him. Speaker 1: Never--okay. And your grandmother, what was her name? Speaker 2: Rachel. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Rachel Carr. Speaker 1: What can you tell me about Rachel? We're gonna go back to your mother, but-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --since you know your grandmother, tell me about your grandmother. Speaker 2: I, she helped start Epworth Methodist Church [Epworth United Methodist Church, New York, New York] in the Bronx and I wish I could remember the name of the street. I could drive you right to it. But, she was a founding member of this particular church, so she was a very church-oriented person. To my knowledge, when my parents got married she lived with them, so all of my mom's married life and all of my life, my grandmother was always there in our, in our household and she would just, and she made the best apple pie and she made, you know, she made some kind of a sauce that was lost when she died in '56 [1956] that my mother couldn't remember to duplicate, but I remember that and she did pamper me and yes, I liked it (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you know where your grandmother was born? Speaker 2: I--Virginia. Speaker 1: In Virginia? Speaker 2: In Virginia. I'm sorry. I don't remember exactly where, but the family was from Virginia (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: The Carrs. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's all you know about the--about them right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me more information about your time spent with your grandmother. You said she used to pamper you. What were some of the things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, because I had four sisters and so they, you're going to hear the stories about being the only boy and so you're pampered and all--I never truly felt pampered but she did, if I asked for the pie she might make it faster than if my sister did, okay? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So she was wonderful to me and as any kid, I guess, there were times when I was growing up when I was called because I had to help her down the stairs when we lived on 150th Street, which is where most of my growing up was. So I had to take time out of my busy playing to go up and help her walk down the stairs slowly and so I used to resent that sometimes, because I was busy playing. But I had to stop and go help, Nanny we called her, come down the flight of stairs, cross the street because the sun was on this side of the block, so she could sit and sit in the sun and just be there, and then I could go run and play and then when it was time for her to go upstairs, same thing. And I, of course I was not the only one but when I did it she was always impinging on my playtime, but I loved her dearly. Speaker 1: Do you know how much education your grandmother had? Speaker 2: I do not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do not. Story_ID: 439365 Speaker 1: Back to talking about your mother [Carol Carr White], and you were telling me about her growing up in the Bronx [New York], what other things did she share about her growing up? Do you know where she attended school? Speaker 2: I really don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know she finished high school, but I don't remember. I think very early from her what I got was we're all individuals and, again, those Italians or those Greeks or whomever, they just happen to be another race and/or color, but they're people. There was no distinction, no better than, no worse than, and that was set up early in my life and I think it's very important to know that there's no head higher than yours and no head lower than yours, you know, and it wasn't in a spiritual way although it was a spiritual feeling. It was just to take an individual as an individual. I learned that early. Speaker 1: Okay. You said that your grandmother was one of the founding members of the Methodist Church (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Epworth [Epworth United Methodist Church, New York, New York], yes. Speaker 1: What about your mother? Speaker 2: Well, she even sang in the choir-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she was there and when they lived in the Bronx before my parents got married and moved to Manhattan [New York], Carol White could always be found in Rachel Carr's church singing in the choir. Speaker 1: And, well we'll talk about you and church later on. Is there anything else that you want to share about your mother? Tell me about her. Describe her to me. Speaker 2: I wrote a song about her. Speaker 1: Well, sing the song. Speaker 2: (Singing) "She only stands about five foot high but that's all she needs to be; To grace this land lovin' just one man, hey that's a peculiarity. She had a hard time with the troubles and the woes, just like you and me. But, she's a lady of the land, doin' what she can, she's a lady, my first lady." She was 4'11". You didn't mess with Carol, and she was a fair woman, but stern. We came from a stern household, but there was lots of, and I loved, she had a great laugh. I loved to hear her laugh. She could say a word, dirty word or two and did it very well (laughter) also, but she was always there. She was, I remember in school, when we were going to school, if we did something wrong because we did not respect or speak respectfully to the older people who were there, she'd get on us. But don't you touch her kid. If there's some- something to be done, I'll do it. Don't you touch my kid, because then Carol's all over you. She was just like that. She was like that. Speaker 1: Was she the disciplinarian in your household (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had both--they both shared, but we had more from her because Dad [Josh White] travelled. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she the more consistent one in the house. Story_ID: 439366 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. What was his name? Speaker 2: Joshua [Josh White] also. Joshua Daniel, actually, so I don't know if I really am a Jr. if I'm Donald. But he was born in Greenville, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1915. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had, his father was a minister and a handyman, because he didn't always make a living just being a minister about that time. So, he was a handyman who'd go around and sharpen your tools or help you, whatever you need to do. They, Elizabeth [Daisy Elizabeth White] was, Dennis [Dennis White] and Elizabeth, parents, I don't know where, if my grandmother, my father's mother, was born and raised in Greenville, I do not know, or my grandfather, because I never knew him either. But I do know that they were not allowed to go to the movies, listen to secular music, a lot of games they could not play, and when my grandparents would have dinner with my dad and his two brothers and his two sisters. They were dressed; suit and tie, and addressed each other as Mr. and Mrs. White. Now this may be another thing to show your children respect for your elders and how to sit properly and be proper, but they, that's how dinner was, my old man said. They dressed and referred to each other as Mr. and Mrs. White. Speaker 1: So you didn't know your grandparents at all. Speaker 2: Didn't know either one of my grandfathers. I knew my grandmother in Greenville a little bit but not that often because we did not go to Greenville, and no matter how hard my father would try, he couldn't get her out of Greenville. I had an uncle in Washington [D.C.] and another uncle in New York [New York], aunt here, but my grandmother for some reason wanted to stay in Greenville. Speaker 1: Did you ever visit Greenville (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Not often but I remember our first times going down, I was still single digit, and remember seeing the men in the chain gang with the black and white, the chains on the feet, working on the roads. Never forget that. Speaker 1: What were some of your other memories of Greenville or going south? Speaker 2: I don't remember what state it was in, might, maybe North Carolina, but as we got into that state, big billboard with a KKK [Ku Klux Klan] man with his hood on, his horse raised, I love horses, saying welcome to Klan country. I don't forget that. I remember my grandmother lived near a, near a railroad track and the house was very small. It was always very hot and honestly, it didn't look, I looked forward to going down there, I guess, because coming from New York City it was walking backwards. I didn't feel free. I knew I had to watch myself. So, how can you call that a vacation? But my grandmother was there, that's why we went. Speaker 1: Okay. And the land that your grandmother, the house where she lived, did she own the land? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I do not think so. It's a small little house. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your parents ever talk about owning land in the South? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there any talk about slavery in any of your relatives or their parents being in slavery or grandparents' parents? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 439367 Speaker 1: All right, let's talk more about your father. Tell me about his growing up. Speaker 2: Well, I think my grandmother [Daisy Elizabeth White] had lost two or three children. I think there was a total of eight, I heard, but it was my father, two other brothers and two sisters that I knew survived and I know that at the age of seven, my father was coming home from school and there were a lot of blind, black street musicians at the turn of the century. They were not beggars. They played and they earned their money on the street and there was a gentleman waiting to cross who was blind. My old man was raised properly. He crossed the man. The man asked my father what his name was, my old man said Joshua [Josh White], and right then the man sang, 'Joshua Fit the Battle of Jericho' to him and asked him if he would, my dad would be willing to lead him after work for two dollars a week. Of course, my old man thought this was going to be a great adventure, but my grandmother had the last say-so and because he felt he was named after Joshua in the Bible, she wanted to make sure that her son was doing something that would be good in the eyes of God. Being the eyes of the blind would be something, but she prayed over this for like two or three weeks before she would say yes, and so he started leading this man, Blind Man Arnold [John Henry Arnold], and he would put his hand on my dad's shoulder, lead him to downtown whatever, circa 1922, the man would play and sing. My dad would be the tambourine, then pass the tambourine for money. My dad did that and for the next nine-and-a-half years, that's all he did, didn't go to school. He led sixty-six different men around the South, Texas, and what some of them would do if they had a good week, Blind Man Arnold might loan my dad out to another blind man for so much money and he'd sit on his laurels and dad would go and lead him and this blind, the first blind man would get money for dad's use over there and dad would get whatever, moneys. My old man was saying that they all weren't, at least legally blind you can see something a little bit, so some were not totally blind 'cause I remember him saying that he would, he wrote back about treatment that wasn't nice. Sometimes he didn't always get to his mom, but he had situations while leading these men that had affected the rest of his life. One incredible story was at eight years old they were sleeping in the fields. Now sometimes a black family would put them up, or sometimes they would put the man up, not the kid, or they'd sleep in a barn or something. They happened to be out in the field and, as you, as one may surmise, people on the road, they, their coach might have hooks that carry their frying pan and so they clanked a lot just because all of their belongings are with them. My father said he was awakened with a hand over his mouth. It was the blind man; in fact, it might have been Blind Man Arnold, I don't know. He had heard some commotion, didn't know what it was, didn't want my father to wake up and make noise before we found out what it was. It was a bunch of white people--men, women, and children--who had caught two black men. God knows what they did. They didn't even have to be guilty of it, but they certainly were hanging, dead. My dad said it went through the night and they had a fire, poker, drinking, and sometimes somebody would grab a poker, get it hot, and go up and burn one of these dead bodies. They knew they could not move. If they wanted to sneak out of there and the guitar happened to hit a rock or his frying pan happened to hit something, there'd be four bodies up there, so they waited knowing, like roaches, when the light comes they scatter. As these cowards did, then it was safe to leave. My father died at age fifty-five, and he sang the song 'Strange Fruit.' Whenever my father sang 'Strange Fruit,' I could always see that eight year old boy's eyes watching that lynching. I mean, I would be on the, my sister and I used to work--and we'd be in the wings, but when he did that song I didn't go back in the dressing room, didn't want to hear him, didn't want to see him. Whether one, anybody liked my old man's version of it, he lived it, he saw it, and I felt it. Story_ID: 439368 Speaker 1: He [White's father, Josh White] was once thrown in jail in Florida because he didn't take his hat off fast enough when he went into a store to get something and was kicked in his groin and threw up and they tore his shirt off and made him clean up, threw him in jail because he was a run-away. He told them that he had permission but until they got in touch with my grandmother [Daisy Elizabeth White], they put this eleven year old boy in jail. They wouldn't believe when he said he didn't take that off fast enough. My grandfather [Dennis White], his father, now they kept a clean house. Sherriff came one day for something. He was there and he had his hat on. My grandfather said, "Would you please respect my house and take off your hat?" He'd do it in a white man's house. He wouldn't do it, wouldn't do it. I think he was asked three times and I believe, I'm not sure because I wasn't there, that he might have spit where the fireplace is; might have, didn't have to, but my grandfather had asked him three times respectfully so he just took the sheriff's hat off for him. So, now you see, this nigger's gotta be crazy. He's not supposed to be touching my hat. So, of course, they take him to jail. My father and his mother went to visit them in the jail. My dad said as he was walking towards them and there were cells along the side, and as he passed the cop, the cop hit him for no good reason. As he was passing him by with a stick, there was a tussle, so he's got to be crazy now because he fought a cop, sent him to an insane asylum. He's got to be crazy. My old man, my father, grandfather escaped, caught him, took him back again and the story after that becomes shady. I don't think, I think maybe from the beating he might have suffered kind of a brain concussion. He wasn't all there anymore, but he did eventually come back to Greenville [South Carolina]. I believe he had a, a cleaners. Story_ID: 439369 Speaker 1: But then, my dad, up until the age of fourteen, again, was still traveling, went to, came to Chicago [Illinois] with a man named Blind Joel Taggart [Blind Joe Taggart]. He was the last blind man he, he led. And by this time my father had learned to play guitar. None of them ever taught him, but if they played in what is called an open tuning where you change the strings to a key, you play differently than the way a guitar is normally tuned. Some may play six strings, some may play twelve strings, but none would teach him how to play so whenever a blind black street musician would go off into the night without his guitar, it'd be left and the old man would fiddle with it and he'd learn how to play guitar that way, and by the time Joel Taggart got him to Chicago to record for ARC Records [American Record Corporation] before Paramount [Paramount Records], the people there got on him because, I'm gonna have you--I'm gonna get to your heart and maybe put more money in that tambourine if the little boy doesn't look good, so he always had short pants, maybe no shoes, and maybe the pants didn't look good, but now we're talking Chicago in the wintertime and the label made the man get my father long pants and shoes, or tell on him for not keeping this boy in school, so he got better--but this man allowed my old man to lead one song of this one album, Blind Joel Taggart, of Josh White leading, and so when that was done my father went back to Greenville [South Carolina] and at the age of sixteen, they used to have talent scouts, who would go out and find people and they had heard this recording and wanted him, came to my mother, my grandmother [Daisy Elizabeth White], and wanted to know if she would allow my dad to come to New York City [New York, New York] and record twenty-eight sides for one hundred dollars. (Laughter) Some things never change. My grandmother prayed over it again and said okay but he could not sing any of the devil's music which was, of course, the blues. Most of these guys sang spirituals and my father knew a lot of spirituals, but in nine and a half years he also learned some of (laughter) the devil's music and kind of liked the devil's music, but when he got to New York City, he did start recording under Joshua White, the Singing Christian, and back then there were race records where a label, well black artists record them, only sell them in the black area, same label, have white artists record them, only sell it in the white area. Well, Josh White, the Singing Christian, became quite popular in that circuit and then after a while, you had 78s [78 rpm record] where you would have one person on one side and someone that may be totally different on the other. You could have a man and his guitar, and on the other side could be an orchestra, so after a while you would find, not particularly always on the other side of Joshua White, the Singing Christian, but all of a sudden there was this blues singer by the name of Pinewood Tom. Now, I don't know if he ever did fool his mother, but God bless him for trying. You know, he sang the blues not in his name, not under the name, whether she ever heard it or not, so my dad was having a pretty good career as a spiritual singer and also as a blues singer. He had two different names going and he was doing very well and it was during that time, because when he moved to New York at the age of sixteen, he never moved back. He lived in New York City, where he found Carol Carr [Carol Carr White] at Epworth Methodist Church [Epworth United Methodist Church, New York, New York], and they became an item. Speaker 2: Do you know the name that he recorded the blues under? Speaker 1: Well, it would be Pinewood Tom. Speaker 2: Pinewood--so, Pinewood Tom (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pinewood Tom was my old man and so was Joshua White, the Singing Christian. Speaker 2: Okay, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I didn't get that part. Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Now, when your father was leading the blind he would go to different states your grandmother allowed him? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. She (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he started at age eight? Speaker 1: Seven. Speaker 2: Oh, seven. Speaker 1: Seven. Speaker 2: Seven years old. Speaker 1: Yes. North Carolina, South Carolina, I think as far as Texas some, and then furthest up was, he came up to Chicago. Speaker 2: And the incident with the hanging was in Texas, you said? Speaker 1: I--no. I do not know where it was. It was somewhere in the South. Speaker 2: South. Okay. Story_ID: 439370 Speaker 1: And so he [White's father, Josh White] moved to New York [New York] and is there a story about how he met your mother? Speaker 2: Never heard a definitive one. I do believe, you know, when you come to a new place to meet people you go to the church. That's just what we do. And I'm sure with his reputation as an artist, those people in New York heard these records too and invited him to come to different churches and sing, came to Epworth [Epworth United Methodist Church, New York, New York], saw Carol [Carol Carr White]. Story_ID: 441564 Speaker 1: We were talking about your dad [Josh White] moving to New York [New York], but I just wanted to go back because you mentioned that the hanging that he saw while leading the blind [John Henry Arnold] was 'Strange Fruit' and I mentioned to you off camera that the only rendition that I had heard before was Billie Holiday's rendition. Tell me about your father's rendition. Speaker 2: Say that again. Speaker 1: Tell me about your father's rendition (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's rendition of it--Abe Meeropol [Abel Meeropol] is the man's name who wrote it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's, Billie's is, she was a jazz singer so there's a tempo all the way through; slow but, mine is, my dad was a sort of off tempo. There was not really a steady tempo to it. It had breaks in it. It's almost conversational. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Is his rendition, so it's not a sing-songy rendition of, but it is so heartfelt that, again, it's just, I didn't wanna be around it because I could see it so well and if you were, if you were a good interpreter, if I'm a good interpreter and you're with me you're gonna feel what I'm telling you. So, those people in the audience did not know, didn't have to know the background that I have with my old man in that song. He still was able to convey those bodies swinging from that southern tree, and they make that impact on you. It makes you think, no matter what color you are and that's, I think, that is a, the job of an interpreter is to, in any field, if I'm gonna sing it for you to believe it. That's, my dad used to (laughter), jumping around, my dad used to tell us all two things. If you're gonna sing a song, you've got to believe it first, because if you don't believe it the person you're singing to won't believe it. Two, if you're gonna sing it, make sure they understand what you're saying. It's not going to be any good if they don't understand a word you're saying. Two things he pushed. Other than that, sing whatever you want. It doesn't have to be a folk song. Sing anything you want but keep those things in mind. And that's what he showed, made with every song he sang. Story_ID: 441565 Speaker 1: So now, your father [Josh White] is sixteen, he moves to New York [New York] and he met your mother [Carol Carr White] at church [Epworth United Methodist Church, New York, New York]. Do you know how old they were when they got married (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think they got married at eighteen, nineteen--young, youngsters. Geez. Young. And they set up house and Rachel Carr, my mom's mom moved in with them. My sister Bunny [Bunny White] was born, I believe in 1935, my oldest sister, and, I'm sorry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, well, let me see, what year would be in, your father was born in-- Speaker 2: Nineteen fifteen [1915]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifteen [1915]. And if he got married when he was nineteen, or eighteen-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that'd be thirty- early '30s [1930s], yeah. Speaker 1: So, we're talking about 1933 or so--okay. Speaker 2: So, he's recording and doing well and in that time there was a small band of people doing that kind of non-mainstream acoustic music as it were. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me what that means. Speaker 2: In today's standard it would be songs you're not gonna hear on the radio on your radio. You'd have to listen to National Public Radio [NPR] to hear non-mainstream songs, songs, folksongs, Scottish songs, not your R and B, not your, whatever your commercial radio stations are playing. We, ours wouldn't particularly fit that mold, so when you hear that alternative music, you hear it more on National Public Radio, which is a bad testament to our radio stations. I believe I've had this feeling all along. If you go to Canada, you'll hear more variety of musics that these people are exposed to. Then you come here, this station plays that same forty all the time and it doesn't broaden your awareness of musics and the younger you are, the better it is to like country music. I mean, if you don't hear it yourself, you buy what-- Speaker 1: What you hear. Speaker 2: What your area is saying, and you don't want to listen to that, so you don't. But that's not right because all music, if there's somebody to listen to it, it's got to be good to somebody. I may not particularly like it, but I can't say it's bad. I don't like to stand in judgment because it's (laughter) been done to me too often, so if there's somebody, if there's some music out there that I don't agree with but someone likes, solid. I just choose not to listen to it. Story_ID: 441566 Speaker 1: So he [White's father, Josh White] was having a very good career (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Yes. Speaker 1: --with his music and you would liken this to folk music, is that what you said? Speaker 2: Yeah. But it was the music of the day too; but I was thinking of people like Pete Seeger in folk music, or Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee, guitar player, harp player, black. Burl Ives, they would do, they would get together, did like, do the same kind of music and sometimes they'd do rent parties. They wanted to keep that apartment, get a little bit of money, have a rent party. Everybody plays some money, put in quarters, you save the apartment, hear good music. That happened a lot, and it was good camaraderie with people, and somewhere in that time, early '30s [1930s], my old man hurt his hand. There were different stories; put his hand through a glass. To me that means fight, that means knowing my old man who was kind of a womanizer, it might have had to do with women. Anyway, he couldn't use his hand for five years. They wanted to amputate three fingers and my old man would not have that. So, he still had family and a mother-in-law [Rachel Carr], so he did whatever he could do. He was a maintenance operator. He was a janitor. He did various jobs other than--but left his fingers intact and would squeeze on a ball when it started going and I think it was less than five years, and it came back, his hand. And, that was interesting because he was at a party, and, Denise [Denise Gines] it's gonna bother me now because the black entrepreneur was there and I can't think of his name right now. We may have to even stop, but this gentleman was about to do a play about John Henry ['John Henry'], and it was going to star Paul Robeson. They wanted a musical walking narrative and this guy I heard on the radio, I haven't heard of him in four or five years is this Pinewood Tom, Josh--I need, I don't know where he is. Ironically, these two people, my father and this gentleman were at the same New Year's Eve party. My old man loved cards. He loved to play cards. He used pinochle. He'd play all night. Anyway, his finger was getting back together so he could play and what the old man would do was he would play a hand and then he'd put the guitar, take the guitar off his lap and make up a verse about the last hand or the coming hand or something. Leonard De Paur, that's his name, heard this singing from this other room and figured I'm doing a production, I can't find, maybe this guy will do. So (laughter) so my old man gets a job replacing my old man (laughter) when they came the next day and it was ironic that Leonard De Paur was looking for the man that was- that he didn't know was in the next door. Story_ID: 441567 Speaker 1: So, my dad's [Josh White] career began again. My old man met--then became friends with Paul Robeson and they did 'John Henry.' The play did not last that long. But, they became friends and from that my dad started recording again and he formed a group called Joshua White and the Carolinians [sic. Josh White and His Carolinians], and in that was to be a lifelong friend named Sam Gary, who was a basso profundo, deep voice; very light skin, deep voice, black man; my Uncle Billy [Billy White], his brother, and, oh shoot--it happens, doesn't it? The gentleman [Bayard Rustin] who later on became a very, an activist, a civil rights activist, was with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and helped do the walk in Washington [March on Washington] in 1963; uh, dog-gone-it, but he was the tenor in my dad's group back in 1939. People forgive me, it will up before the day, before we're done I'll come up with his name. So there was Josh White, the Singing Carolinian, and this gentleman was in it and my Uncle Billy and he did songs of chain gangs, and one of the tunes my dad did at that time was a song he called "Southern Exposure," which happened to be the title of the album ['Southern Exposure'] and they talked about the plight of the black sharecropper. Now being a sharecropper, white or black, was no fun. You didn't even work a land that was yours, but the difference my old man pointed out back then was there was a time when that black sharecropper had to walk--had to pay to walk the street. I don't know if a lot of people know that, but there was a time when blacks had to pay to walk the street and, in fact, in an interview I ran into of my father's some years later, he even mentioned a number, like eighty-seven dollars and something a year to walk the street, so there was the difference right there between a white and black sharecropper. We had to pay to vote. We had to take a literacy test to prove we were smart enough to vote, then get a job to pay for it. The white sharecroppers didn't have to do that. Then the white and black only, colored only, those signs were there, so there was a marked difference between a white sharecropper and a black sharecropper and, so at the time the song, (Singing) "Love, oh love oh careless love; love, oh love oh careless love; love, oh love, oh careless love; oh see what careless love can do," ["Careless Love"]. Anyway, my old man thought well, he gave it new words but gave it the tune so when they hear it on the radio, the tune will automatically grab your ear so you're not gonna turn it off, because I like that song; ah, but the words are different. (Singing) "Well, I work all the week in the blazing sun; work all week blazing sun; work all week in the blazing sun. Can't buy no shoes, Lord when my payday comes," ["Southern Exposure"]. Gives them a little insight with this song, which goes to, with me automatically saying that, my dad's heyday was the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. He was one of the few people, black performers, who sang against racism back then. They all felt it but, you know, to sing about it you want to live a long time, maybe you gotta think, do I wanna do it. But I think my old man felt if not me who, if not now, when. And that is something that from birth, I experienced, that if you don't talk about it, how we gonna get it solved? It'll fester and grow in the darkness, but in the light of day we gotta bring out some truth. It's gotta be talked about. And that's how my father looked at things. Story_ID: 441568 Speaker 1: He sang against racism, but most of his audiences were white, is that not right? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the black community was fine; I mean, they supported him when they had the race records. I think that's the song, the album 'Southern Exposure,' I think, is one of the first ones that crossed over, both black and white radio station started playing this. Somehow, somewhere along the line, white society found folk music; ergo, a separation, I do not know why. Barney Josephson in New York City [New York, New York], who was a shoe salesman, started a club in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] called Cafe Society. Primarily, if you want to see black performers, you'd go to Harlem [New York, New York] and as we know, there were some clubs in Harlem that didn't want us there. They're open just for white people to come and see what we do. (Laughter) Barney Josephson came down the Village. Josh White worked there. Lena Horne worked there. Billie Holiday worked there, but so did white performers. He had black and white sitting at tables in the same room together. He had black and white on stage. That had not been done before. Speaker 1: This was the first integrated nightclub (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, in New York, and again I come up a few years later and it was established. That was the way life was to me. I didn't know that this man took a step and treated performers like performers no matter what color you were and so my old man worked that club off and on for many years, but so did Hazel Scott, so did Mary Lou Williams, so did, in fact thinking about Billie Holiday and 'Strange Fruit,' because she sort of claimed that song but it wasn't written for her. But I guess my dad was performing. She came to see him. They'd all come to see each other. He was singing 'Strange Fruit' and she took offense that she was singing his song and she pulled a knife on my old man about singing a song and, of course, he took it back and they discussed and said, "Billie, you know, everybody should sing this song 'til no one has to." And, of course by the end of the evening they were sitting, drinking, and talking and laughing together. But, at first she thought it was, you know, there's no song that belongs to anyone. And a song like that should be sung by as many people as could be to get that exposure. Story_ID: 441569 Speaker 1: So your father was a bit radical when it came to race and racism (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he just thought--he just thought I'd stand up and be counted. Speaker 1: Okay. But his involvement caused him to be black listed (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, sure. We gotta get that too because during WWII [World War II], Russia was our ally; so, if anyone, my old man did not get drafted because he had kids, so you raise bonds. Who's putting on the benefit? It didn't matter. It had to be an ally because they're raising the money. If it was the Russian people doing it, so? They're allies--after WWII, after 1945, and they started the Communist scare and said, oh, you did that benefit and you know who put that benefit on, so you must be, you're one of them. So, here we go with the black listings, and Paul Robeson's friend and he was pretty outspoken. My dad had become friends with the Roosevelts [Eleanor Roosevelt and President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] for singing against the racism in the [U.S.] Armed Forces. He'd do the song of the state called 'Uncle Sam Says.' So, he did a lot of benefits, did a lot of things, but later on it could be misconstrued and my dad was on, I believe, his first trip to Europe with Mrs. Roosevelt. Heard people were being called--HUAC, it was called, House Un-American Activities [House Un-American Activities Committee]. "I was there. I did the, okay, listen I'm gonna cut this short, go back home, get rid of this, finish my tour." He came back and was voluntarily gonna go. A lot of friends were, don't go until they call you. "Listen, I've got five kids. I can't wait. I wanna get this done. I got stuff to do." So he went voluntarily against people saying he shouldn't do it and, of course, things were taken out of context and so things were said that made them say he said things. Speaker 1: You're talking about when he testified before the House-- Speaker 2: When he testified before the House Un-American Activities. Speaker 1: House Un-American Activities. Speaker 2: Yes, I'm sorry. My mother went with him. I think she and my dad and his lawyer, I believe, Mary Chase, at the time, put it out. It's in a book that one can find. But, those on the left who were on this side thought he shouldn't have done it and the right just needed anything to say against anything against him. So, he went through a hard time because those who wanted to believe he said anything were not then, would not speak with him and he was sort of ostracized, as it were by some, and a lot of venues, it's not that they believed; in fact, some say you can believe whatever you want. He's a good entertainer but, hey listen, if I have you at my club I'm gonna catch so much weight I can't afford it. So, for that period of time my dad did more work outside of the United States than here. In fact, they were, I heard many, many, many years later that a fan of his was willing to buy Josh White and his family a house in England, come here and live scot-free. Well, Carol White [Carol Carr White] wasn't leaving the Bronx [New York] and she certainly wasn't leaving Rachel [Rachel Carr] so that was out. (Laughter) We weren't going anywhere. So my dad didn't work here in the states; I mean, not that he didn't work here but he didn't get the great venues. We lived on 150th Street between Amsterdam [Avenue] and Broadway. Rent wasn't that much, I'm sure, so my family never felt anything. Thanksgivings came, Christmas came, it was all there and now if you had to hock a guitar or do whatever, we children, my mother, my grandmother, we never felt anything. I don't know what the man went through. Speaker 1: But he recovered from those times (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And began performing again. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 441570 Speaker 1: 'Strange Fruit' was one song that influenced other singers but 'House of the Rising Sun' was another song that influenced the-- Speaker 2: Yes, and it was interesting how that came about. I've got a recording somewhere here. Lead Belly, Woody Guthrie and my father [Josh White], I was told, heard 'House of the Rising Sun' together by an Appalachian singer and the song did not have a minor chord. It was all in major chords. And they got Woody, I think, and Lead Belly doing their renditions with the major chord. My old man being the interpreter, for some reason, heard that minor chord. That first chord you hear, if you do it as I do, in a minor, you hear an a minor chord first. (Singing) "There is a house--." My father's contribution to that song was putting in that a minor. That has stuck with the song. He had no idea. It's just how he felt it, and I also like, when he first started doing it that he slowed it down and made it more of a lament and didn't do any of the verses. The verses all came from first person singular. So he sang it from the woman's point of view; not a man talking about the woman's situation, but from the woman's situation, which I respected greatly that he didn't feel threatened by what someone might say, to say, you know that's the girl. He's thinking about a plight of a person who happens to be female and how best can I get into it if I'm not her. You're going to go into a role, you be the role, and that's what he did. Story_ID: 441571 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk, well we've gotten into a little bit about your family life. But tell me about your brothers and sisters. Speaker 2: Four sisters. Speaker 1: Tell me their names (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two older, two younger. Speaker 1: Tell me, tell me their names but tell me the order. Speaker 2: You got it. Blondell Deborah [Bunny White] is my oldest sister and I believe, '35 [1935], I believe Bunny was, Bunny is her nickname. My dad loved nicknames. Then Julianne Beverly [Beverly White] came in 1939. Joshua Donald [HistoryMaker Josh White, Jr.] came eighteen months later, Carolyn Fern [Fern White] came four years later, I think Judith Mary [Judy White] came four years after that. And that's, so I have two older and two younger sisters living on 150th Street [New York, New York] and I've been waiting to tell you this, 150th Street, 539, but 150th Street was kind of a, when I look back on it, kind of a special block. Because if you start from Convent Avenue heading towards Riverside Drive, from Convent to Amsterdam [Avenue], you have Paula Kelly, a very fine singer, actress, dancer, who was in 'Sweet Charity' with Shirley MacLaine. When you hit Amsterdam, right there on 150th Street, you had Hines, Hines and Dad. You had Gregory [Gregory Hines], Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] and their dad [Maurice Hines, Sr.], the father used to play drums and they sang and danced. Come halfway down the block was Sweetwater Clifton [Nathaniel "Sweetwater" Clifton], basketball player who was also with the Harlem Globetrotters. Then came my family, Josh White, middle of the block, going closer to Broadway was John Bubbles [John W. Bubbles] of Buck and Bubbles, a dance comedy team. I remember he always used to, and I remember this fifty years later. Why does a duck walk softly? I don't know. Because he can't walk hardly. John Bubbles, when I was a kid. All right, then you go to Broadway and from Broadway to Riverside Drive, 150th Street, down near Riverside Drive was Marian Anderson, so we all lived on 150th Street. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: On 164th Street was Leslie Uggams and Frankie Lymon, before, (Singing) "Why do fools fall in love" ['Why Do Fools Fall in Love']. So, I just like that fact that when I look back, they're down on 150th Street. That's kind of a nice block. Story_ID: 441572 Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Singing with the old man. I was told we recorded when I was three-and-a-half. I don't remember that. Back then it was during the war [World War II, WWII] and they were not recording because they needed to use that for the war purposes so they used to have recordings made just for our [U.S.] Armed Forces to be sent over there and apparently I did a recording of the song 'One Meat Ball' when I was three-and-a-half and that was sent over there, but I was at the age of four working at this night club, the Cafe Society [New York, New York]. I was there, four years old, and well I don't get why the hell I was there at four; maybe Josh [Josh White] was happy 'cause he had a son finally after two girls [Bunny White and Beverly White], and he was performing and singing the song I knew, 'One Meat Ball.' He's here with a spotlight, playing with his foot on a stool. He never had a guitar strap, and all of a sudden during this song, the audience started hearing this little squeaky voice to the right, which was me, and as I loved to tell people, (laughter) the spotlight operator took the spotlight off of Josh White and put it on in the corner (laughter). Josh White went towards the light (laughter). My old man came to pick me up with one hand, had the guitar in the other, stood me on the chair, put his foot on the chair. We finished the song 'One Meat Ball' and that's how my career started. (Background noise) That's my dogs getting up from the, off the, from the wood. So my first memory was performing with the old man. Story_ID: 441573 Speaker 1: Of your parents, who do you think you have, or what traits from each parent? I was going to ask you about personalities, whose personality do you have, but let's talk about the different traits you think that you received from each of your parents. Speaker 2: I think for many, many years I felt my dad's [Josh White] presence in me more than my mom, because I travel with him, same male person kind of thing. But I think there's a strong sense of my mom in there with the tenderness, you know, and I mean, show me a good commercial and I'll cry (laughter) and I feel there's certain movies I'll watch and I'll, my mom died in '98 [1998], and I'll think of Carol [Carol Carr White] right away; in fact, I normally give her a call and say did you--my dad's and mom's position of I am somebody, and no matter where I go I am somebody and no one is going to diminish that from me. We get from both and especially from the old man, because also by the time I came along the black community was not, was not supporting us so, it was white audiences that you sang to and it was very important to keep your own dignity, being yourself wherever you go and remembering that you're also representing not only Josh White [HistoryMaker Josh White, Jr.], but (air quotes) the Negro race. Story_ID: 439434 Speaker 1: You had mentioned that your father [Josh White] never went to school. Was he self-taught? What, you know, how did he get an education (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The times when he was home, he did, I think the final tally was he might have gone up to fifth or sixth grade. So, he was, he read a lot, westerns, he didn't improve his information by books, reading, that kind of thing but he liked to read, liked to read westerns, and I do believe that with interviews or even at parties he could not always find the words to put them perfectly well enough for you to understand, but there was always a song. He was never far from that guitar. He could always find a song to make his point and I don't care what the point was, whether it be sex or politics, the man had a song to express it. Story_ID: 439435 Speaker 1: Now, when you think of your neighborhood, now this is when you're a little guy, when you're four, already in the night clubs (laughter), think back, think of a sound, a sound and a smell that takes you back to that time. Speaker 2: Hm, the sound would be us playing stickball. You know, you get a broom, break broom, mop, and your--you go from, the sewer would be first be first base and it's one bounce hit, and you have somebody in the outfield which is on the street, or somebody, that person can carry going over to the sidewalk on your left or right side that the balls hit. So, you have one car would be first. The sewer in the center of the street would be second, another car, and back home or--I think we used to call it Chinese handball. Not with just hitting it, but it's one bounce and then you have to, and loadies. People don't know of loadies if you weren't from New York City [New York, New York], where you have a little square and you have thirteen little boxes and you have to, that was, that was home. And, you always knew what basement to run down when you broke somebody's window, when you play ball. Zap. You go on. Oh man, yeah. We're fast. I look back and I enjoy the fact that we're either called lower Washington Heights [New York, New York] or upper Harlem [New York, New York]. Sugar Hill is what we were called. And so, we had, there were white people and black which is always good when we were growing up. One of my best friends, little Jimmy [ph.], lived right next door to us and there was a guy down the block and there was, most of the stores were owned by white people, but there was a Chinese family that had the grocery store and it was the kind of stores that they knew the family so well, you could go there and get something and not have money, you know. You go to Mr. Jeans [ph.] and get the cleaning and my mom or dad [Josh White] will pay him later. Here, it's yours. There was a trust that is not here anymore. It was (laughter) also, it was hard to get away with anything because everybody in the block was your mother or your father, so you can go up near the Amsterdam [Avenue] where your house can't see, but if you do something Carol's [Carol Carr White] gonna find out about it because So-and-So is gonna tell Carol or--so it's that kind of a thing, so it was a family feeling and there was never any problem with white or black, Spanish--we all, as we were talking off camera before, we all got along. You know, you enjoyed each other. There was never any tinge of racism, and I always felt strange when my friends in the summertime who had family down south said, Ray Hardy [ph.] who lived across from me, he was sort of my brother around the same age. He and I were close enough because I didn't have a brother, but they'd go down to North Carolina in the summertime for a vacation and as I sort of, mentioned before, I never think it's a vacation if you've gotta go down and watch what you say and I was around when Emmett Till whistled when he shouldn't have in 1950 [sic. 1955] and those people killed him. I related that to that young boy 'cause he lived in Chicago [Illinois], though he's from the South but he felt he could carry his Chicago self, down to North- or wherever it was [Mississippi], and it got him killed. So, I never enjoyed the South because I always thought you walked backwards. When we went down there it was to see my [paternal] grandmother's [Daisy Elizabeth White] for a specific reason. Didn't stay long and my old man wasn't comfortable there, but the block was wonderful. Story_ID: 439436 Speaker 1: What smells do you remember from that time? Speaker 2: You could smell maybe (unclear) family cooking arroz con pollo, or you could smell my [maternal] grandmother's [Rachel Carr] apple pie. There was a variety of mixture of smells that was not isolated to what one should smell because you're in Harlem [New York, New York]. Now, who lives in Harlem? People. (Laughter) People have different tastes, so--what's this stuff that I can't eat--chitlins. That also will permeate but that's not a happy smell to me, because god bless everyone who does, and that's very good, but I just never understood why anyone would want to eat anything that smells so bad cooking. I just (laughter), it's just me. It's just me. But there was those, the chitlin smell and the cabbage smells. And they're wonderful, wonderful memories. Speaker 1: What about sights? You said the sounds were you and your friends playing and the smells of food (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My stickball, right, yes. Speaker 1: --and what sights take you back to your neighborhood? Speaker 2: If I'm going to envision or--it was always on the corner of Amsterdam [Avenue] and 150th Street. Somebody was also always washing somebody's car. The man with the money, the number runner, I guess, his car was as clean as the board of health. He had that Cadillac or whatever--young boys always; I mean, it always was there. That was a sight that was always there. Sounds could, other sounds could be my mother. We lived on the third floor and she always stared out the window, but it seemed like we were always the first ones to have to come upstairs, and my nickname is Donny [HistoryMaker Josh White, Jr.] so, "Donny," or we had a whistle. You hear that whistle, it's time to go. And we always seemed to be the first ones that were called to go upstairs, but I remember doing a, having fun with my mother because I've always loved animals and I think that because (laughter) I had four sisters we always had a lot of animals. She placated me, I think, because she let me have the animals. We lived on third floor, four kids, and my grandmother, but I had dogs, cats, guinea pigs, white rats, two monkeys. Carol White's [Carol Carr White] on the third floor. I'm fourteen, fifteen years old. Here's a gentleman on Broadway with a white-faced capuchin monkey. I said, "Let me pull a thing on my mother. Come walk with me. I'm gonna tell her you gave it. Just watch her face. Ma. This man just gave me this monkey." She said okay. You should have seen my face. But then, the man gave me the monkey. Flat out gave it to me. His name was Scampy [ph.]. I had a white faced capuchin monkey that, for anyone if you ever wanted a monkey, white faced capuchins are the way to go. Capuchins. They are so, they're easier to learn, they're used now for quadriplegics. These monkeys are used to help them answer the phone or open the door, whatever. The capuchin monkey is smart and is used a lot that way. But, it was a lot of fun, I-- Story_ID: 439437 Speaker 1: I was known in my neighborhood [Harlem, New York, New York] for either my German shepherd, Baron [ph.], whom I got from Mrs. Roosevelt, because the families had been close over the years and my uncle started working, for Uncle Billy [Billy White]. To my-- Speaker 2: You had a dog from the Roosevelt, which one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eleanor Roosevelt, yes. I'm jumping. I hope that's okay. Speaker 2: No, that's okay. I'm gonna take you back. Speaker 1: My father wrote in '39 [1939], '40 [1940] this song called 'Uncle Sam Says.' It was because he went to visit this Uncle Billy at Fort Dix, New Jersey and drive around the base trying to find my dad on closed barracks, passed a lot of structures, no black soldiers, structures and pup tents, no black soldiers. Finally found an area where there were just pup tents and that's where all the black soldiers were, so my dad was saying, well, you know, you probably do those maneuvers and stuff and--and my uncle said, no, this is where they keep us. All right, you ask a man to go die for his country and you're just slapped with that which you knew. So he came back with a man named Cooney, Mr. Cooney [Michael Cooney] who wrote songs with him and they wrote 'Uncle Sam Says.' It got to the ear of somebody on the president's staff because my father got a call from Washington [D.C.] to come to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and sing this song for FDR, [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his people. And there, he was called, said, "Josh [Josh White], I don't know if you should do this." My old man says, "The man wants to hear it (laughter) I'm gonna sing it to him." And I'm sure my old man sang this next song twice, just to make sure it was understood. (Singing) "Airplanes flying across the land and sea, everybody flying but a Negro like me. Uncle Sam says your place is on the ground. When I fly my airplane, don't want no Negro 'round," ['Uncle Sam Says']. And it goes to the [U.S.] Navy and all throughout. But this song started a friendship between, in fact, I'd say this is the song that brought the two White Houses together, 'cause my dad would go to the White House on many occasions and sing, and I started going up to Hyde Park [New York] and Mrs. Roosevelt would send us their Christmas trees sometimes, or my first big sled, my German shepherd, turkey, so we had that kind of a friendship with the family. Then after FDR died in '45 [1945], that same uncle who was in my dad's Singing Carolinians [Josh White and His Carolinians] and in Fort Dix started driving for Mrs. Roosevelt. And there was a, FDR had a very famous dog named Fala. It was a Scottie, I think, black Scottie. So, my uncle sometimes would bring some of Fala's babies when he was driving down there, so we had a connection with the family and that continued through her life. Story_ID: 439438 Speaker 1: Tell me about the building that you grew up in-- Speaker 2: 539 [150th Street, New York, New York], walk-up, we were on the third floor. Though there were no white people at 539, but in 533, right next door, was little Jimmy [ph.] and his brother so, and we had an alley where my kitchen could look into his living room and sometimes we'd have a, try to throw a long string and have the little cans so we can talk to each other. On the first floor, my mom's [Carol Carr White] two sisters lived, so my Aunt Gertrude [Gertrude Carr] and Aunt Olah [ph.] lived on the first floor. We're on the third floor. One of my best buddies lived on the fourth floor, Ronnie Dawson [ph.]. Now my German shepherd, Baron [ph.], from Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt]. We never taught Baron this but after a while, you could come into my apartment, but you couldn't leave unless we put up the dog. I don't know where he got it from. And there's a great story, because the apartments are never locked. You know, you just go into one another, I'd go up to Ronnie Dawson's, he'd come down to mine. Well, Ronnie happened to come down to mine. We might have been downstairs an auntie's house, but Baron was home. Ronnie came home. "Hi, what's up? Ah shoot." He just sat down and waited. He knew he wasn't going to--because it's kind of a long hallway before you get into the living room. There was no way in the world. He just sat in that living room and waited (laughter) for one of us to get home so Baron could be put up so he could leave. But it was one of those, it was just, again the sense of family in the block and in the apartment building. You knew everyone and you didn't always have to lock the door. It was, it's funny, I'm sixty-six years old and I still sometimes have dreams at 539, having things happen. It's still there, which is a lovely thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What sort of things? Speaker 2: Just something that might happen that is now, but I'm living there. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: I'm not in Michigan. I'm at 539. Story_ID: 439439 Speaker 1: So, what elementary school do you go to? Speaker 2: I went to private school, myself, all my life. Downtown Community School [New York, New York], Beverly [Beverly White] and I went to and I think, I don't remember where it was in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], but I was there until the third grade. Speaker 1: It was called Downtown Community (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Downtown Community School, yes. But fourth grade on, I started going to Professional Children's School [New York, New York], PCS. It was for children in the business, in any form, and it went from first to twelfth grade, but for the first, up until the seventh, maybe eighth grade or so, my school occupied three floors of an eighteen story office building at Broadway and 61st [Street]. It's gone now, but it was one of those old buildings where you had the elevator operator and you had the head clicker guy that would tell them when to leave, when to go up; Pete [ph.], his name was. And, we had the, I can't remember what floors we had, but, and we only had four hours of school, from ten 'til two. We were nothing extra, just the three Rs; reading, writing, and arithmetic. Now, it was known with all of the agencies, commercials, plays, movies, if you come to school in the morning no matter what grade, and there's a call for your age, what you do, get a note from the office, go audition. If you get the part and you're on the road, you have correspondence courses. As long as you send it in every Friday--Sandra Dee, for those of you of my age, (laughter) was in my class and she was the first Gidget. She was in there. Before the first year was out she got the role of Gidget and went to California and we never saw her again and she was in my class. Christopher Walken went to my school a few grades below me; Elliott Gould, a few years older than me; Ann Blyth, for those of you really older, graduated from that school, I don't know when. So, we have dancers, singers, actors who, for all intents and purposes, would pay whatever the fee was for the school themselves because they were working, and I went to that school. That's the only school I went to from fourth grade to twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Well, let's back up just a little bit and talk about your first through third grade at Downtown Community School. Do you remember-- Speaker 2: Not much. Speaker 1: Not much? Okay. Speaker 2: I remember, I guess, in the second grade, playing, there was a sandbox and there was an Oriental girl named Tuohy Mingh [ph,]. I remember that name; I loved her. That's truly, I don't remember very much of Downtown Community School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the one vision that stuck in my mind. Story_ID: 439440 Speaker 1: So now, when you're nine years old, so I guess you would be-- Speaker 2: What, 1949 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm trying to think of what you would be in at nine--third or fourth grade? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You were in a Broadway play. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: It was a--well, I kind of won the role by default. I had never acted before. And I've-- Speaker 1: Before you go into that, let me ask you, how did, how did this all come about? Talk to me about the transition from performing with your dad [Josh White] on stage at four and then becoming a performer. Tell me about that transition. Speaker 2: Well, if you really want to look at it, I guess I'm in the right business but I didn't choose it. I didn't say at four years old, "Dad, I want to sing." I was there. I sang. So, it was quite natural to continue. So I kept on singing with him, and if you're in show business and you have a management, what else can this little boy or girl do? Well, they need a little kid, a black kid for this TV show. Do that. I didn't ask and say, yeah, I wanna be an actor. There's an acting job. You're in show business, go up for it. So all my life, I did as I was told. So there were TV shows, 'Lamp Unto My Feet,' 'Studio One,' a lot of little, when they needed a black child there were not a lot of us, and so I, I'm not quite sure whether I had acting before I did the play or not. I really don't remember, but by 1949, there was a play, 'How Long Til Summer?' My father was starring in it. They needed somebody to play his son. Hello. So, my first acting on Broadway was with my father, playing his son in 'How Long Til Summer?' Speaker 1: But even though, you don't remember having any acting lessons-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah-- Speaker 1: You got a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], a special Tony Award for Best Child Actor in 1949. Was that right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I might have been the only child actor (laughter), but yes I, yes I did, and I really don't, I do not remember. Again, there were not a lot of roles for young black kids back then, so I'm sure I was a very small minority who was up for it. But, it did establish me in the acting field and I did go on to do more plays without my father, and all of my plays were all dramatic. I never did a musical. All the acting I ever did on TV, none had to do with music. And, sort of the fun about that when I was growing up was because there were not a lot of shows on TV, whatever show I did, everybody watched it; especially if you know a brother's going to be on the show anyway. And so, whatever my name was on that show, I knew I'd be called that week around the block, and I remember being, having to be Jasper [ph.], was my name in one of the shows and that's when, "Hey, Jasper." But that was the price of fame as it were, but it was kind of cool because there, again, was support because they did watch the shows, but we're going to watch it any time one of us are on, because a lot of us were not there during a lot of shows (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the shows? Speaker 2: Again, it was 'Lamp Unto My Feet,' was a religious show. I did a lot of that. There was 'Studio One,' 'Armstrong Circle Theatre,' and all of these were live now. All of these shows were live on TV. And so, I just did a slew of them whenever they need--I happened to be known and then once you get established as an actor and performer, you might be called faster because they know your name. So, I don't how many were out there but things were kind of good there and it was kind of nice to, in the block to, for the block to be proud of. Story_ID: 439441 Speaker 1: Was Leslie Uggams one of the students at the school [Professional Children's School, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes, Leslie came to school later on. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what was your relationship with Marvin Hamlisch? Speaker 2: Marvin, I knew early because I sang and I think that he might have been two or three grades below me, but when I met him as a young teenager he was already writing music. I think his partner at the time was like an older guy, maybe twenty, but Marvin was writing music then and I recorded for Decca [Decca Records] in 19--pardon me, in 1956, and it was a song of Marvin's called 'Seesaw' that I recorded, and I don't know whether that was the first published thing that Marvin had, but my very first recording happened to be a Marvin Hamlisch tune. Speaker 1: Do you remember how it goes? Speaker 2: (Singing) "Seesaw, seesaw." I sing this now with my granddaughter when we go to the seesaw. (Singing) "Seesaw, seesaw, my love is like a seesaw. First it's up, then it's down, am I a lover, am I a clown? Up and down and down and up, something something, don't get up, oh seesaw, seesaw, a game of love, a game of love for two," ['SeeSaw']. Yep. Story_ID: 439442 Speaker 1: Now in 1950, you're ten years old. Speaker 2: Watch out. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And you act in, is this a play, 'The Man' [Mel Dinelli]? Speaker 2: Yes, with Don Hanmer and Ian Gish [sic. Dorothy Gish], yes. Speaker 1: And 'Touchstone' [William Stucky]-- Speaker 2: 'Touchstone' with Patty McCormack. Those of you who remember Patty, that was her first Broadway show. Speaker 1: So tell me what it was like to be in these plays on Broadway. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was talking with my friend, Doug Yeager [Douglas Yeager], who has managed me for many years and is my agent. It was what I did. Since I wasn't one that said, I wanted to be an actor, go give me all the acting gigs. I wanted to be a singer. Singing and acting just came along with what I had been doing all along. So, though I enjoyed doing it, I didn't have the passion that maybe my contemporaries did because they chose. It was their choice, their cognitive choice. My, just, it was the flow of life that brought me to the--it was just from here you go there kind of thing, you know? So I really am sorry that I cannot relish working with Richard Boone and Alan Alda, and Nehemiah Persoff and Shepperd Strudwick and all of these very fine famous actors and actresses, because it was just another thing to do as acting. I loved it but, again, it was never the initial drive for me to do. There is a play going, we're going to send you up for it. Okay. So that's how it was and I look back at my life and I think there is a difference in the approach to your profession when it is something you truly cognitively chose to do. Speaker 1: Would there have been something else that you would have chosen? Speaker 2: You get used to instant gratification early (laughter). You get used to that so early and if you're, if it's easy for you to do, why look to do anything else? You know, I wasn't the gifted young kid as I would think a Michael Jackson was, but I was cute. I could carry a tune. That's all that was needed. And that I was his son, and they loved him [Josh White]. So everybody loved you. You get used to that and then you develop your craft as you continue to do it. Story_ID: 439443 Speaker 1: You went to the Professional Children's School [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, PCS. Speaker 1: All the way through to the twelfth grade. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you feel that you missed the activities of a regular high school? Do you wish you had attended maybe public school? Did you have a prom (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I kind of--yeah, I went to a couple of proms, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think of--when, now older and going and singing in schools, I would have loved gym because I don't know if I was double-jointed but I could do a backbend standing straight up and all, so I was very agile. So, I think I might have pursued something in that vein. Had I had a coach to say, that handstand's pretty good kid, maybe something might have developed, but it didn't and I don't think I would change how I grew up at all, and but yeah, I guess there are tinges of, gee, I might have been a good gymnast had I gone to that regular school, but it wasn't going to be that way. Speaker 1: So now, through your teenage years, are there any other activities that you're involved in besides going to school and going to work, that was it. Speaker 2: If I wasn't acting or singing I was on the block playing ball. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you think you were making a good living as an actor/singer? Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember I was eleven or twelve, I guess or something, and my mother [Carol Carr White] had a coffee table with a nice square, rectangular glass and I decided to do a handstand and fell into it. She said you're going to pay me for that. I had the money to pay for it. (Laughter) So yes, I think I did okay. Story_ID: 440714 Speaker 1: So tell me more about your high school years and what happens during that time. Speaker 2: High school was fun. Never played hooky much. The school was good. They'd let you know if that was not a good reason and you wouldn't want to face the wrath of Mom and Dad, Carol [Carol Carr White] and Josh [Josh White], but 61st [Street] and Broadway just at 67th Street, there's a horse stable, you see. My old man bought me a horse when I was eleven, because I think the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] had won the pennant [National League pennant] so, for half a minute (laughter) I had a pinto named Dodger (laughter) and we kept it there at 67th Street, so my friend that I was very close to and went to school with, Michael Mann, we would sometimes sneak out the back and go horseback riding from the, 1860 Broadway is where the school was. But it was a fun time just having, just ten to two [o'clock], so if you were pursuing your acting career, your dancing, your singing, they gave you that short a period for three hours, then you took your lessons, not like the school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], like 'Fame' showed where you taught it in-school. Ours is strictly reading, writing, then you get your lessons of what you're doing somewhere else, and I think in my last year, I was in two plays back to back, the last being 'The Long Dream,' written by Richard Rogers [sic. Richard Wright], directed by [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards, was Clarence Williams III's first play. It was my last play. He was intense back then. Now just to show you the difference and I don't mean that to go back and forth, but I would learn my lines well and give it the emotion, but even then Clarence Williams III, chose to be an actor. He gave his character-now, our characters were friends of Al Freeman, Jr., who had the lead role. But Clarence had a background. He gave himself a background. Parents, X, Y, and Z, I hadn't. I got my lines. I get to say them, but ergo lie the difference. In there lie the difference. He was a dedicated man in that respect. I was doing it because it was the thing that I was set out to do and I got the part. But I, and so during this time I wasn't a very good correspondence person. My oldest sister, Bunny, Blondell [Bunny White], would be the one that would travel with me because she was older on the road when I did the different plays. So, come the end of my senior year, I needed two more credits, American history, I think, and English; two of my favorite subjects. But, I would have to pay the full year to go back to PCS [Professional Children's School, New York, New York] for those two subjects, and I wanted my diploma but I thought, well I'm not going to pay that much money, but if I went to a public school I'd have to do regents back then, which my school never had from the ninth to the twelfth to get the diploma, so the hell with it. I just, I actually then never did graduate from PCS although I got an award from PCS back in the '70s [1970s] for some reason, but it wasn't for lack of knowledge. It was just, seemed like a lot of money for about two subjects that I knew and it wasn't, my career was not going to end because I didn't actually graduate, as it were. Story_ID: 440715 Speaker 1: Now you talked about Al Freeman, Jr. and Clarence Williams [Clarence Williams III]. Tell me some of the other people who were in plays with you. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen gave me my first and only stage kiss. We did, oh what was it, off-Broadway, 'Take a Giant Step' [Louis Peterson] off-Broadway production at the Jun Hus theater [Jan Hus Playhouse, New York, New York] on Third Avenue [ph.], but I worked with [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis on different shows and, again, lovely Billie Allen and Beah Richards and oh, so many. But the thing that gets me is that, again, I couldn't savor it as I can now. I mean, there's a picture of me on Paul Robeson's knee. I was four or five, dog-gone-it, I wish I could remember. There's a picture of me with Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt] and Joe Louis. Joe Louis gave my old man [Josh White] a pair of boxing gloves for me one time. I was too young, and it all, all so normal; you know, they were friends of my dad who happened to do the same thing he did so it was nothing special, until you look back at it from many, many years and say gosh, I worked with these people. Story_ID: 440716 Speaker 1: You leave high school [Professional Children's School, New York, New York]. Well, let me just ask you about high school. Were there any teachers that you remember that might have encouraged you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mr.--Mr. Pickering [ph.]. Can't--what's his first name, dog-gone-it. Mr. Pickering, high school music. He came late in our school year. I think he went on to arrange for [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, but he kind of had a modern jazz thing going with us, me, Leslie [Leslie Uggams] and I can't remember whom else. He wasn't for us, with us very long, but all of our teachers were wonderful people. Again, our classes were so small. At times there could be eight people in the class. So, we had that one-on-one situation all the time, even if there were twelve of us. There was never twenty-five in a class or anything. So, we always had a chance to really get the knowledge and not take any time away from the other because there was so much time, so that was wonderful. I mean, when I got older and started singing in schools and having so many kids when I teach now, twenty-five or thirty kids in a class. I'm thinking how they're losing out, just by the sheer number of it. They can't have that which I was able to have going to the private school. Story_ID: 440717 Speaker 1: So, what happens after you leave high school [Professional Children's School, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Okay. Leaving high school. So now, I'm still working with the old man [White's father, Josh White]. By 1960, there were not a lot of plays, good roles for black young people and Billy Dee Williams, Clarence [Clarence Williams III], Billy Gunn [Bill Gunn], who were not primarily singers, Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.], although he played and sang, Lou Gossett. They had a rougher row to hoe, I believe, because I could go back to this (gesture), which I just concentrated on more heavily and I went to Europe with dad and did concerts with him. He had, it was a series of shows of his name, 'Josh White' ['The Josh White Show'], and North Granada TV [sic. Granada Television; ITV Granada], and I do remember taking the train and my father drank and drinking, somebody red scotch, whatever, out of the bottle on the train. Whew. Speaker 1: Johnnie Walker Red? Speaker 2: Johnnie Walker Red. Yes ma'am. On the train. Going to North Granada TV, boy I was a man, watch out. Shoot. It was fun. I met a lot of, I met more, I met one of the, one of the people I met whose name I cannot remember right now had the largest jazz collection of any person I ever met in the United States. The Luck, the Luck family. There was a family that lived over there, Don [Don Luck] and Sandra Luck. My father would stay with them. Nina Simone stayed there. I mean, they were friends to a lot of the black artists who went over to Europe, to England to perform. So it was a wonderful time. (Laughter) I remember drinking over there and it was Dubonnet. So I come back home (laughter), so give me a (pronunciation) Dubonnet. I didn't know, Dubonnet, not Dubonnet. Anyway, little things like that were fun- funny when you look back. Story_ID: 440718 Speaker 1: 'Josh White at Town Hall.' What was that? Speaker 2: I believe that was Mercury Records, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, produced by Quincy Jones, young Quincy Jones then. My father [Josh White] normally performed with just a bass player. Spike Lee's dad worked with us a lot, Bill Lee, but sometimes you'd have other musicians. My old man wasn't great with rehearsals. So, I remembered that night at Carnegie Hall [sic. The Town Hall, New York, New York] it was going to be taped and I'm twenty, Beverly [Beverly White] is going to be twenty-two, eighteen months older than me, but she and my father had a falling out at home on 150th Street before the concert and she wasn't going. "Well, all right. That's it, come on, let's go." So we get down there, my dad and I, and there was a flute player, piano player, bass player, and there might have been another horn too. But, what was so cool about these musicians was we did, except for the bass player whom I had worked with, as my old man used to say, they had big ears because they didn't quite know the arrangements of the songs but they're musicians, so give me a little bit and I'll go with it. And at the intermission, Carol White [Carol Carr White] got Beverly White down there, somehow it eased over. So, in the second half, my father was going to introduce me again and normally I would come on, we'd do a song, he leaves, I do some songs, I call him back, we do a song, I leave, he finishes. And, I surprise him, and instead of singing I introduce my sister, Beverly, whom the last thing he knew they were arguing. So, out comes Beverly and it was a great surprised to see him surprised, and she did the "House of The Rising Sun"; our version, the slow, lament version and to this day, I still think capturing that recording was so great because it just started with dad and the bass player and after it got established, the piano just started filtering in, and then the flute player and all of a sudden we had something going, and at the very end of it when she says, I'm going back to New Orleans [Louisiana], there must have been some kind of a fire down 57th Street, because you could hear the siren and when the stereo goes from one to the other and it was just absolutely perfect. It was a wonderful night. It was a good night for my dad. We had standing room only. It was recorded well. It was nice that the surprise of Beverly was captured. No one knew the background, why she wasn't in the first half, and so it was a very warm feeling all around to have had that evening of the three of us working together and recording, because I don't think there is another recording of the three of us. We did a little recording in Sweden in '63 [1963], but I think the Carnegie Hall thing was special because it was the White family and it was kind of cool. Story_ID: 440719 Speaker 1: Well did (cough) your other sisters sing, also? Speaker 2: They all sang. Beverly [Beverly White] stopped when she got married, after '63 [1963]. Fern [Fern White] went right after me, never sang with my dad [Josh White]. Judy [Judy White], the youngest one, did work with him. By this time, I was on my own so I was not around. I think they went to Europe and Judy used to sing with Miriam Makeba's daughter, named Bongi [Bongi Makeba] and they recorded on the Buddah label [Buddah Records], Bongi and Judy, and they had some semi-hits out and my sister Judy worked with The Isley Brothers, sang with them, and, but now I'm the only one doing secular music. I've got one sister who is a Seventh-day Adventist, Ferny, who sings but just, and Beverly is a born-again, and so is Judy, so they keep in music. But there was a time, soon after my dad died in '69 [1969], when the three of them all still lived in the New York [New York] area, 'cause Judy is now in Atlanta [Georgia]. They called themselves the Josh White Singers, and with my sister, Fern, now, her husband who was not that at the time, and another young lady, they sang in the New York area as the Josh White Singers doing, primarily I guess gospel, you might say, you might say. I didn't grow up in the church. My sister, Beverly, didn't grow up in the church. My sister Bunny [Bunny White], the three of us did not grow up in the church. When we moved to Manhattan [New York], my mom [Carol Carr White] didn't drive and so we didn't get to the Bronx [New York] that often if dad wasn't in town. So, when Judy and Fern, the two younger ones after me came along and my mom had established with, established herself in the religious community in our area, not in the Bronx, and those two, Ferny and Judy, grew up more singing gospel in churches. Beverly and I grew up singing on stage. I mean, Beverly was Patti Page and I was Nat King Cole you know, that kind of a thing. Story_ID: 440720 Speaker 1: So now, you're on your own and tell me what that is like. Speaker 2: Well, again, here's continuation. Nineteen sixty-one [1961], I'm, we went to Europe, I came back and I went into our office to find out where we were going to work next. Executive decision was made that I, it was time for me to do my own show. So the next gig was in Detroit [Michigan] by myself. I didn't say it's time for me to go off on my own, buy me a gig. They decided it was time for me, which was true. Just to jump back for a second, when I'm thinking about management and decisions, I was given a guitar when I was eleven. I didn't ask for a guitar. I was given a guitar. It was cute enough for me to sing with the old man [White's father, Josh White], but then if I had the open shirt like him and have the guitar, that's even a double thing. I loved the instrument. I loved to hear my old man play, but I didn't, it wasn't in my mind to play at the time. I think they should have waited another year for me to ask for it. But I got it at eleven, learned songs to play on stage, but I never sat around (gesture), and my old man was not a good inspiration, because by the time I came along he wasn't really learning a lot of new songs. He was kind of, there were a lot of performers that at times of their lives they get stuck with those same forty tunes, they do. Not just folk music, not just jazz, they do. I mean, if you try learning a new song, you ask for a request, they are asking for the old ones. So I never saw my old man being studious with his instrument. I saw him play more cards. So, I did not learn the discipline. So, from eleven until twenty-one, I learned songs but I didn't have that desire, that, but when I went out on my own it was different but I had lost--no discipline--I had no discipline. So I'm not--I don't play guitar as I could after the years I had been playing. Story_ID: 440721 Speaker 1: So, anyway, here we are 1961, June, and my gig is in Detroit, Michigan at a folk club right, not too far up the street from a very famous Baker's Keyboard Lounge, jazz place here in Detroit, and I remember distinctly because the Ramsey Lewis Trio was playing there and I wanted to see them but I wasn't twenty-one, you have to be twenty-one to get in because, to drink. But they knew I was another performer, so I was allowed to go see them. But it was interesting when I first started off because most of my strength came from working with the old man [Josh White], so I pulled some of his tunes and some of the ones I used to do; again, my dad was never a traditional folk singer. I'm not a traditional folk singer. I happen to sing and play guitar but if it's a song I like and if I can hear it, I'm gonna do it. I'm not gonna wait to say, what is it labeled? It's labeled I like it. That's the label and that's what I want to convey to you when I sing it. So I, that's what I did and I was sort of nervous to do two forty-five minute shows but then all of a sudden it wasn't that bad and I kind of liked it and they liked me. What I had to be careful of when I first started out was venue owners taking advantage of the name. I had to sometimes, after a while, make sure that in the contract or when they advertised, that the J in Jr. was also 100 percent typed and the R no less than 60, because they'd be Josh White, (whispering) Jr. [HistoryMaker Josh White, Jr.], and that wasn't fair. So I had to make sure that was a respectful thing for them to do. Whether they all come see me if they find out it's not dad, it's, whoever comes in, I gotta keep 'em there. My old man's not gonna keep 'em there. I'm going to or I'm not going to, but let me do it that way. And my father never spoke a lot on stage. I think he felt limited because, so, he'd just pretty much introduce a song and do it, and I pretty much did that until I sang in Boston [Massachusetts] in '61 [1961] or '2 [1962], and I ran into Jackie Washington Landron [Jack Landron], a young black man out of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. He changed my approach to performing because we always joked we who play guitar and that between songs you gotta always tune. But when he was tuning he would talk to the people about things they could relate to about going to the A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company], and whatever, and that was part of entertaining. Well that happens to me, too. So all of a sudden, I would start talking to the people and doing a little of that, and all of a sudden I'm much more in tune to talking on stage than my father ever would have been had he lived to be a thousand. I'm comfortable with that and at this point in time, some friends think I talk too much, but it is still me. I'm a package. It's not just what I play and what I sing, but it is me. All that I, all I do to entertain. There is talking involved. I think you, Jackie, always for that. He opened that up for me and I found it was comfortable. Speaker 2: You saw this was the way that he did it and felt that maybe you would try it, is that what you mean (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I thought because you had pregnant moments up there and you gotta do something with that time. You just don't wanna have empty time when you're tuning. You wanna say something. Oh, yeah. Then I started talking about when you fly somewhere and, you know, you wind up somewhere but your guitar winds up in Buffalo [New York]. People can relate to it because they lost luggage. Natural. So it opened me up to feel more comfortable to talk and sing and I've been doing that ever since and that's part of what I do. Story_ID: 440722 Speaker 1: Did you or your dad [Josh White] ever write music, write songs? Speaker 2: My dad co-wrote with a man named Coon [Michael Cooney]. He was part of the Renaissance period [Harlem Renaissance]. I, he didn't write a lot, though, my old man. I never did, as my father's generation had Woody Guthrie, between Woody and Bob Dylan, it was okay. When Bob came along I always thought my generation means if you play guitar and sing, you gotta write your own. I've always been an interpreter. I always will be an interpreter. Songs that have come through me are more inspirational. I did not say there's a subject matter I want to write about and I'm gonna sit here all day as some people say, and write something. The song comes to me, music and lyrics normally together, and I never take credit for it. I'm just the conduit. It comes through me, not from me. Yes, my name is on the copyright; of course it is. But, where it comes from is greater than me and all of the songs, one song is called 'Say a Prayer for a Stranger,' one song is called 'Think About Me, Think About You, Think of All the Joyful Things We Can Do' ['Think']. That kind of song comes out of me. I always thought I'd be a, if I wrote a song and do those songs 'cause I love Nat King Cole. I love the ballad singer, but (laughter) as I feel mine came out more as save the world songs, but I think they're needed. I think in this day we have so many things going for us, we need to have a song that kind of reassures that there is a greaterness within us that is better than sometimes the negative we do to each other, and as much as the negative is reinforced, so should the positive of what we are is. And I think that is part of what I enjoy doing is doing that. When I was younger growing up singing blues (laughter) I always found funny to myself because at twenty-one or twenty-two years old, I try to make you, I sounded like a young kid trying to make you think he had problems. (Laughter) I didn't have any problems. Years have gone by. I can sing them suckers now. You know, but back then it was, but again, it was the variety and my old man was an eclectic performer. I'm an eclectic performer. Speaker 1: And what do you mean by that when you say that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) An eclectic performer, you will me do a song by Bob Dylan, then you'll see me do a song by Cole Porter, anywhere in between. Anything that touches me that I think you should hear, if I can find it in my ear, because I don't read or write music, you're gonna hear it. I gotta share it with you; be it from country, be it my own, be it whatever. Story_ID: 440723 Speaker 1: Now, we're in the '60s [1960s] and the music that is being played had a message or message songs at that time. Do you think that you fit in to trying to relay a message of the times? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Absolutely. We started in Vietnam early '60s [1960s]. We were just advisors. We were heading down a bad road and the one thing about non-mainstream acoustic music, folk music, if you want to call it, is that it really is of the people, by the people and for the people. There is not always that commercial thought that boy if I write this, it might be a million seller. That is not always the goal of someone in this business. It's to write about something that we should talk about or someone who feels that they don't have a voice. If that happens to hit, cool. And of course, some songs may be written in that vein, but primarily it's bringing out things that should be discussed, talked about. My old man [White's father, Josh White] did a song ['Last Night I Had the Strangest Dream'] about a landlord back in the '40s [1940s]. It's prominent today. Ed McCurdy wrote, "Last night I had the strangest dream I ever dreamed before. I dreamed the world had all agreed to put an end to war." He wrote that in 1948. It's viable today. That's what I'm about. Making whatever is good. Let us, let us still touch upon it today. Story_ID: 440724 Speaker 1: We were talking about you being out on your own and you performed at, you know, different night clubs. Tell me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Coffee houses, a lot of non-liquor joints that were around back then. Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the audience. Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) my memory, since age four, I've always sung to white people. I don't know what it is about non-mainstream acoustic music that a lot of blacks don't come, but I've always sung to white people. I bless them. Thank you very much. They've supported me, but I always felt sort of ostracized from the black community for doing that which I do best, and so whenever, every now--I will never forget there was a club here in town called the Raven Gallery [Detroit, Michigan], and I started working that club in 1963, and I worked it until 1979, four times a year, before I moved to Michigan, and if a black couple happened to be in the audience, they probably were there because they knew of the old man and wanted to see what Josh's [Josh White] son could do. But boy, I wanted them to like me so, it could be a full house, but two black faces there, I would work to them. I would do any music I think they would like so they would like me. That's not how you do it. And, I realized that if someone is going to like me or dislike me, let it be on my terms, not what they think I should be doing for them to like me. And I never deviated since then. Again, I've not sung to a lot of black people in my life. (Laughter) In fact, in the early '80s [1980s], I was asked to sing at an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] convention in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. I was very nervous 'cause I had never sung to that many black people in my life. I thought what am I gonna do? Well, I'm gonna be me. Well, the funnest, biggest tune that was in my repertoire was called 'Long Haired Country Boy.' (Singing) "People say I'm no good, say I'm crazy as a loon, 'cause I get stone in the morning, I get drunk in the afternoon, kind of like my old blue tick hound who likes to lay around in the shade, I ain't got no money, but I damned sure got it made, and I ain't asking nobody for nothing if I can't get it all on my own. And if you don't like the way I'm living, you just leave this long haired country boy alone. Thank you very much." I did it for them. They loved it. But had I try and think it out, oh no, don't, now don't do country music for these black--give it to 'em. Give 'em what you feel is your best shot. Let them decide whether they like it or not. 'Cause if they don't like you, you're still good. They have a problem (laughter). That's with any audience. You know? Always give somebody a best shot and I am grateful that understanding came into my life and at this point in time, I always want a variety of peoples in my audience, but I will never try and make you like me more by doing something that you and I will like better. Give you my best shot, whatever it may be. Story_ID: 440725 Speaker 1: So, in 1962 you release your, your first hit? Speaker 2: It was--well, hm, interesting--we were asked to go down to Tennessee and record some songs; Shelby Singleton was going to be the producer. So, there was my dad [Josh White], my sister Beverly [Beverly White], sister Judy [Judy White], Fern [Fern White], and a friend of Fern's. We were driving from New York City [New York, New York] in my old man's Lincoln, one of his Lincolns, to Nashville, Tennessee. I do not remember where, but I think it was in Tennessee. We were getting closer to our destination. My little sister Judy got sick. And she was, she had lost her bowels and throwing up. Now, we're talking a lot of people in a car in the summertime, embarrassing for a little girl, embarrassing for anyone. Stop at a gas station. Nobody, these white people, would not even come out. My father didn't really need the gas but he was gonna buy the gas. "Could I please take my daughter to your bathroom because she's not feeling well?" They were not human, humane enough, to allow my sick sister--that is truly one of the rare times I could have killed very easily. We weren't asking for anything special. It was a sick young person, forget her color. Boy, I never, this was 1962. Anyway so that, we survived it. We didn't kill anybody (laughter). We went to Nashville and recorded. We all had some solo singles. One of mine was 'Do You Close Your Eyes.' It, I don't know what transpired but it was never released, or it was released regionally, but it became, what it, became a hit in certain areas. I am (laughter) as we talk right now, I am a very big name in oldies but moldies in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. They love old rock-n-roll. My single for 'Do You Close Your Eyes,' I just got a call yesterday from my friend who lives here. It can go as much as a hundred dollars. From my single of 'Do You Close Your Eyes' that nobody else may know about except in Pittsburgh. But it became a big oldies but moldies and every single year when they do the countdown of the favorite songs in Pittsburgh, New Year's Eve, I believe my song is one of the top five. Make sense of that, I don't know. I love showbiz. Story_ID: 440726 Speaker 1: So tell me what happens now. We go on to 1963. Speaker 2: I record my first album for, for Mercury [Mercury Records], 'Do You Close Your Eyes.' Bobby Scott produced this album, and for those of you who may not know fine, fine jazz piano player, arranger, he co-wrote, (Singing) "He ain't heavy, he's my brother" ['He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother']. So what I was doing is just recording a lot of the songs that I had already been performing. But Bobby Scott came along and heard this and he heard me differently. I think (laughter), I think he tried it, he sounded more black when singing than I did. I think he was trying to uphold me in that genre, you know what I mean? So, he rearranged some of the songs I've been doing to arrangements I had never heard before. I mean, he heard it and here, let me give that more from the piano. All of a sudden, I can't think of a song right now, but there were a few songs that were different because he heard it differently. There was a tune that Bobby Darin wrote called 'I've Been Down So Long' [sic. 'Down So Long']. (Singing) "I've been down so long, getting up never crossed my mind." (Unclear) I used to do it like that, tapping of the foot and the fingers. Bobby Scott heard it, slowed that sucker down, got to the piano, and just turned it on, played enough where I was comfortable with it, just try it. I've never done it that way since, just on the recording, but I loved the recording of that because he did bring out something in me in that arrangement that you would not have heard otherwise. So I thanked Bobby Scott for that. Speaker 1: So how did it sound slowed down, do you remember the tempo? Speaker 2: "(Singing) I've been down so long, ever so long, and the piano's just going, oh getting up, never, never, never, never crossed my mind," ['I've Been Down So Long']. Interpretation. Story_ID: 440727 Speaker 1: And in '63 [1963], something else happens. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. In 1963 I got married to my Jackie [Jackie Harris White]. She lived three blocks away, 147th Street, and I met her when she was fourteen, I was sixteen. And, we got married in '63 [1963], I think we went together longer than we stayed married, because we separated in '66 [1966]. I think it was a lot of my womanizing I had learned from my old man [Josh White], sadly to say--that double standard was there. I'm not proud of it and no man should be, but back then it was the double standard which I'm saying, it's okay if the husband fools around, but not the wife. I mean, back then I think even bigots could get along. A white bigot--yeah--wives can't do it, I'll kill you, but we can do it. That's silly kind of thing. So I'm sure a lot of that and the travelling, but I got my son, Joshua III [Josh White III], and my son Jason White from there. Story_ID: 440728 Speaker 1: Did you ever record or sing, well record with one of your sisters, or any of your sisters? Speaker 2: Well, in nine- well they were on my first album ['Do You Close Your Eyes'], my three sisters, Beverly [Beverly White], Fern [Fern White] and Judy [Judy White], sang on the one with Bobby Scott. They were not on my next two, but the one after that, I think in '78 [1978], they also, my sisters sang with me. I think it was called 'The Josh White, Jr. Album' [sic. 'Josh White, Jr.'], and they were not on the rest that I did. But about four or five years ago, I was trying to fulfill a dream of mine to have a motivational, inspirational album in my mind that I've had for twenty years, and I was trying to put it together and some of the songs are mine, some are just spoken things that are inspirational and my sisters did record some of the tunes, that didn't record because it's not finished, but I used them, oh and some of the recordings and by that time, excuse me, on one of the tunes it was three of my sisters, but also my sister, Judy's two daughters and her son were on it, so it was really a family affair and that was an enjoyable thing. Story_ID: 440729 Speaker 1: 'Good, Drunk and Goozey' [sic.]? Speaker 2: 'Good and Drunk and Goozey.' A man named Bob Gibson and Shel Silverstein. We know the name Shel Silverstein, 'The Giving Tree.' Bob Gibson is the reason why I look the way I do. He's written so many children's books [sic.], but he also used to write for Playboy and at one time in the early '60s [1960s], part of my tour, of my circuit, was doing the Playboy clubs and I met Shel Silverstein, I met Bob Gibson, who played twelve-string guitar and banjo, and he really was, I guess, the second big influence in my life besides the old man [Josh White]. I liked how he played the twelve-string. He wrote tunes and he rearranged well, and because of him I bought, or converted my first, one of my six-string guitars into a twelve-string guitar to play Gibson tunes and Gibson did a lot of songs written by Shel Silverstein, whom people just thought wrote children's books, but he also, years ago used to write, those of you who like country music, (singing) "Cover of the Rolling Stone" ['The Cover of Rolling Stone']. That was a Shel Silverstein tune. So, anyway, you've got Bob Gibson did the song, (singing) "Good and drunk and boozey goozey," and Beverly [Beverly White] and I and Dad were in Sweden in '63 [1963] and we recorded that as a single back then and what was on the other side of that tune? Oh, I can't remember. But, yeah, that was fun to do to recor- that was never released here in the states. That was just in Sweden. Story_ID: 440730 Speaker 1: And, so now, what happens? You are married [to Jackie Harris White] and travelling still, performing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, tell me what else is going on. I know that your father was very active in civil rights. Did you have a part to play as far as your music, maybe? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. There were a lot of us that know where we fit best to help the cause. I could not march and be hit and not hit back. I just couldn't. It's just not me. But, where ever I go, I represent because, again, it's primarily white people I sing to, so what are they looking at when they come on stage? They hear an articulate black man singing a variety of songs, but a lot of the songs are saying we gotta make this happen, it's time--melanin, I happen to have more melanin than you. That's all, that's all. So, to be myself and to be a proud black American person and not to allow anyone to taint that is what I did during those years. Wherever I went, I represented that which we stood for. I remember when I was growing up (laughter) my parents [Carol Carr White and Josh White] were very, it was very important how we spoke and to this day, I still have a problem with people who say, where it's at. You should never end a sentence with a preposition, but anyway. But we were sometimes by, because of the neighborhood [Harlem, New York, New York], would get on us because we spoke too white. Well, so be it. But, we knew when we walked out of 539 West 150th Street and went to school, which was all-white, down to 59th Street and Columbus Circle, we didn't, we all didn't hang there, that they never saw us, Beverly [Beverly White] and myself, misrepresent us. We spoke well. We conducted ourselves, because we were not, I mean you gotta think about it. You look back and think about it. We were representing, we have to remember we're Josh White's family, so what we do can reflect on him. We're also black Americans and what we do can reflect on that. We're not gonna have them say, oh see, what, they're all like that. Unh-uh. Not here. It ain't gonna work. You may not run into a lot of us, but a lot of us are not what you think, are typical stereotypes. No. Gee, we know those big words too. We can spell, we have, all of those things. So, being in a white world and always being yourself, you didn't have to be any different, but you just were always aware, always aware, always aware. Another thing that, that brought up to me, when you're in the South, things I learned from my dad, I still do to this day. If you're in a situation and you're not sure, you never back into a parking space. I mean, never pull in. Always back in. And when you're in a big area, I always to this day, it's just habit, I'd rather not sit with my back to a lot of people. I'd rather sit where I can see most of the people. That is just survival. And I do it to this day. Places where you don't have to, but it ain't bad to do. Story_ID: 440731 Speaker 1: So, you told me that your dad [Josh White] died in '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-nine [1969], okay. And that's when your wife [Jackie Harris White] had your second son, in '69 [1969] also. Speaker 2: Jason [Jason White]. Speaker 1: Jason, okay. Speaker 2: It was also actually my biggest year because when my dad died, I was just starting my biggest tour. I was doing twenty-five concerts in twenty-five days in twenty-five different cities, starting in Albany [New York] and winding up in Fairbanks, Alaska. But, fortunately, the first gig was in New York State, and my father was in the hospital to replace a valve that was constricting, and back then it was a fifty-fifty operation. Now, it's no big thing, and it was, he had a heart attack on the table, and I must thank Carol White [Carol Carr White], my mom, because my old man and I had fallen out for whatever reason, and he had been in the hospital many times before. He used to be able to get his teeth done without Novocain. I mean, he had a high tolerance for pain. I (laughter) got a lot of respect ready, one who does, and the old man, so it was just the thing the old man was gonna overcome. I didn't feel like talking to him. Mom says, "Don [HistoryMaker Josh White, Jr.], just come on down with me." So, for my mom I did, and I'm very glad for me that I did, 'cause he died the next morning and I would have been kicking myself for saying ego, come on, whatever it was, so I'm very glad that happened. Speaker 1: So you complete your tour and tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I also must add that I did my dad's eulogy. My manager at the time, Chuck Ramsey, wonderful man I love dearly, he wrote it out mostly, but I felt as he did in the family, I don't want this man talking about the man who doesn't know my old man. I don't like, it bothered me. I would rather talk about my father than some person who was more gift of gabbing, but I did. So I did my old man's eulogy, with Ramsey writing most of the eulogy and I'm grateful for that. It was just a warmer feeling for my mom, my sisters, my uncles, so that was a good thing. Anyway-- Story_ID: 440732 Speaker 1: Just tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Okay, so my dad [Josh White] lays in state as it were, or whatever they call it, and then I finish my tour and in 1969 [sic.] I record an album ['One Step Further'] for, is it Decca [Decca Records]-- Speaker 1: United Artist [United Artists Records]? Speaker 2: United Artist. Thank you. (Laughter) Thank you. But it was an album with a thirty piece orchestra, and what I was doing was the songs of the day. (Singing) "The windows of the world are covered with rain," ["Windows of the World"]. Non-folk songs to show people what I do is sing. I choose to sing this, but I can sing this. So, '69 [1969], '70 [1970], I did a tour of Chicago [Illinois], Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], Seattle [Washington], New York [New York], Sweden, doing what I call my Jack Jones act. I carried, my friend of mine, a piano player who was in a group that Chuck Ramsey had managed, David, della Rosa and Brooks, and we'd pick up a drummer and bass player, put on a little tuxedo, have a little brandy here in the glass and sing those tunes. When I got over to Sweden, it was the year after my dad died, in Sweden, the Swedish loved my old man, and I think they were a tad disappointed with me because I didn't come there with guitar and do what the old man did. I was doing this. But I could feel how they really, Sweden really mourned my old man's death. They really truly loved him over there, but that is, but I had to do that for me. You know, after that I went back to playing guitar and didn't do the other tunes that much. Off and on over the years I have, but I just wanted what that album would show. I could sing the "Windows of the World," or I could sing "Molly Malone." It bothers me that they have to categorize us. You either like it or you don't like it. I mean, I love how musicians will get together and it doesn't matter what they sing, they can enjoy each other, but put 'em on a shelf and they have to be separated. You either like me or you don't. And it's all right if you don't like me because I don't expect everybody to like me, but there's music out there for you and there are those who will like me, and that'll--that's fine. Story_ID: 440733 Speaker 1: Your music, I would assume, would be music of, what we call the hippie era (laughter) or even the Vietnam [Vietnam War] era. Did you play to universities? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. I, I'd say like from 1963 to the late '70s [1970s], I lived on college campuses. I don't even know, I read somewhere where it was two thousand over the years, might have been, but I know I would do college concerts and they were wonderful. They were just, they were just so much fun. It was an hour-and-a-half show and my manager, Chuck Ramsey, was with me or I had a road manager when Chuck stayed home, but we had it down to a science. You know, we had a tape that would play that would count down when the lights would go out, the house lights go out, I go on, I'm introduced. We've done some schools where they had an orchestra pit and I started my show rising from the orchestra pit, playing and singing. I mean, I love show biz, so any way of little things like that were fun, and that is primarily what I did for many years was the college concerts, and when they were out, there was a club called the Raven Gallery here in Detroit [Michigan] I would work, or other places in Boston [Massachusetts], but pretty much not a lot of bars. I'm not a bar guy. And, there's a difference between a bar and a night club. A night club is still respectful of the performers, where maybe a bar is not. I mean, we worked the Village Gate in New York [New York], and there would be The Clancy Brothers and Tommy Makem, Irish guys, loud and stuff, or Dizzy Gillespie and his, with people, and then would come Josh White [HistoryMaker Josh White, Jr.]. But there was a respect there, and there's another thing I learned from my dad [Josh White], which is so cool. When you go on stage and you're introduced, but the people are still kind of up from the last one, start the song, then if they're loud, the last thing you do is try to over-sing them. They keep talking, start singing softer. Maybe softer. Until they will place themselves. Hey, man. I didn't pay to hear you come talk. I paid money to hear him. Cool. You didn't have to say anything. You showed your respect to yourself by getting softer and saying no, I'm not about to get there. Come on to me. I'll wait. Another thing that I just thought of my father learning that I just want to play up, because other performers who have worked with my father have in their mind that one way of sewing it is not, I'm alluding to when my father broke a string, which he did a lot, he would change the string by singing a song and so people thought he did it on purpose. My father never broke a string on purpose, but he knew what to do as a solo performer to fix it. He sang 'Summertime,' changed the string. To this day, some people think he did it on purpose. He never did. But he knew what to do and that's important. Story_ID: 439411 Speaker 1: In 1971, were you, you said you were separated from your wife right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Jackie [Jackie Harris White] and I separated in 1966. Speaker 1: Oh, in '66 [1966]. Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966]. But we remained close and she died in 1971 and it's a matter of public record that she was going with someone [Walter Robert Benjamin] who was dealing drugs and, as innocent as she was, she was still associated with him enough that they both were shot and killed, and so my Jason [Jason White] and my Buddha [Josh White III]--we call him Buddha--came to me and I had the thought of me travelling and all and I'm not prepared for the two kids by myself and Jackie's parents could or, even my mother [Carol Carr White], and I thought, no, they're mine. So, I was going with a lady at the time and we found a place in Wappingers Falls, New York. She and I separated and from December '71 [1971] to May '72 [1972], I lived there with my sons, and my neighbor whose husband was a trucker, I think I paid her twenty dollars a day to take care of my boys when I was on the road and she had children, so there were kids for him to play with. It was a very safe area and then I started living with Marilyn Brown, my friend from Boston [Massachusetts], for, until '76 [1976], and then she and I broke up and I moved here with my boys to Michigan and my wife, whom I married in '78 [1978], Sara [Sara White], I had met ironically the very first week I ever did my first solo performance here at the Cafe Galleria [ph.], I met Sara and her sister within three days that they came to see me, so she and I had been friends for a long time. She got married, I got married, she got divorced, and so we re-met again and I moved here in '76 [1976] and we got married in 1978. She brought three girls and a boy to the marriage and I brought my two boys. She is Caucasian. So are my four step-kids and, of course, my boys are black and we became a family. Speaker 1: So, tell me what life was like for you. Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting to be of a mixed marriage. My youngest son and my youngest stepdaughter are months apart. They're going to a private school here in Detroit [Michigan] because the public schools were not that good. They're in the ninth grade. Her last name is Turtling [ph.]--mine is White--my son's White. Get a call from one of the vice principals calling Kristen Turtling's parent. "Yes, yes." "Well, this is a call just to let you know that your daughter, Kristen, she's in the ninth grade but she's hanging around a lot with twelfth graders. And they're black." (Laughter) This is what I hear on the phone. I just, I didn't know what to do. It is hilarious, because I don't sound black on the phone (laughter). I said, Sara, get on the other end. Now I don't remember how it transpired. I'm normally quick. I just should have said don't worry. My wife and I will come down tomorrow and straighten it all out. That's what I should have done. But I think I let the man talk enough and maybe he had papers in front of him that he realized Jason White's address and Kristen Turtling's address was the same address. So, little things like that cropped up in our lives. But it was a good lesson, I think, for the kids themselves, because he's my brother; I know my daughter will say that too about my son, and I don't care what looks someone may have, that's her brother, that's my sister. Solid. What are we doing then? We're helping the world understand it's just the melanin and your ignorance, my friend. Story_ID: 439412 Speaker 1: What you told me, we were talking off camera about a time that you, you and your family moved to another small town. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, hold on. I will tell you that, but when Jackie [Jackie Harris White] and I first got married, East 233rd [Street] White Plains Road, we found an apartment, 1963. Speaker 1: This was in New York [New York]. Speaker 2: In the Bronx [New York]. We had to picket that apartment. Now, we're on a hill but the land, the super was nice enough to say, man, it's a great apartment but you're gonna have some problems because of the owners--my sisters and I got our signs and we picketed the front of that building. We knew we had to keep moving so they won't arrest you, that's how I got my first apartment, because we had to picket because they didn't want blacks in that building. Now, getting to what you're saying in 1997 after living in Detroit [Michigan] for twenty years, we moved to a smaller town here in Michigan called Gregory. It actually is not too far from Hell. There's a Hell, Michigan (laughter), so we weren't too far from Hell. But it was a small little area, a small town, it's a wonderful town, so small that it doesn't even have a stoplight. Now, I'm New York City born and raised and here I am going to move to this little joint that doesn't even have a spotlight [sic. stoplight], but I'm also moving with my wife [Sara White], my oldest stepdaughter, her two children and my mother-in-law from Wales, and me. But I'm going to be travelling a lot. That's when we found Lucky. You guys, every now and then you might hear some noise. It's my dog, Lucky. He was a stray and I wasn't even going to be able to be home when we moved, but I thought I wanted, I said if you guys want this dog, it wouldn't be a bad idea because at least there would be something to bark, so they'd have some kind of sound when I'm not there. Lucky stayed. Ten years later, still with us. But I wasn't sure about this community because, though my daughter had found it on her own, she's young. She didn't know that in the '60s [1960s], Livingston County [Michigan], where this house is located, was the head of the John Birch Society and the imperial wizard [of the Ku Klux Klan, KKK] lived in Livingston County. I knew of that, but now here it is in the '90s [1990s], late '90s [1990s] and she didn't know this transpired but I didn't know what minds still lived there, so for the first week I saw it was there, and I was scouting out the areas, I did not let the people know I was with my wife and my family, just in case someone had a problem with me and found out that I was them and that I'm gone. You fall in love with a person, not a color, and then when you do you protect it, and I was not going to put my family in harm's way. So, I went to the local hardware store just to feel it out. I needed to borrow a thing to put my (gesture)-- Speaker 1: Mailbox-- Speaker 2: Mailbox, thank you very much. I've never done that before. I'm from New York (laughter). But the guy didn't rent it to me. Go ahead. Bring it back when you're done. The mail person, the people in this little place, were wonderful. I did not have any worries of leaving my family there when I left to go, but I had to scope it out. We lived there for four years and in that little county there, there's little towns near us. I had two racial incidents. (Laughter) You're gonna have that if you live in a white society and I chose a place because I liked it. It was nothing. They were light stuff. So, I mean, when you happen to live and work in a white society, your antennae are always up. You're always willing to accept but you always have that antennae. It's that New York stuff, I don't know, or whatever. (Laughter) It's kept me alive for a long time, so it's gotta work. You don't want to be suspicious, but you don't want to be gullible, and that's how you live your life. We still love it to this day. We're not there anymore, but I love Gregory, Michigan. Story_ID: 439413 Speaker 1: Now, through the '70s [1970s] and into the '80s [1980s], you have become a staple on late night television. Is that right? Tell me about it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what you do, what you do is, you know you need the exposure. You do a lot of things because it may not be a paying gig, but it gets your name out, gets your face out. You had a record out, you're gonna do a tour, so you do, never did 'Johnny Carson' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'], did 'Joey Bishop' ['The Joey Bishop Show'], but even Joey Bishop wasn't there the weekend, and Sammy Davis, Jr. happened to be his host for--what, bad shot right? I get a chance to meet this young man. So you do all the talk shows. You get that exposure. You meet and greet as they do to this day. That's part of staying in this business. It's almost like reinventing, what else can you do? Like, in 1990 I started doing music for children. Before that, I always sang to a, for the double digit crowd. I never sang to the single digit. I didn't know if I would enjoy that because I would have thought little kids, I might lose control, but if you bring yourself to them, which is all that I did, and just maybe kind of change the kind of song you might do, but you yourself do not have to change. I now so enjoy singing to the single digit crowd I don't know what to do. I think I'd rather do that than sing at a college concert now. They're just a lot of fun. And then you divide your musics also. When I first started doing it, I'd sing from K [kindergarten] through six. But, if you try and get those, then those in the fifth and sixth grade can look at you like this (gesture), you know--so you gotta work yourself. So I find that I changed my music and for one I had music from K to four, then I had music from fifth grade up, and with that group I'll do songs of peace and hope and freedom, because I don't think they hear a concentrated amount of that, only talk about that and I'll go from songs from the Underground Railroad, to Garth Brooks' song about 'We Shall Be Free,' and for seventh or eighth grade through high school, I have an assembly on why my father [Josh White] is on the United States postal stamp. You don't know my father from Adam, but he's on a postal stamp. He must have done something. So let me tell you his story with music and talk and you decide if he should be on a stamp. So there are ways of approaching the different age groups because sometimes it's hard to go to high school and say I want to do some folk music for you, because they'll turn you off in a minute, but if you give then an interesting idea with the combination of, it's a good thing. Speaker 1: When was your father honored with a stamp? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998]; 1998 is the summer, sadly to say, my mom [Carol Carr White] died in January, but she knew it was going to happen. Woody Guthrie, my father, Lead Belly, and Sonny Terry, blues harpist who is part of Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee. They were the first four people to be honored in a folk field to be on a stamp. I think that's pretty cool. Story_ID: 439414 Speaker 1: Tell me about Tom Paxton. Speaker 2: Tom Paxton, singer, songwriter, another New Yorker. He only moved to Virginia to be near the grandkids, I understand. But to me, Tom Paxton always had like his finger on the pulse of the nation. He is such a good writer. I knew when anything happens politically or whatever, Tom would write a song about it, to bring it up, to talk about it, for Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and the rabbit, the water hitting, it was a great song ['I Don't Want a Bunny Wunny'] there. I can only assume as I have not seen him for a while, assume he has had a lot of fodder (laughter) since 2000 to write some songs to counteract that which we have been going through. So, I look to him because he puts things right in a way that can be very strong and powerful and sometimes--he had a wonderful song about Stephen Biko [Steve Biko] years ago. He does it right. He is very succinct in what he does and, again, with humor sometimes, but he always has the pulse of the people in his hands and in his heart and you hear it a lot. Grateful to have him. Speaker 1: Did you know Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon]? Speaker 2: I know Odetta. I'm privileged to know Odetta, I guess since I was late teens there was Odetta. There was no other. There were, there were female singers but no black female singers playing guitar. She brought, she brought something to our field that had not been there before and ask anybody, Judy Collins, or ask, it doesn't matter, Janis Ian. All of these, so many people were inspired by this lady and we just had a tribute to her that I was part of in February and when I was talking about travelling in the South in the '60s [1960s], she travelled alone in the '60s [1960s] in the South. Me being a male travelling, I always had either my old man [Josh White] or a road manager. Can you imagine what this lady went through, but it didn't deter her. It only makes you stronger. She can be the softest singing, doing a ballad, and then when she needs to gut it out and give the song what it calls for, you see her hair kind of blow back when she sings. I mean she's a very strong woman. She gives the song what it needs and I am privileged to say she's my friend. Story_ID: 439415 Speaker 1: Whose music do you listen to personally? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I go through times when I don't listen to music at all. What I do, I will again listen to a lot of National Public Radio [NPR] to find out what my fellow man is thinking and talking about. I need to hear that, especially since this last administration. I need to know why and what made them think that this man [President George Walker Bush] was doing anything good for the world or for us and his cabinet? So, I mean, I'm very interested in my fellow man and what they think. I know what my fellow man can do with a song. I know we have great singers. I know we have great writers. I need to hear those who, what they think and where they're going. I need to hear. They've gotta, I gotta know because I'm dumbfounded with some of the decisions that have been made, some of the things that have been accepted by my fellow human beings. Why? That music is always there and when I do listen to music, it all depends on the station that I'm on. Sometimes I just want to listen to some of the older stuff, go back to 539 West 150th Street [New York, New York] and hear the doo-wop songs. Sometimes I want to hear what some new singers are singing and I'll listen to NPR because I can hear something new there or I can go to the regular radios. I'm not big on rap and I think that's fine. It's such a different rhythm that I haven't worked it enough to really feel comfortable with it, but I know there's some good out there and I hope it's doing well, as I know there are a lot of lyrics out there that shouldn't be, because I think some of our younger artists are not always aware of the power that they have. What they say, how it's listened, and how then it's transcribed in their mind, and ergo out and do something. I know there's power in music. I know how strong it is and I, and if anyone wonders have you ever found yourself singing along with a song you don't like? Is that not powerful? So, if you can do that with a song that's nebulous, that, think of songs that are saying something that is not nice about females or another person and you hear, young minds hear it and they don't know any better, what you could be doing in their lives. It's important to me. Lyrics are important. Words are important and I want, though they're expressing their feelings, I want them to look at what power they have and what it can do in a negative way. Keep saying what you've gotta say but, ah, do you need to say that about them? Do you really need to do that? But I can't stop anything. I can just have my opinion. Speaker 1: Well, you talked about some of the new artists. Tell me your thoughts about, say, Tracy Chapman or India Arie or Jill Scott, or Erykah Badu. These are all women because there's just-- Speaker 2: You know, there can't be too much of them. I think it's good. I like that they have their expression and I think they do it well. I, what can I say. I can't--I'm just grateful. You know, there was a time when there weren't that many young women that you could hear, and so I see the door opening. It's always been slow (laughter), but it is opening and it's good to hear and, again, some of the music out there that I may not personally enjoy but at least the exposure and the important thing is to expose young ears to music that is good, and it's all good. There's one thing I haven't touched on that I want to talk briefly about and that's the teaching that I do. Speaker 1: But that's now, right? Speaker 2: Well, that started in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Just let's-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I just want to talk about one incident-- Speaker 2: Go. Speaker 1: --where at the Smithsonian Institute [sic. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] with your mother at the hundredth birthday celebration for Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Ah. It was a joy. I'm so glad that my mom was able to be there and the recognition of the contributions that were given and, I don't know, it was memorable to be asked to be part of that and it was so good that Carol White [Carol Carr White] was able to be there. It would not have been the same without her. 'Cause she's, she's not a bad singer. She wasn't a bad singer. Story_ID: 439416 Speaker 1: 'A Man and His Music' [sic. 'Josh: The Man and His Music']. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Peter Link. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This was a one-man show? Speaker 2: A one-man show about my father. When this first started, Peter Link who had my father and me at his school when he was a student. Like the old man, Peter Link was in the original 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'], by the way. Wonderful singer, songwriter. We were going to do this as a movie, had Billy Dee Williams, good looking Billy Dee played Josh White and I was going to do the soundtrack. It didn't go. Maybe mini-series. Get somebody, whomever. I do the music. They do fine. That didn't work out. And when it came to doing it on stage, I won by default because my father's guitar style is such, not that it's that much different but no one else is doing it, so no one else could pull that off on stage except me. So, I hadn't done any acting since 1960, so it's twenty-three years of being on stage but without direction. When you first went out, god, am I going to be able to take direction? It's been so long because I'm just out there on my own. But the subject matter was something that I was (laughter) rather close to. Being alone on stage, I'm used to. Being out there for two hours was not a big stretch, so doing this play was a great thing to give back. I mean, the exposure he gave me for seventeen years, and there were a lot who did not know him, it was good to tell his, to be able for me to tell his story. And the way Peter wrote me, Josh came back from the past to tell you about his life, so it was fun for me as my father to tell you about my life. I enjoyed that immensely. My father had a habit of putting, having a cigarette and putting the lit cigarette behind his ear. I don't smoke anymore. Thank you father, but I used to do the same thing and I remember we'd start the second show with my father at the Cafe Society [New York, New York] and I do this one tune, 'Where Were You Baby When My Heart Went Out,' and I lean over and get a light from this invisible person off stage--right in front of me--put it behind my ear and I do the song. But it was an afternoon gray hair, blue hair show. (Laughter) I could hear these little old ladies in front, his hair's gonna burn, go up, get the cigarette, move, move. I was thinking, please, baby it's okay. (Laughter) But it's so cute that the lady thought that I was gonna burn my hair, which was a wig, by the way, because I've been looking like this since '72 [1972]. So it was very good to tell the story. But my father was a very, my father was one of, if not the first black singer to use sex appeal. He had the open shirt. That's where Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] got it from. He knew how to get women, get somebody. I can't do that. There are certain songs, one called 'Jelly Jelly,' that Billy Eckstine co-wrote that, if you ever hear Josh White, there was Josh White at midnight with him doing it, I couldn't pull it off live, so we re-did the script so instead of me singing to an audience they had me at a make-believe party. At the make-believe party, I could do this thing to a woman that my old man did as opposed to trying to really do it to an audience. There's a difference in us. He could do it. I'm not that way. But, that was a joy to do and I've done it a few times and I might do it again. Story_ID: 439417 Speaker 1: So now you wanted to tell me about the educational part. Did you make a video, an educational, instrumental video (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. There is a, one about reading that I did a video. But there's also a video that I did with my buddy Ron Coden. We did a PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] special ['Josh and Ron's Family Adventure']. But this teaching that I do started in 1991 here in Detroit [Michigan] by an actress named Randi Douglas from Oregon. She had moved here with her scientist husband, who worked for Ford [Ford Motor Company], actress, and she somehow got involved with the Historical Museum [Detroit Historical Museum, Detroit, Michigan], and they were having a project about toys and they wanted a song about toys and asked Randi if she could do it and we met because she had met me back in '76 [1976] and we wrote the song and then she introduced me to this way of teaching that is extraordinary. Story_ID: 440734 Speaker 1: So you were telling me about how you went about the teaching. Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Randi Douglas was here. Now how--so they asked Randi Douglas to write a song for this exhibit for toys [at the Detroit Historical Museum, Detroit, Michigan]. But she didn't play an instrument so she wanted to know, give me a list of performers who were in town that maybe I can align myself with and I'd moved here, and she heard my name and right away, I did not know this but she tells me later that I was in Oregon in 1976, doing a tour with a group called Quilapayun from Chile, letting them know how we put a fascist government in Chile. Randi happened to be at the concert, so they talked and played music and then I did some and apparently she wanted to get into the concert and, as I remember, she said she wasn't dressed properly or something and they weren't going to let her in and I said leave the lady alone and let her in. Something that simple. But she never forgot it. This is 1976. Now here it is 1990 in Detroit [Michigan]. She remembers and asked me to be part of the song, so I co-wrote 'My Favorite Toy' with her and then she told me about this teaching that she had heard about by a woman named Dorothy Heathcote in England, who is an actress. In the '50s [1950s] she started a thing called drama process teaching [sic. mantle of the expert]. We started calling it StoryLiving [Living History] as a group, and what we do is, it's history based, to learn history, Michigan history. Well, the best way to learn anything is kinesthetically. We, instead of sitting and talking and reading about it, if you get up and do, you are more apt to remember. So, with role-playing, imagination, and music, two of us, male/female, she's blonde, I'm black. So they had that visual of the two different races coming together to teach. So, you want to learn about the Underground Railroad, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh grade. All right, it's an asking program--well do you mind going back in time to learn about the Underground Railroad, because we're going to go back to the year 1850. Oh, by the way there are no fifth graders in our story. Would you mind playing the role of adults? (Gesture) Okay. So, we have them play the role of people in 1850, set it here in Detroit. We find out what they know as a class, what they know about that time period, about the Underground Railroad, and you ask questions, so you try to eliminate so they can focus in on the time frame. One of the last questions is if we're going to go back to the year 1850, what do we have to leave behind in 2007, we would not have in 1850? To eighty-six all the other things that they would not have, even the way they're dressed, everything, stoves, no phones, no cars, all of that stuff. And then, we start as abolitionists in Michigan and say we're going to be playing different roles and through the two hours that you're there, we are abolitionists who have to make new codes because they've been found out, so we can't say watch out for that thunderstorm this weekend because that means danger. So we put them in groups and let them come up with different words for different things, the new password, the new danger word, the new signal. Getting the feel of it, have them sing a song and find out what, 'I'm On My Way to Canaan's Land,' is saying. 'Cause Canaan- there's a code word in there. What is Canaan's land? No, it's from the--oh, why is Michigan so important about--oh, Canada. They get a chance to learn and explore by becoming. And if you walk a mile in someone's shoes, you're not going to forget the experience. Story_ID: 440735 Speaker 1: And so, at one time, then, we asked them to change roles and if they don't mind now being slaves on a plantation instead of being northern abolitionists and they have to pick an age to do that each time, and as slaves, I'm an overseer owned by this, Randi [Randi Douglas], who has now become the cousin of the plantation owner and I'm down there as her slave, personal slave. He'll never know she's part of the Underground Railroad because her personal slave, good. But I'm the overseer and all of a sudden yelling at these kids. Don't give them a quarter. Don't let 'em talk back, nothing. You're a slave and you can't do any--give them that experience. Okay, and when they work, okay, that's your job. That's your job. Sing while you're doing it. All right, and after that is done, we do 'Follow the Drinking Gourd' and we say there's gonna be an escape, but the escape is in the song so when you work, listen to the words of the song 'cause you have to find out what it's all about. After, what is the song--I did it already. What did the song mean? First of all, what is a drinking gourd and how do you follow it? So, it lets them know that we who are supposed to be ignorant are able to write these songs and sing them in front of the masters about running away and they don't understand, because the song is in code and he doesn't give us credit for being that smart? Good. Let it work for us. And they get a change to decipher songs and we do tableaus where, as a group, we say show us an escape. A moment on the escape in the form of a scene with all of you. Decide whether it's going to be a safe or a dangerous moment where it's taking place and who's doing what in the picture, and it's a one-two-three freeze picture, while the rest of us try and figure out are we watching a safe moment or dangerous--what is he--oh, he might be a tree. Oh, is that a slave or is that a slave catcher? That's a dog. And at the end, we have them going to Canada and they write back to somebody they left behind on the plantation, so the teachers will have something written for them to show, and it's a wonderful way to learn. It's called Living History, and that's what they're doing. They're living a history and they're not going to forget it and we have different units we do for certain age groups, so we do one on the Underground Railroad. We do one on, Detroit [Michigan] burned down in 1805. Did you learn that in New York City [New York, New York]? I didn't. By 1805, the whole town was down in six hours. Nobody died. And they rebuilt the city. We do that for a certain age group, Underground Railroad fourth grade and up, the migration of people coming to Detroit in 1914, because Henry Ford said, "I'll pay you five dollars a day for an eight hour day." No one had done that before, and we do the sit-ins of 1960, called the Rite of the People, where we ask the kids do you mind just playing the role of a senior in 1960 who has a four-year scholarship to a university. Happens to the Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. And, until I'm introduced as a junior, they don't know they're black. And when I tell them be careful because after 9:30, the local police may find a reason to get on you. Then they realize they're black and then we give them the same situations. You gotta, maybe you have the scholarship. Do you want to jeopardize the scholarship about then sitting in the lunch counter and changing things? Give them that. Give these kids the experience, especially when white kids do it. They can't look at it the same way, because they know what they've gone through when they're treated badly, only because of the color of their skin, which is not really the color of their skin but the experience. It's called Living History. I'm so--it's a wonder that in show business, I've been able to learn how to sing with four and, with younger single-digit, to go into a classroom and teach history and all my background is that I'm a singer/actor. But what it's--how enriched I am for these coming into my life and being able to share is a wonderful thing. Speaker 2: So, you are currently doing this now, this program has been going on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, the program is still going. Living History. OurLivingHistory.US [sic.]. You can find us on the web and it doesn't have to stay in Michigan because some of these units are America's story, not just Michigan's story and the experience to do it for two hours and become involved, it's multiple intelligence, it's kinesthetic. We have so many children we have lost over the years because they learned kinesthetically and we do not have programs like that in our schools, so they drop out and they call them dropouts. They wouldn't drop out if we had a program that was more kinesthetic, and this can cover that. Story_ID: 440736 Speaker 1: As a native New Yorker, give me your thoughts about September 11th [September 11, 2001 (9/11)]. I know you were asked to sing at Ground Zero [World Trade Center, New York, New York] and that didn't happen, but what were your thoughts as a native New Yorker about that? Speaker 2: You know we're possessive, we're possessive and it's sort of like family. Now, my brothers and sisters can yell at me but you can't. You're not a New Yorker. So, for someone to, to do that to my town, and for me to watch it was just surreal. It truly, truly was surreal. Sara [Sara White] woke me up. I think I had been working and I saw that second plane hit and it was so ironic, because I watched those towers being built when I lived on Jane Street in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], before I moved down to the city. I watched those two buildings going up. So, it was, again, there we go, family thing again. That was--I'll never move back there. I don't have to move back there. I'll always love it and be careful how you treat my city, 'cause it's supposed to give you thrills and what you've done to us was just incredible, and to have people ask to put on an event and, of all of the people that could have been, whose name could've been mentioned, my name was mentioned as being the first person to have touched that hallowed ground; however, when it didn't work out, the concert went on into a college somewhere else, but the fact that I was thought of (laughter) and that it almost came to pass, it was just, I thank New York and I thank those involved, because I just give back, I will give the tears that we all shed and I'll give the hope that we all have, had it worked out and you don't have to be there to still do that. Story_ID: 440737 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, would you have done anything differently? Speaker 2: (Pause) I look back and I wonder how my life would have been had I chosen my profession, had I said I want to be singer, help me out, or I want to be an actor. Had that passion been within me, as it is with my contemporaries as opposed to, it's a normal progression. You act and you're going where there's acting and there's singing so you sing. So I wondered if I would have tried rock and roll before I found my niche in where I am, would I have had the struggles of Billy Dee [Billy Dee Williams] and Clarence [Clarence Williams III] and Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] and Billy Gunn [Bill Gunn] had during that time when there was not a lot of good acting jobs for young black men, and I had a wife and a child and I didn't have this to fall back on. Curious as to how it would have worked. But, whether I cognitively chose or not, I've always been in the right profession. I've always been there. Speaker 1: You actually grew to love what you do. Speaker 2: Ah. To be able to touch somebody, touch somebody's heart and mind and make 'em think or have them cry with you or laugh with you, and if you, and if you like what you do it's not work. I get paid for doing what I like. How many people can say that? That's what I tell kids when I go in singing at the schools. I get paid for doing what I like. Follow your passion. I hope you can do the same thing. Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have not done that you would like to do? Speaker 2: Well, maybe more of the same. I wish I knew more about psychology. I think I might have, as I look back, had I not done this it would have, I think it still would have been in a service mode of some kind. Help somebody else see life a little better. I like that, to this day I think I'm the only person so far who has gone up in a hot air balloon and singing--and sang while being three thousand feet in the air. So, I like the, I like the newness of my business, because you never know where you may go, who you may meet, what, you can't ask for a better way of expression than being in show business in the capacity that I've touched, that have been fortunate to always do, I've never had to do a day gig. I've been able to, I've been able to--and I've known so many musicians who have to have a day gig because they can't make enough money at their passion, though they're excellent at it, and I've been fortunate to do non-mainstream music and raise six children and have fourteen grandchildren. You can't beat it. Story_ID: 440738 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: The legacy I want--hm. My legacy is the work that I have done if ten years from now, twenty years from now, thirty years from now, someone can hear a piece of music that I did and it can touch them, or they can hear 'Say A Prayer for a Stranger' or 'Think About Me' ['Think'] or see a piece, dramatic piece that I did somewhere and that it touches them in some way, then there's the old song, "If I can help somebody as I pass along, then my living shall not be in vain, and if I touch somebody and help them along, and I believe I have, then my living shall not be in vain, and I'm cool," ['If I Can Help Somebody']. Speaker 1: So, how do you, what do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: He always tried to be part of the solution and not part of the problem. Story_ID: 440739 Speaker 1: Now, this project will be available for generations to come. If you had to send a message to future generations, what would you say? Speaker 2: (Gesture) This is so much better than this. (Gesture) This is better than--this, I beg your pardon, (gesture) this is so much better than this. Try and think this way first. We can always do this, but this can beget that. This can beget that, can become peace. That's what I've strived for all my life. That's what I want to leave, and it's not easy. It ain't easy. I mean, there are times when you just want to be ignorant like them, and them can be any color too. But you don't. You hold on to that greater part and you know they have too, they're just not aware of it (laughter). And what you wanna do is brush off some of that crust and stuff so that little light can shine in you like I try and let it shine in me, because we all have the same light. We all come from the same place. Some are more ignorant about it than others. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I want to thank you for taking the time to share your story. Speaker 2: Certainly (laughter). 'Twas a pleasure, 'twas a pleasure. Thank you for inviting me to do so...