 Story_ID: 442757 Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure, and I'm the interviewer today. Nicolai-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Burghelea. Speaker 1: --Burghelea [Nicolai Burghelea] is the videographer, and Judi- Juli- Judi-Julieanna Richardson is the observer. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Otis Williams [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams]. Otis, O-T-I-S, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, Speaker 1: Is there a middle name, sir? Speaker 2: My middle name is Clayborn, C-L-A-Y-B-O-R-N. Speaker 1: Could you please state your birthdate and place of birth? Speaker 2: Ten, thirty, forty-one, [October 30, 1941], Texarkana, Texas. Speaker 1: And can you tell us today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April 1, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are currently located? Speaker 2: We're currently located at 9200 Sunset Boulevard, Penthouse 20, Los Angeles, California, zip code 90069, and I'm at my manager's office, Star Direction [Star Direction, Inc.], Shelly Berger. Speaker 1: And what is your current occupation? Speaker 2: My current occupation for all of my life is entertainer slash songwriter. Story_ID: 442758 Speaker 1: Now, we have a couple of questions that we ask. We call them People magazine-type questions to get us to know you a little bit more in depth. What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple, blue, black. Speaker 1: And your favorite food? Speaker 2: I'm kind of eclectic, food eater. I like food, soul food. And then I like fish and chicken, something like that. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring and summer. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii and Rio de Janeiro [Brazil] and South Africa. Speaker 1: Do you have a particular phrase or saying that is very important to you that you use quite often? Speaker 2: Kiss the monkey on the bald spot. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Would you like to elaborate on what that actually means? Speaker 2: Oh, that means when something goes wrong or whatever, even if it's funny. Kiss the monkey on the bald spot means kiss my--yeah. Speaker 1: Throw caution to the wind, you would say? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 442759 Speaker 1: What we want to do is go into your early, your early life, and the way we'd like to do is by starting with your parents [Hazel Williams Little and Otis Miles], and we'd like to start with your mother. Could you tell us a bit about your mother, her name please? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Hazel Louise Williams. Speaker 1: And when was she born? Speaker 2: My mother was September--good God almighty, she's been gone for a while. It's September 15, 1925. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: Texarkana, Texas. Speaker 1: And did she grow up in Texarkana, Texas? Speaker 2: Well, she did for a while and then she moved to Detroit [Michigan]. She had me when she was about fifteen or sixteen, and then she went to Detroit, as most black folks do, for the Great Migration, for finding better work. Speaker 1: And what do you know about her early years as a child growing up? Speaker 2: Not too much. No, not too much. Just, you know, growing up in Texas I guess, like all black folks, at an early age. And then she, when she was about like twenty years old she went to Detroit to find work. And then I came along when I was about, I must have came to Detroit when I was about ten. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you recall any stories that she shared with you about her childhood growing up? Anything in particular? Speaker 2: Well, I recall a bit. When--see every year when I was down in Texas, I would go back and forth to Detroit. And then I remember when we--you know, back in those days black folks had to, was relegated to the back of the bus. And it was her and I, and we'd fix our, they would fix a bag of chicken, and we would eat chicken at the back of the Greyhound bus. And I asked her how come we couldn't sit up front, and she said, "Well, son, black folks are not allowed to sit up front just yet, but the day will come." Speaker 1: So, did she share any stories about segregation in her own childhood with you? Speaker 2: No, she didn't. Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother as a person? Speaker 2: Well, my mother, aside from being pretty, she was a wonderful lady. I remember when I was in school in Texas [Sunset Elementary School, Texarkana, Texas], they pulled me out of school for a day, because she got burned pretty badly on the back of her leg. They had one of those little heating place things that had fire to it, and she had on a long gown, and she was in the room. And I guess as she turned, the gown must have, you know, ignited, and she was burned pretty bad on her leg. So they pulled me out of class, and I went to the hospital and they had this big covering over where, I guess, you couldn't touch the skin because of the burn thing, and I was very young then, so I remember that. But she, she healed, and you know, moved on with her life. Story_ID: 442760 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your father. Do you have much information on him? Speaker 2: Otis Miles. All I know is they called him Sonny One, and Bird Head. And they reason they called him Sunny One, no Bird Head was because--and I guess it's an inherited kind of thing, because I whistle. And my aunt, Aunt Flora [ph.], she told me, she said, "You know, your father was something of a, I guess, a ladies' man." I said, "Oh, really?" She said, "Yeah. He, you know, walked the gravel roads late at night. And he was very good at carpentry and, you know, doing handy man's work, and he would whistle going home late at night." And Aunt Flora said, "Yeah, and the ladies would be talking about, "There goes Sonny One, you know." I said, "Oh, really?" She said, "Oh yeah, he was something of a ladies' man." But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where was he born? I'm sorry to cut you off. Speaker 2: He was born in Texas also. But he, I never did know that much about him. Because you know, I went to Detroit [Michigan], and my stepfather, Edgar Little, did most of, you know, the raising of me along with my mother [Hazel Williams Little]. But I went back to Texas to see my biological father. It was about '86 [1986] or so, when he was sick. And, you know, I went back there shortly after he died. Speaker 1: Now you mentioned your Aunt Flora. Did he have--are you aware of all his siblings, your father's siblings? Was she one of his sisters? Speaker 2: Yes, she was, and then Della Gooden, who was his mother. See, I was raised by my grandmothers on both sides, my mother's side and my father's side. And I used to live on a farm, you know, Mama Gooden's farm. I used to--you know, I have the best of both worlds, so to speak. Because I used to have to slop hogs; I used to have to milk the cows, feed the chickens, and churn milk and all of that, take a bath in a big tin tub. There was no TV. I used to listen at the radio and let my imagination run away with me from listening at the certain radio shows. But then my grandmother was very strict, you know, because my cousin, Delores and myself, we would have to go to church sometimes two and three times a week, you know. So, I had that strong spiritual, Baptist upbringing. And so, you know, they really did a great job on raising me. Speaker 1: We want to go forward into your childhood, but let's focus back on your grandmother and your grandparents. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Let's start with your father's grandpare- your father's parents. Do you recall (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just my--just Della Gooden. I don't know-- Speaker 1: Her name was Della Gooden? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that was his mother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 442761 Speaker 1: And who was--and what was your mother's mother's name? Speaker 2: Her--was Lucinda. Speaker 1: Lucinda. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you recall her last name? Speaker 2: Lucinda Eliga Williams. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you know any of your grandfathers? Either grandfather at all? Speaker 2: Well, not on Della Gooden, my grandfa- father's side; I didn't know. But my mother's father, yeah, Frank Fisher [Frank Fisher, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I used to go and stay with him. And what I remember about him, besides from him being such a wonderful grandfather, was that he could cook some of the best biscuits. Oh man, I mean I loved it when he would fix those biscuits. And they would be on a--see, back then they had those wrought iron stoves where you had to put wood and all that in there. And so, yeah, I would stay with him. And he stayed, his house was right near a lake, and I would sit right out there and just throw rocks across the lake and watch them skip along. And he had me to slop hogs, because, you know, he was of that kind of ilk, and just a wonderful grandfather, you know. Speaker 1: So, was this side the primary side that you were raised with pretty much? This side was the side that you spent the most time with (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 442762 Speaker 1: And as we move forward, you were giving us some ideas about your early childhood. What's your earliest memory growing up as a child? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Well, starting with Texas, you know, doing pretty much what kids would do back then, you know. I used to--I remember when coveralls--you know, and running up and down the gravel roads of Texas barefooted. You know, running around with hot water cornbread in one hand and, you know, playing hide and go seek. And, you know, down in Texas they have homes built up on, like, bricks, and you can crawl up underneath. So, that--you know, just the regular thing that kids would do--trying to make the best out of what we had, to--you know, what was in our thing, the realm of living. Story_ID: 442763 Speaker 1: Tell us more about Texarkana. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is that an actual city, or was it part of a, was it another part of Texas? Was it suburb? What was Texarkana (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a city. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a city. It's right on the northeast part of Texas. You know, I have actually stood on the state line, and half of me was in Texarkana, Arkansas, and the other half was in Texarkana, Texas. So, but it's in the northeast section, not that far from Dallas, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Approximately how far would you say it's from Dallas? Speaker 2: Oh, I would say under a hundred miles. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're growing up as a young man, a youngster, in Texarkana. You said you were doing the things that kids do normally. Tell us about your neighborhood, your particular--what was your address in Texarkana? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. I forgot the address. When I went back there in '86 [1986], the house that Mama Gooden [William's paternal grandmother, Della Gooden] owned, ironically enough, it was still there. And, but I forgot the name of the street. It sat up on the hill, and then 318--I can't think of the name of the street. Because I went to Sunset High--Elementary School [Sunset Elementary School, Texarkana, Texas], and that much I remember. But the name of the streets and all, so long ago, I forgot. Speaker 1: We'll come forward to Sunset. But, now you're in this neighborhood. You're a youngster. What was the neighborhood like? Were the houses right next to each other? Was it more spread out? Speaker 2: Spread out. Some were next to each other, but Mama Gooden's house was kind of like sitting up on a hill. And then there's the long dirt road, and then there's homes scattered on the other side of the road. And you'd go up, and there would be other homes, but more spaced out than anything. Now, when I stayed with my mother [Hazel Williams Little] and was closer into Texarkana, homes were kind of close together. But my early formative years and things were with my grandmother, Mama Gooden, and it was spread out. Used to go out in the watermelon patches and crack open a watermelon and eat that. And so, it was a very tranquil kind of times. Speaker 1: If we can, if we can ask you--you said you were primarily raised by your grandparents. Was there a particular reason for that, why your mother didn't directly raise you? Speaker 2: Well, I guess by her being young, you know, that's the only thing I can think of, and after a certain point and time she felt the need to go to Detroit [Michigan] to try and get a job, and you know, raise me. And then she met my stepfather, Edgar Little, in Detroit. And then my grandmother, Lucinda Williams [Lucinda Eliga], and my mother had a brother and a sister, Aunt Lucille [Lucille Woods] and Frank Fisher [Frank Fisher, Jr.]. And they all migrated to Detroit as well. So, but I guess-- Speaker 1: So, let's talk about Lucille and Frank. Now, they're your mother's brother and sister? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And they were also in Texarkana? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Tell me about them. Were they, were they an integral part of your life? What was family life like in your--? Speaker 2: Well, primarily, like I said, my grandmother raised me. I knew of my mother, I mean, my aunt and uncle, but I didn't really spend that much time with them until after I moved to Detroit. Mama Gooden and Frank Fisher had the better part of raising me. Story_ID: 442764 Speaker 1: Now, did you have any siblings yourself? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was the only child for ten years until after I moved to Detroit [Michigan]. Then my brother [Edgar Little, Jr.] came along. Speaker 1: And you mentioned a cousin that you lived with, the household-- Speaker 2: Delores. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And her name is? Speaker 2: Delores. Gee, I forgot Delores' last name. She just died a few years ago. But I know her first name was Delores. Speaker 1: Was she older, or younger? Speaker 2: She was older. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she was a cousin of yours? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And was she the only child of the fam-, and you? Were you the only two children at that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah. Story_ID: 442765 Speaker 1: What was life like growing up at Mama Gooden's [Williams' paternal grandmother, Della Gooden] house at that point? What was it like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very strict disciplinarian. You know, like I said, had to go to church, you know, three or four times a week. And, you know, would crack that behind if you didn't follow--you know how grandmothers can be. "Boy, I ain't going to tell you anymore." I often tell the guys that there was a time when I guess I went against her rule, and Mama Gooden had a great psychological kind of thing that she would do. You know, grandmothers back then wore those long dresses that would come down there. So, when I did thi- did wrong this one particular time she said, "Now, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], sit right here." She said, "Now first, I want you to go cross the road and get me three long switches." So, I knew what was meant by that, I went cross the street, up the road, and came back with them. They were this long. She said, "No, boy, no, no. I want three long switches." So I went back cross the street, up the road, and got three long switches. She said, "Now, you sit here next to Grandma. I want to talk to you a little bit." And as she was talking to me, she took those three switches and she braided them together. She said, "Now, you know, I'm not going to keep telling you not to do something and you keep doing it." And I'm just sitting there whimpering. "Yeah, Grandma, yeah, I ain't going to--yeah, uh-huh." And she left three of them at the end, you know, like a whip. So she said, "Come here." She took my head and put it right there, and locked my arms down there, like that. I had my pants down, and she wore my behind out. I mean, she was whipping that behind of mine so that you could hear the (unclear) switches whistling in the wind. I never did mess with Grandma Gooden again after that. So, I always remember that about--grandmothers do not play. Story_ID: 442766 Speaker 1: Well, that's funny because I was going to ask you about the sights--some of the sights and sounds and smells that you recall growing up in your neighborhood. That's one, obviously. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Are there any more that you'd like to share with us a little bit (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, I remember, you know, the things of hog maws and chitterlings, and seeing the hogs, you know, eating the slop. And I would stand there and I'd ask my [maternal] grandfather, you know, Frank Fisher [Frank Fisher], about that. Because all of the food that was eaten that day that was not used, you would put it in the pail, you know, or you'd dump it over in this here big ass trough, and the pigs would just be eating it. And I wondered why--I noticed in between the hog's hooves was foam. And I asked him about that, and he said, "Well, that all came out of the hog's system." And as I got older, see, I don't eat pork now. Only--about the only pork I will eat is bacon. But I said, "And we eat that?" And he said, "Yeah. You know, son, we have to do what we have to do. Being black folks." You know, being poor, you had to, you know, eat what you could the best way you could. And, but, yeah, you know, hot water cornbread, you know, and biscuits, and syrup, you know, and stacks of pancakes; you know, all those wonderful southern cuisines, you know, kind of cooking. I was raised up on that, but after a while, after I got to Detroit [Michigan] and started finding out about health thing, I backed up off eating pork a long time ago. Story_ID: 442767 Speaker 1: So, you mentioned being very religious in your household. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you recall, recall the name of the church that you went to? Speaker 2: It was a Baptist church, but no. I had to get up in the choir and sing in the choir. And I had to recite, you know, certain scriptures, and poems, and things like that. And I never will forget, there was a time when I had to do a recital. And my mother [Hazel Williams Little] was late getting there, so when she got there, the pastor, you know, recognized that she finally had made it there. So, they had me to come back up and do it over again, because my mother finally made it there. So, I remember those kind of days. Speaker 1: You mentioned singing in the choir. At that point, when you were you singing as a youngster in the choir, did you have any feelings or aspirations toward a career? Did you say I really like doing this? Did you-- Speaker 2: Not at the time. You know, all I was doing it for was because it was the thing to do, you know. Because my [paternal] grandmother, Della Gooden, was very noted for singing. She had a name in a certain, you know, area for being--"Oh, Della Gooden, oh, she can go. Uh-huh, yeah. Everybody would come to hear Della Gooden sing." So--(yawn) excuse me--it was based on that kind of thing, why I had to sing in the choir. I didn't become interested in singing until I moved to Detroit [Michigan]. Story_ID: 442768 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned the school, Sunset Elementary [Sunset Elementary School, Texarkana, Texas]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Texarkana [Texas]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How long did you attend there? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I must have attended there until I was about like nine or ten, shortly before I moved to Detroit [Michigan]. And I remember there was a young girl there named Verna Lillian Wright. And boy, I tell you what. A young boy, when they see a little girl, and your heart starts pumping like I don't know what. And I liked me some Verna Lillian Wright. So in those days they had those swings where, you know, you could just stand up in it and just swing, and then you had to line up outside before you go in school, you know, classes and things. So, I'm just swinging and swinging. And I got, I guess I swung too high, and I came out and landed on my behind. And I was so embarrassed, because Verna Lillian Wright, she was looking at me. And I got in line, and I was crying and my backside was hurting. But my little heart was crushed, because I didn't want her to see me, you know, like that. But when I went back to Detroit, I mean, to Texas, to see my cousin and all, I asked where was Verna Lillian Wright, and she had moved to another part of Texas. You know, so I remember those kind of days, my first little, sort of kind of being in love. Speaker 1: So, how old would you have been at that point? And what year would that have been possibly? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess that would have been like '48 [1948], '49 [1949]. Because when I moved to Detroit, it was about like '50 [1950], '51 [1951] when we moved to Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you spent your kindergarten to about what, fourth grade? Speaker 2: To about fifth--fourth, fifth grade. Speaker 1: At Sunset? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that were notable or anybody that had left an impression on you at Sunset? Speaker 2: Not really. You know, the teachers back then were, you know, very strict and what have you. But, no. The ones in Detroit were the ones that left, you know, more of an impressionable kind of thing than the ones down in Texas. But no, I can't think of anyone in Texas that would, you know, stand out. Story_ID: 442769 Speaker 1: Let's go forward to Detroit [Michigan] a little bit. So, it's fifty--'51 [1951] or so? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell us about this move and what it meant to you. How were you told about this, that this was going to be happening for you? Speaker 2: Well, actually it was--it just meshed into the many times that, you know, like I said, during the course of the year, with going back. During summertime I would go to Detroit and spend summer vacation and then go back to Detroit, I mean back to El--Texas. But this one time we came to Detroit and that's when my mother [Hazel Williams Little] said, "Well, we're going to live in Detroit now." And we moved to an apartment that was on Vernor Highway, and it was downtown Detroit. And so there was a long brick wall that must have stood about six feet tall, and I remember days of just sitting up there and watching all the cars go by. Because, you know, they didn't have much--kind of--that many kind of cars in Texarkana [Texas], and I would sit there and count this car and that car. And then I would say the next bunch of cars would be mine. And I had a friend and he said, "Well, mine will be--" bip bop bam, that kind of thing. So, that's when I started hearing about the, you know, the radio thing, as far as rock and roll. Because down in Texas with Mama Gooden [Williams' paternal grandmother, Della Gooden], you know, I was relegated to listening to gospel, you know. Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that for a moment. Was there any music in particular in church that now might remind you of church music then? Speaker 2: Oh, sure, yeah, the choirs. Well, back then, you know, I listened to The Swan Silvertones, The Soul Stirrers, Mahalia Jackson, Clara Ward and her Famous Singers [The Famous Ward Singers]. So, I would hear all the greats of that time, you know, and I would lay there and listen at them. So when I got to Detroit, I was crazy about listening to The Soul Stirrers and The Swan Silvertones. Yeah, I can't think of his name now, but he's sick now, and I asked my road manager to send him some flowers. But they would sing--The Swan Silvertones sang 'The Lord's Prayer,' and I was about sixteen years old, and Claude Jeter, that's his name, Claude Jeter. And to hear that man sing, I said, "Oh." And then here comes Sam Cooke, you know, and what have you. But I was raised up listening to, you know, the gospel greats of that time. Speaker 1: Now, those groups were considered the quartet groups? Some of the quartets? Swan Silvertones-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They were quartet groups, groups of-- Speaker 2: Quartets and quintets. Speaker 1: And did that have any impression, you think, for the future-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --as far as set-up was concerned? Speaker 2: No. Even then I wouldn't be listening at them, no, unh-uh. What made me finally say yeah, that's what I do, as far as singing was concerned, was in 1955, '56 [1956]. And at that time rock and roll was in its infancy, it was just breaking out. You know, I would hear, in 1951 or '52 [1952], I remember hearing Hank Ballard and The Midnighters, 'Work with Me Annie,' which everybody would say, "How is that record getting played?" Because they were talking about, you know, begetting. And then I remember hearing The Spaniels, 'Goodnight Sweetheart, Goodnight.' So you know, I said, man, I like this here kind of music. When the rock and roll shows came to the Fox Theatre [Detroit, Michigan], I saw what The Cadillacs and Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers were doing. See, the Fox Theatre is the second largest indoor theater in America. Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York] is the first. So, being sixteen years old and seeing five thousand plus people going crazy over what was happening on the stage--I turned and I looked, and I looked back up on the stage, and The Cadillacs were whipping puredee behind, far as the Frankie and The Teenagers. And so, I started forming me a group when I was about like fourteen, fifteen years old. Story_ID: 442770 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's go back a little bit before that. Okay so, now you got to Detroit [Michigan], and your mom [Hazel Williams Little] is there with you? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Was she, was she remarried at this point? Speaker 2: Not at that time. She was dating a man by the name of Edgar Little. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she eventually, him and her eventually got married. Speaker 1: Tell us about Mr. Little. Speaker 2: Oh, he was a hardworking man at Ford's [Ford Motor Company]. He was from Mississippi. He had a family of about eight or nine sisters and brothers. And there's a place which you might know of, Eastern Market [Detroit, Michigan], where everybody would go over and by their, you know, vegetables and meats, and what have you, and every weekend, we would go over there. And he pointed out his house where he grew up, as we would walk to Eastern Market, and wonderful man, though, a wonderful man. He took care of my mother and myself. And then ten years later, you know, my brother [Edgar Little, Jr.] was born. And then a few years later after that, my sister [Denice Little], you know. So-- Speaker 1: Now, how many years after you got to Detroit did he come into your life? Speaker 2: Oh, I would say shortly after I got up to Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because evidently my mother and him started dating, you know, during the course of while she was up in Detroit, and I was still in Texas. So, so, shortly after I moved up to Detroit, and I was there in Detroit, they were seeing each other then-- Story_ID: 442771 Speaker 1: So you had a brother and a sister, and their names, please? Speaker 2: My brother's name is Edgar Allan Little [Edgar Little, Jr.]. And my sister's name is Denice Little. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's your birth order? Well, of course, you said your si- your sister came after you. Speaker 2: Well, my brother came after me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a ten year span. And then Nicey is I think about eight years after. I have to call and ask them their birthdays, because I forgot, you know, even though I talk with Allan. Allan is January, though. He's January, I think the 12th. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nicey is just around about this time, you know, but--so I'd have to find out to be more, you know, precise. Story_ID: 442772 Speaker 1: Now here's a young man from Texarkana [Texas]. Now he's in what we'll call a bigger city now. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You're in Detroit [Michigan], you're about ten years old. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us about going to school. What school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to Bishop [Bishop Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] on the East Side. And then-- Speaker 1: For elementary? Speaker 2: For elementary, uh-huh. And then we moved to the West Side, the north end part of Detroit. We moved from--let's see, I used to--when we moved from Vernor Highway we moved to Brush [Street] and Alfred [Street], which was one block from the Brewster Projects [Brewster-Douglass Housing Projects; Frederick Douglass Homes, Detroit, Michigan] where Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Wilson] and The Supremes, and Diana [Diana Ross] and Florence [Florence Ballard] grew up. So I could, I walked all through the Brewster Projects. And that's when I, like I said, first wanted to start singing, because the Fox Theatre [Detroit, Michigan] was not far from Brush and Alfred. You could walk up there. And then we moved to Custer [Street], between Brush [Street] and John R [Street], and I went to, what was the school I went to? Doty [Duane Doty School; The Henry Ford Academy: Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], I think. I went to Doty, and then eventually I moved and went to Jefferson High School [sic. Jefferson Junior High School; Jefferson Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan] off the freeway. And so, I moved around. And then when I finally moved to the West Side of Detroit is when I went to, yeah, Jefferson, and then from Jefferson I went to Northwestern High School [Detroit Collegiate Preparatory Academy at Northwestern, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Now, in your elementary and junior high years, was there anybody--were there any other classmates of note that-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: --who you might like to share with us? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Well, in particular at Jefferson, Lamont Dozier. Lamont Dozier has since become well-known with Holland-Dozier-Holland. But Lamont and myself, we both would be singing. And we would come into our homeroom classes--I would come into mine, and I'm just singing. And Lamont would come into his, and he would just sing, and as we would go into the room, we stood there and looked at each other and smiled, and would go in to our classroom. But he was with a group called The Romeos, and my group was going through all kind of manifestations of different names, you know. But he was very popular, you know, then. And then he started being noted for writing songs, you know, 'Popeye, the Sailor Man,' and a few others. And then as fate would have it, or as time would have it, him and I, we all ended up at Motown [Motown Records]. Speaker 1: Was there anyone else in your class that might be of note? Speaker 2: Oh, just before I came there, Duke Fakir [Abdul Fakir] went to Jefferson also, of the Four Tops, you know, and so he was there. But those are the only two that I can recall from the same school. Story_ID: 443057 Speaker 1: You go from Jefferson High School [sic. Jefferson Junior High School; Jefferson Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan] where you had a few people like, like-- Speaker 2: Lamont. Speaker 1: --Lamont Dozier-- Speaker 2: And Duke Fakir [Abdul Fakir]. Speaker 1: --Duke Fakir from the Four Tops. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So you stayed there until about what grade? Speaker 2: Oh, I graduated from, to the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went there to the ninth, and then I went to Northwestern High School [Detroit Collegiate Preparatory Academy at Northwestern, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now before you go to Northwestern, what was the musical climate in the city like at that time? This would have been, what, 1950? When was this? Speaker 2: Oh, that was '56 [1956], '57 [1957], '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: What was Detroit [Michigan] like at this time? Speaker 2: Detroit was magnificent, you know. I mean, it was a fun place to grow up, you know. The city was thriving, you know, even though I found out that it had some racial tension back during the '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s] when there was some of kind of racial, you know, thing that happened then. But all and all, it was, I loved Detroit then. Like I said earlier, when we started really making it, speaking of The Temptations, we'd be in some fun-loving cities like L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and New York [New York] and whatever. And we said, "Man, later for that. We want to get back to Detroit." Because Detroit was--I would tell the guys in the group, I said, "Man, you need to live in Detroit back during the '50s [1950s] and the early '60s [1960s]." The riots, since the riots happened in Detroit, it's never been able to get back on its feet. Speaker 1: So, now Detroit in the mid-'50s [1950s], there's a lot going on. There's, as you said, the rock and roll movement is coming in and music is coming in. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But at that point, also the jazz thing was strong, too-- Speaker 2: Very strong, that's right. Speaker 1: --at that point. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And there were a lot of great jazz musicians. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Did you have any intermingling, or were you into that kind of music at all also? Speaker 2: No. That came later on, you know, after I was around the greats, speaking of The Funk Brothers, you know. But primarily, you know, in my teenage years it was just rock and roll, rock and roll, you know. Because that was more dominant than the jazz, even though I know jazz was, you know, has always been pretty strong and popular. But boy, when people started getting turned on to rock and roll, then the other radio stations started playing R and B music and black music. It just was like bam, you know. So, it was more of a rock and roll influence. But then as, like as I said, after I got over to Motown [Motown Records], I started hanging out and listening to the greats like The Funk Brothers, who were very, very versed in playing jazz. You know, that's what they would do. Speaker 1: Guys like Pistol [Richard "Pistol" Allen], and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and James Jamerson, Benny Benjamin, Robert White-- Speaker 1: Messina. Speaker 2: Yeah, Jim Messina, Earl Van Dyke, Joe [Joe Hunter]--he just died, I can't think of his last name. He was the first keyboardist before Earl Van Dyke. But all those guys, you know. Wow, I can't think of--he would kill me. He was one of first managers at Motown, Beans Bowles, you know, so. Speaker 1: Harry Beans Bowles [sic. Thomas "Beans" Bowles]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, you know, great guys. And I would hear them talk about jazz, and I would hear them and see them, you know, because I went around to a lot of clubs in Detroit where they would play. Speaker 1: So now you're about thirteen or fourteen, and you're getting ready to go to Northwestern High School? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now Northwestern High School has a legacy of all kinds of great musicians coming out of there. Once you got there, who was at Northwestern with you of note? Speaker 2: Melvin Franklin, my bass singer, Richard Street, who later on became a Temptation [The Temptations]. [HistoryMaker] Mary Wilson, she went to Northwestern, you know. That's all that comes to mind. Speaker 1: And you mentioned being in a neighborhood close to the Brewster Projects [Brewster-Douglass Housing Projects; Frederick Douglass Homes, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In which Diana Ross grew up there? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And a few other people. Speaker 2: Florence [HistoryMaker Florence LaRue]. Speaker 1: Do you recall like seeing them prior to knowing anything about this music thing? Speaker 2: No. No, I didn't meet Florence and Diana and them until I guess I was about like seventeen or eighteen years old thereabout. My group at that time was called the, what? Before we became The Distants, we were like The Questions, The El Domingos, you know. But Diana and them were called The Primettes, after Paul [Paul Williams], Eddie [Eddie Kendricks], and a guy named Kell Osborne, and they called themselves The Primes. And a guy by the name of Milton Jenkins managed all three groups. So, that's when I became aware of The Supremes before, you know, they became The Supremes. Speaker 1: So, now we're in your teenage years. And Detroit is booming, it's a great place to be. And teenagers were very involved in being professional with their music at that time, right? Was that a thing that was going around the city? Everybody had a group and was trying to really do their thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You know, it was nothing to walk and see a group just about on every street corner singing, you know. So, yeah, it was that kind of time. Because like you say, rock and roll was really busting loose at that time. So then, like I said, the rock and roll shows were coming not only to the Fox [Fox Theatre, Detroit, Michigan], but various theaters in and around Detroit. So you would go and see them, you know, and it was a very influencing factor to (yawn) excuse me--to see, you know, to hear that kind of music. The skating rink was a very popular place on Woodward [Avenue; M-1] and--near Warren [Avenue] or Canfield [Avenue], the skating rink [Arcadia Roller Rink, Detroit, Michigan]. And they had rock and roll shows coming to the skating rink. And you know, so it was just a wonderful place to be at the time. Story_ID: 443058 Speaker 1: Do you think that there may have been an artistic, a greater artistic pursuit, when you all were coming up versus--you know, we have kids t- nowadays who are trying to be in the business, so to speak. What do you think the difference is between the teenagers of that day in the business and those of today? Because today, they're really concerned about blowing up and being big stars. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Were you all more concerned about the music itself? Speaker 2: Well, I think from a fun-loving thing, and wanting to sing was the primary concern. And you know, we didn't know about the business in the sense of knowing what it was then, because it was in such an early state of the game. You know, we just wanted to sing, and get a hit record, and travel and make money, you know. The difference today is that I think a lot of credit should be acknowledged for the acts that came from the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] that broke down the doors for music to be accepted on such a grand scale. And now that it is a business--which it has always been a business, but you don't learn about it until you get in there--and you find out, oh, it's not only about making money--I mean about having hit records. It's about making money and then you start learning about, well, okay, if we sold all these records, don't we get a royalty statement? You know, so you start learning about that, those kind of--money that you're supposed to get. Now, it is so knowledgeable now. Yeah, acts that come along, artists coming along now, can really grow more than just being an artist. You know, they can grow to be a profound businessperson, which is a good thing, you know. But I think it took a lot of those doors to be cracked open for our artists to realize. When we came along, we were not told about owning your own publishing, writing your songs, and that you get paid for writing, for publishing, and all those different other things. So, that was shielded from us. You know, just sing, and if you're making any royalties, you know, you would get the lowest royalty rate, you know. But now they--like when I speak, I tell artists and up and coming people in the business, I say, "When we came along, there was no such thing as books that you could go and buy and educate yourself about being in the business." And I have just about every book about this business of music that's been edited. And--I meant-- Speaker 1: Published? Speaker 2: --published. And so we had to learn the hard way, because we weren't told about those other facets of making money. And now with everybody nowadays knowing about how to own your own publishing, that when you write songs you get paid for that, and the various ancillary ways of getting money. So, it was a thing that is good now, but we didn't know about it back then, yeah. Story_ID: 443059 Speaker 1: So back in that days, you had groups named like Otis Williams and The Siberians? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All kind of good things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now you and Melvin [Melvin Franklin], tell us about your friendship in school, and how did it, how it started. Speaker 2: Melvin was, see, before I had Melvin in my group there was a guy by the name of Arthur Walton. And Art decided that he didn't want to sing anymore; he wanted to go back to school. Well, you know, you can't fault a man for wanting to better himself in the educational aspect. But I'd heard Melvin and didn't even know who he was. Well, I heard him sing with this group called The Voice Masters, and I loved me some Voice Masters because they could sing, the blending of the harmony. And they had a song out called, the first song that they had out was 'Hope and Pray.' So, I said, "Man, I like The Voice Masters." And they didn't have no bass. Second record that they came out with was 'Needed,' part 1 and 2. And Melvin opens up, (singing) "Boom, boom, boom." And I said, "Well, who in the heck is that with all that booming bass voice?" Little did I know, as fate would have it, it was Melvin. Melvin was sixteen years old. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And his mother let him go, and I think he said they recorded in New York [New York] or somewhere. But anyway, when I found out it was him, as fate would have it, I'm walking down Woodrow Wilson [Street], and Melvin was on Woodrow Wilson. And I had on a black leather jacket, processed hair, tight-fitting jeans, and some white bucks. Melvin thought I was part of a gang. So he said--so when I first saw him I said, "Oh, that's, that's who I'm looking for, Melvin Franklin." So, I crossed over to the other side where he was, and he crossed on the other side where I was. And I crossed over there, and he crossed back. And I said, "Hey, hey, man. Hey, man, hold up, I want to talk to you about singing." And Melvin was so shy and things, he said, "Oh, I thought you was in a gang, and that you wanted to beat me up." And he said, "That's why I was walking down Woodrow Wilson, because I, you know, I don't walk to walk down 12th [12th Street; Rosa Parks Boulevard], because 12th is where if you don't know anybody you can get jumped on." I said, "Well, you don't have to worry about that, you're with me." And I said, "I would like to talk to you, because I need a bass singer." And he said, "Well, you have to talk to Mama Rose [Rose English Franklin]." So, we turned around and walked all the way back to Clairmont [Avenue] and the expressway [M-10], where Mama Rose lives today. And I crossed the street, and Melvin hid behind the tree. And I crossed the street and I knocked on the door and said--I met Mama Rose and I asked her could her son sing with me, because I needed a bass singer. And after talking with her, she said, "Well, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], you seem to be a nice young man. I'll let my son sing with you, but you take care of my baby." Speaker 1: So, now you're still in high school at this point yourself? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Melvin was at Northwestern [Northwestern High School; Detroit Collegiate Preparatory Academy at Northwestern, Detroit, Michigan], and then something happened and he ended up going to Northern [Northern Senior High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Because he was out of the school district, and they found out he was on Clairmont and the freeway. Speaker 1: How old were you at this point? Speaker 2: I was about seventeen, and Melvin was sixteen. Speaker 1: So, you were probably in the eleventh or twelfth grade? Speaker 2: The tenth. Story_ID: 443060 Speaker 1: So you're singing. Now what, what were some of the venues at this time period where a group like yours could sing? Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, we did parties, record hops, you know, those kind of little gatherings. If somebody had a little wedding thing, you know. Speaker 1: You were too young for the clubs, though? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. But, you know, eventually we became so popular--you know, you had to be twenty-one to go in the clubs and drink, you know. We were so popular about eighteen or nineteen years old that--and twenty, that at twenty the club owners would let us in. They wouldn't serve us no alcohol, you know. So about twenty, nineteen years old, we were playing the Phelps Lounge [Detroit, Michigan]. We played the Rage Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan]. We would do--there's another one that was very popular, Chappy's Lounge out in Ecorse [Michigan]. So, yeah, then we would go up to clubs in Muskegon, Michigan and Saginaw, Michigan, and places like that and work clubs. Speaker 1: Was there still a Flame Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan] and all that? Speaker 2: The Flame Show Bar, yeah, yeah. The Flame--we never did work the Flame. Speaker 1: The 20 Grand [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: The 20 Grand, yeah, we could work the Gold Room of the 20 Grand. And then eventually once we got of age, we worked the 20 Grand, the club part itself. And I knew the owner, we knew the owner real well, Bill Kabbush. So, yeah, we eventually went up to that. Speaker 1: How easy was it--now you mentioned that you heard records and their records were--how easy was it to do or record a record back in those days? Speaker 2: It wasn't too hard, you know. We recorded for Johnnie Mae Matthews, you know. And she started her little label called Northern Records [Northern Recording Company]. And a guy that I had mentioned earlier, he was trying to get us a deal, Milton Jenkins, but it never did work out. And I forgot exactly how Johnnie Mae knew about us. But--oh, I know. One day I was walking by on--she lived on Carter [Street] and Lawton [Street]. So as I'm walking by, I heard this group singing, and I stood outside. And somehow or another Johnnie Mae came out, and I told her I had a group. And she said, "Oh, you do? Well, bring your group around and let me hear you guys, and if I like you, you know, I'll, you know, I'll record you." So I brought my group, which at the time was Elbridge Bryant, James Crawford, Richard Street, Melvin Franklin, and myself. Because Art Walton [Arthur Walton] had decided to quit singing. And she liked my group, and that's when we became The Distants, D-I-S-T-A-N-T-S. And so, we would rehearse and rehearse. And how I got to be the group leader was whenever Johnnie Mae would call a rehearsal, by us living--well, Al was the lucky one, because he lived on Blaine [Street], which was right around the corner from where Johnnie lived. So he could (makes sound) right around the corner. But everybody else had to catch some kind of ride or either walk. So, one day when I got there, she said, "You know, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], you are never late." I said, "Well, Johnnie Mae, you said get here to our jobs at certain time. And I--." You know, she said, "Oh no, that's a good thing. You be the group leader." And little did I know what that would encompass down the line. So, that's how I got the role of being the spokesman and the leader of the group, was through Johnnie Mae Matthews. Speaker 1: Now, she was one of the first black women to have a record company, wasn't she? Speaker 2: Yeah, as far as I know, she was. And she was doing pretty well, because for a minute she had, Mary Wells was there. She almost had The Impressions after they left Vee-Jay Records. She had Popcorn and The Mohawks, which Frank Bennett [ph.]--and Norman Whitfield was the tambourine player, you know. So, later on he became a very noted songwriter and producer for The Temps [The Temptations] and Marvin Gaye, and various other artists. So she was doing pretty well there, you know. Story_ID: 443061 Speaker 1: I think the rift that made it--happened between my group and I--was we had this record called 'Come On.' And it did very well in Detroit [Michigan] and Chicago [Illinois], Cleveland [Ohio]. So I guess she wanted to sell it to a larger recording company that had a stronger disposition--distribution. And so she came back after signing with Warwick Records, and she was showing all these hundred dollar bills that she had. And I said, "Oh, wow, Johnnie [Johnnie Mae Matthews]." She said, "Yeah, the record's going to be played all over the country now." So, I said, "Oh, good." I said, "Well, aren't we supposed to get some royalties behind this?" And boy, when I said that, that was it. She went off. "Royalties? The hell you mean asking me about some royalties? Just keep singing; don't worry about the royalties." I said, "Well, we want to sing, but I mean--." Because I wrote 'Come On,' and it was very popular. And she went off. And she had let us use her '57 [1957] sky blue Buick, and it had Otis Williams and The Distants' name on the side. And she said, "I'll take the car from you and I'll take the name." I guess she thought by the name being so popular that we would say, "Oh, okay, well, can't let her take the name. We'll stay here." So, my retort was, "Hey, take the name. We're young; we can go somewhere else." And before that, you know, during that time, Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] had seen my group at St. Stephens Community Center [Detroit, Michigan], and gave me his business card. And he liked the record and he saw what we were like on stage, and he said, "Well, if you should ever become disenchanted where you are, come see me. I'm starting my own label [Motown Records]." In '61 [1961] I gave him a call, and history was made. Speaker 2: So you were the leader. What--how did the other guys in the group feel like? Say for instance, Street [Richard Street], how did he feel? Because now Street was the only original Detroiter, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In The Temptations later on, he was the only one that was really born-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in Detroit. How did they feel in the Distants, at that point? Were they with you, like, "Let's go," or did they say-- Speaker 1: Well, who stayed--after we left Johnnie Mae, was Al [Elbridge Bryant] stayed with me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Melvin [Melvin Franklin] stayed. Richard, he got caught up with some love entanglement and he just stopped coming to rehearsal. Enter Paul Williams and Eddie Kendricks. And by the connection being--when we were with Milton Jenkins, that's when we knew of Paul, Eddie, and Kell [Kell Osborne]. So, they broke up and Eddie went back to Birmingham [Alabama], and Paul went to Cleveland. And I guess at some point and time, Paul and Eddie came back to Detroit. And so one day, Eddie gave me a call. And he said, "Hey, man, I'm back in town. What you doing?" And I said, "Man, you right on time. I need a first tenor." I said, "We're getting ready to sign with this company, but one of the guys stopped coming or whatever, and I need a first tenor." He said, "Oh, yeah, I'll sing with you." He said, "What about Paul? Can he come along and join?" And I never will forget. I said, "Man, as good as Paul sings, who would turn Paul Williams down?" Paul and Eddie walk- came over to my place where I was staying with Josephine [Josephine Rogers Williams], my first wife, and Paul had a guitar. And so I called rehearsal. Melvin came, Al came, Paul, Eddie, and myself. And the first song we rehearsed to was 'A Hundred Pounds of Clay,' by Gene McDaniel [sic. Gene McDaniels]-- Story_ID: 443062 Speaker 1: Let's back up for a moment. Now, you graduated in '58 [1958] from Northwestern [Northwestern High School Detroit Collegiate Preparatory Academy at Northwestern, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now at that point, what did you think? Did you know at that point, it's all about music now? Or what were you thinking when you, 'cause (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, actually I didn't get a chance to graduate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was out on the road. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was--we were traveling like nine hundred, man. Speaker 1: The Distants were traveling? Speaker 2: Oh, no, The Temptations. Speaker 1: Okay. So then The Temptations-- Speaker 2: See, when we left Johnnie Mae [Johnnie Mae Matthews], she kept the name in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we became The Temptations. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, so, you didn't officially graduate from Northwestern? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You were working? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Kept it moving, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now also, now Eddie Kendricks had been in the group, The Primes, right, before that? Speaker 2: Paul [Paul Williams] and Eddie. Speaker 1: Paul and Eddie had the group, The Primes. And that disbanded at some point? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: So now you're re-forming this new group? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And did you have a name for it at this point? Speaker 2: Well, after we left Johnnie Mae, we were The Elgins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we found out there was another group called The Elgins. So one day standing out in front of Motown [Motown Records], a guy named Bill Mitchell, you know, who at the time worked for Motown, he said, "Well, there's another group called The Elgins, so we can't do that." So we just started throwing out names, throwing out names, and the name Temptations came up. I said, "I like that, I like that." And so he said, "You want to go with that?" And so I asked the rest of the guys, Paul, Eddie, Al [Elbridge Bryant], and Melvin [Melvin Franklin]. And Paul said, "Hey, man, a name is whatever we make it." And I said, "I like Temptations. That's what I'm going to go with." So Bill hollered up to the second floor of Motown, on one of Motown's buildings on West Grand Boulevard, "Put on the contract The Temptations." And that was 1961. Speaker 1: So let's back up a moment. So now you've got Eddie and Paul, and your new group is called The Elgins. What was that first rehearsal like? Sometimes there's magic moments that occur with-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and you know that this is the deal. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Well, like I said, then we became The Temps when we couldn't use The Elgins, because. Speaker 1: Well, prior to The Temps, when they first came to your rehearsal-- Speaker 2: When we left, we were The Temps. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Then that, because that's when--no, we were--no, we were The Temptations. No, we were The Elgins. Speaker 1: The Elgins. Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: What was that first rehearsal like-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was magic. Speaker 1: --when Eddie and Paul came by? Speaker 2: It was magic. Speaker 1: You knew then that this was a group that was going to go somewhere? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, because I had known of their singing when they were with The Primes. See, Paul, Eddie and Kell [Kell Osborne] could stand there flat-footed and sing the most harmonic harmonies, you know. I mean they were doing like, (singing) "A foggy day in London Town, had me low" ['A Foggy Day']. Speaker 1: A lot of jazz standards? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, acapella. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, and Eddie had that soaring tenor, and Paul was soulful. And Kell was just one of those true sounding voices. So when Paul and Eddie came and joined Al, Melvin, and myself, oh I knew I had the magic there, because I knew what Eddie could do and I knew what Paul could do. Story_ID: 443063 Speaker 1: So you had previous- in previous years met [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, and you had this card in your pocket, so you called Berry Gordy? Speaker 2: Let me tell you how I first became aware of Berry. By--a guy by the name of Ronnie Taylor lived on--Jesus, can't think of the street [Gladstone Street] because it's so many years ago--but anyway I met Richard, I mean Ronnie. Him and I were out in front of his apartment building just sitting and talking. And Berry had this two-family flat on--damn, I'd have to go back to Detroit [Michigan]--but it's going right down the street to Jefferson Junior High [Jefferson Junior High School; Jefferson Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan]. But Ronnie and me would say, "Man, what is all that that they're doing over there?" Because you would see this little Volkswagen Beetle, huge truck in and out, coming back and going in, people in and out the building. I said, "What the hell is going on in that house?" You know, because we thought it was a house. But that was Berry's first office set-up, and come to find out it was Berry Gordy Enterprises [Berry Gordy Jr. Enterprise] or what have you. And then he moved from there to West Grand Boulevard. Speaker 1: What was he doing before that? I heard that he had a record store [3-D Record Mart, Detroit, Michigan] at some point? Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. Yeah, he had a record store, and he was selling I guess primarily jazz, and I guess it didn't do that well. And you know, he was writing songs. 'Cause he wrote a big hit for Jackie Wilson. Speaker 1: He was a musician also, correct? Did he play piano or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, he could. He wasn't that proficient at it, because when he would rehearse for us, or with us, you know, he could play just enough to get his point across. Speaker 1: There was someone, another HistoryMaker, Dr. Mable John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], who said that at one point he played, he was her accompanist. I guess she's the sister of Little Willie John? Speaker 2: Little Willie John. Yeah, Mabel John (unclear). Speaker 1: Right, right, right. And she said he was her first accompanist at some point. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: So he was playing blues, you know, so I'm sure that was pretty good. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, now, so you see this going on, Berry's truck going back and forth? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, what do you do now? You go in there and ask him what's going on? Speaker 2: No, no. We just didn't bother doing that, because, see, we just watched. Because at that time I must have been about seventeen years old, sixteen, seventeen. But, you know, as fate would have it, after, you know, doing our thing with Johnnie Mae [Johnnie Mae Matthews] and leaving Johnnie Mae--how I really came in contact with Berry was that--except for, hearing about him writing songs for Jackie Wilson and then taking on The Miracles--he was writing with The Miracles when The Miracles had 'Shop Around' and some of the earlier recordings. Speaker 1: How big were they at this point, The Miracles? Speaker 2: They were fledgling. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were beginning to really take shape, you know, because a lot of their records was getting a lot of air play. And we all had to do record hops at that time, and Berry would go out to the record hops with Smokey and The Miracles [Smokey Robinson and The Miracles]. So this one particular time when we were at St. Stephens Community Center [Detroit, Michigan], we were the co-stars, and The Miracles were the stars of this here record hop, and Frantic Ernie Durham, a very noted disc jockey, was the one that was sponsoring this record hop. And we were on stage doing our record, 'Come On,' and here come Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] and Berry. And the stage was high enough where you could see the people that's coming in and out of, you know, St. Stephens. And we're just doing our thing, singing. And I say, "Oh, there comes Smokey and The Miracles now. And that's Berry Gordy, okay." So the audience just kept calling my group back again, back again. And so when we finally came off--because like I said, 'Come On' was so popular that when we finally came off, I said, "Now, I'm going to stand here and watch Smokey and The Miracles," because their record was doing real good. And Berry was standing next to me. I guess evidently he saw the reaction to my group, and he said, "You know, if you should ever leave where you are and become unhappy, come see me. I'm starting my own company." And-- Speaker 1: So at this point it was Smokey and The Miracles and The Distants, at this point? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He gave me his card, and I kept it, and as fate would have it, when we had that little thing with Johnnie Mae, I called. And Berry said, "Okay, call and talk to Mickey Stevenson [William "Mickey" Stevenson]. He is my A and R [artists and repertoire] man." And I called and talked with Mickey, and he said, "Well, bring your group over and let me hear what you guys got, because Berry, you know, he knows of your group." So we came over, and we went downstairs and we were singing, 'Oh Mother, This Heart of Mine,' and we couldn't record that because Johnnie Mae kept the first one that we recorded, 'This Old Heart of Mine.' So, we changed it to 'Oh, Mother of Mine.' And then Mickey did, "Romance without finance is a poor paradise" ['Romance without Finance']. And that's, that was our first record, and we started recording with Motown [Motown Records], 1961. Story_ID: 443064 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned record hops before. So, would a record hop be the same as a showcase? Nowadays, the kids call it a showcase. Was it, was it basically showing the record, or being--? Was it--? Speaker 2: Record hops were for--you'd go there and do it for the disc jockey to play your records. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what record hops were all about. If you wanted a record, you know, your record would continuously be played. You'd better go and do those record hops, because, you know, you had Frantic Ernie Durham, Joltin' Joe Howard, Bill Williams, and Larry Dixon, you know, very popular disc jockeys in the Detroit [Michigan] area. Speaker 1: So nowadays--back in those days, deejays were just as popular as some artists? Speaker 2: Oh, shoot, sometimes even more so. Yeah, yeah, because Larry Dixon--and I heard he just passed not too long ago. To hear this man over the radio, women were just passing out, because he had that deep, rich-sounding bass voice. And Lord, you could just hear the women fall out, until they went to see him. And then they would say, "Okay. He sounds good on the radio. But--" Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But he was very strong and popular, you know. And Frantic Ernie had a very upbeat kind of thing, you know. He'd call his girlfriend over the radio, "Oh, you're cool." "Oh you're cool, your man sitting up here playing all these records." A very popular guy, you know. So, yeah, some of the disc jockeys could be just as big and colorful as the actual artists. Speaker 1: So what was radio like itself, during those time periods? Speaker 2: Radio at this time was like unrestricted, you know. If you liked a record, if the disc jockey liked a record, they could play it over and over. Now they can't do that; they'd get fined or fired, you know. But they would come on with, like, okay, case in point. Our record 'Come On,' it had that--Melvin [Melvin Franklin] would start it off, (singing) "Boom, boom, boom, boom, cha cha. Boom, boom, boom, boom." So it had that kind of, "Oh, my god, what kind of song is this?" So once they would play it, Bill Williams and Joltin' Joe and all of them would say, "So nice, I got to play it twice," and they could go back and do it. And then they would flip it over, you know. But they can't do that, too tough now, so radio has become very restrictive and very--right down the pike. Story_ID: 442899 Speaker 1: The new group--Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy]--you've auditioned for Stevenson [William "Mickey" Stevenson] now. And what was his reaction when he heard you? Speaker 2: Well, he liked us, you know. Because like I said, when you have a lineup with--like with Paul [Paul Williams], and Eddie [Eddie Kendricks], and with Melvin [Melvin Franklin] dropping down with that bass--and Al [Elbridge Bryant] was a heck of a tenor--you know, us doing our thing--he was, he signed us up and we started recording. And the first recording was 'Oh, Mother of Mine.' Speaker 1: Now, we read somewhere that there was a group called The Pirates. Speaker 2: Berry wanted us to make it so bad. Because we had recorded 'Oh, Mother of Mine,' 'Check Yourself,' 'Dream Come True,' about three or four tunes. And we became The Pirates through the efforts of Berry saying, "I want you guys to make it. So, we're going to do this cover job of 'Mind Over Matter,'" which Nolan Strong of The Diablos [Nolan Strong and The Diablos] had a copy of 'Mind Over Matter.' He said, "But we're going to call you guys The Pirates, you know." So, we met it with mixed emotions, like, "Yeah, Berry really wants us to make it, yeah. But damn, if this record jumps off, that means we have to walk out on stage with pirate outfits." So, you know, we were caught in between like ugh. Well, we went and recorded it, and as fate would have it, it didn't do--you know, so we went back to calling ourselves The Temptations. And I think 'I Want a Love I Can See'--we had about, we must have had about eight or nine singles out, until Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] came up with 'The Way You Do the Things You Do.' Story_ID: 442900 Speaker 1: Before we go to that now, so you're--who else is at Motown [Motown Records]? This is like '62 [1962]. Who's at Motown also besides The Temptations now? What other groups are--? Speaker 2: Well, The Miracles were there. Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] was signing quite a few, you know. He had a group called The Satintones there, Mary Wells was there. Marvin [Marvin Gaye] had yet to arrive, but he came a little, shortly thereafter. Who else? The Contours came there. There was a lot of different acts there. Speaker 1: Was it a family environment (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Martha and The Vandellas, The Marvelettes. Speaker 1: Well, was it a family environment, or was it really competitive as far as who--? Speaker 2: Oh, well, it was both, it was both. You know, which, competition is healthy. That's what Motown was, you know, made of, you know, that inner-competitive thing with the songwriters and the producers and the artists. You know, but it had a family atmosphere. In fact, Motown was such a wonderful place to be at, that we would, when we would be in town and didn't have anything to do, we hung out up at Motown. So it was great. Speaker 1: So you're there, and you're relatively young men and young ladies at this point-- Speaker 2: Sure, yeah. Speaker 1: --at this record company with Berry Gordy being at the helm. Besides the musical grooming, was there an overall grooming into lady-hood and manhood? Speaker 2: That didn't come 'til later. That didn't come until like '66 [1966] when Harvey Fuqua came, and he was married to one of Berry's sisters [Gwen Gordy Fuqua]. And he was in charge of artist development. So Harvey brought the great Cholly Atkins in, who was a very noted choreographer, and then Maurice King, a very noted musician, you know, who used to be the Flame Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan]. He became our vocal coach along with Johnny Allen. Lon Fontaine was also a part of the artist development. Maxine Brown [sic. Maxine Powell], Ardina Johnson-- Speaker 1: This was a few years into the career? Speaker 2: Into. Oh, yeah, this started in like '65 [1965], '66 [1966] when they started grooming everybody for--to start playing the smart rooms. And Shelly [Shelly Berger], my manager here, he came aboard in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he was right there when all of us were being groomed to go to the smart rooms. Story_ID: 442901 Speaker 1: In '63 [1963], Al Bryant [Elbridge Bryant] decided he didn't want to be in it anymore, he left? Speaker 2: Well, more so, yeah. I guess you could--to put it mildly, we'll say yeah, he didn't want to be here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --anymore, because, you know, then that's when David Ruffin came in December of '63 [1963]. January, like, I started off our last record for Motown Legacy. In January of '64 [1964], Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson], you know, wanted us to come in, because he came up with this great song called 'The Way You Do the Things You Do.' But as we were walking that cold January night, all five of us--and we had long coats on, because it was cold, and I was in the back, and I could see David and Eddie [Eddie Kendricks] up front, and Melvin's [Melvin Franklin] right along with me. And as sure as we're sitting here, it's like God said now, "Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], this is the five that's going to make history." So we went and recorded 'The Way You Do the Things You Do.' And we'd always been a working group. Speaker 1: And David Ruffin came. Tell us more, a little bit more about how David Ruffin came in. Al decided--Al and Paul [Paul Williams] had a few issues, right? Speaker 2: Al and Paul? Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: To put it mildly, as you say. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, truth be told, Al hit Paul across the face with a bottle. We were at Chappy's Lounge [Detroit, Michigan] in Ecorse, Michigan [sic.]. There again, you know, we were closing the show with, I think it was 'Shout,' and they kept calling us back, kept calling us back. So went back about two times, and they kept calling us back. And David was, you know, out there with us at the time, but he wasn't on stage, you know. But he jumped up on the stage at the end of 'Shout.' But this last time, I think about the third time after we had gone up there and they kept calling us, Al said, "Man, they keep calling us back. They want more." And Paul was in charge of running the, giving the show rundown. So Paul said, "What we going to do, Al? Go back out there and do the same thing? What we going to do? We've gone out there two times. What else we going to do?" And Al said--I reached over, and I knew Al's temper. He reached over and grabbed a bottle. And he said, "Motherfucker, I'll hit you across the face with this bottle." He said--and before Paul could say anything--and I tried to grab Al's hand, and I was just a little late. And by the time I missed it, then it came across and hit Paul in the face. And I came out of the dressing room, leaned up against the door, and Eddie and Melvin said, "Man, what's wrong, what's wrong?" And I said, "Al just opened Paul's face with a bottle." And we went back there, and Paul was bleeding, and we rushed him to the hospital. And luckily, it just was the bridge of his nose. It didn't get into his eyes, you know, but he did have that scar until he left here, and that didn't sit right with me. And now Paul was in the hospital, and I went to see him. I said, "Well, we're going to have to let Al go Al--Paul, because we're not going to have that kind of, you know, thing happening." And Paul, being a wonderful guy, he said, "No man, I can feel it. We're about to do something. We're about to make it, just hold on." I said, "You've got to be kidding." He said, "No, man, no, let's hold on. Let's keep him." But we appeared at the Fox Theatre [Detroit, Michigan] with one of those Motown revue [Motortown Revue] shows. And Paul has always been the kind of guy that could break out and do a step on the stage, and the place would go crazy. So, Melvin joined in with him, you know. "Come on Al, let's do that." "No, no, no, we the pretty boys. Let them do the hard work." And that's when I said, "He's got to go. He's got to go." So when we came off I told him, I said, you know-- Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: "We got to let you go." And see, Ruffin was up and coming. So that he knew the popularity of my group [The Temptations] in my kitchen, along with Jimmy Ruffin. And I was married at that time to my first wife [Josephine Rogers Williams]. He said, "Man, I want to sing with your group, Otis." And I was shocked. I said, "Wait a minute. You want to sing with us, as bad as you are with the record--." Because he had a record called 'I'm in Love,' and 'Mr. Bus Driver.' So he had a little name, and he was called Little David Bush. And he said, "Yeah, but I want to sing with your group." I said, "Oh." I said well, he can already dance, because David was known for throwing the mic up and jumping up and dropping down, (unclear) and all that fancy stuff. And when we were out at Chappy's, he jumped up on the stage and started singing and did that, and people thought he was a member of the show. Oh, the place really, really, went crazy. Speaker 1: Do you think that upset Al somewhat, too? Speaker 2: Al didn't know at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, he hadn't seen it? Speaker 2: You know, well, he saw when David did that, but I don't know. Because it got to the point I didn't care, you know, after Al became so crazy and hitting Paul across the face with the bottle. And then it was just an easy transition. Because after I told Al, you know, we no longer wanted him in the group, enter David Ruffin. And David was wonderful all through our formative years, until we started having a large amount of success. Speaker 1: Well, now did Al really buck you when you said he had to go? Did he try to beg to stay? Speaker 2: No, no. No, I guess he knew that was, that was over the top. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the last time I saw him before I heard that he died, we were at Cobo Arena [Detroit, Michigan]. And I saw him standing up in the doorway, and he was looking kind of bad, you know, skin was kind of ashy, dark circles under his eyes. He had a long gray coat on, and that was the last time I saw him. Story_ID: 442902 Speaker 1: So Motown [Motown Records], so you're there now and you've got David Ruffin in the group now. David Ruffin comes in, and this is like '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Somewhere around that? Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 2: January of '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: And the Motown-- Speaker 2: He joined the group in '63 [1963] but, you know, our first recording was in January of '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: So, now what is Smokey's [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] role at Motown? Besides being an artist himself, is he doing a great portion of a lot of the writing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he was. And Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] was about to make him--shortly, not too long after that, he became vice-president of Motown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was, he had a very influential role in the development of Motown, the Motown sound, you know. Speaker 1: Now, this is the mid-'60s [1960s]. Things are changing somewhat as far as--racially is concerned, civil rights. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And The Temptations--now before we go through, you said your first wife. So, in the midst of all this stardom and with the up and coming, you managed to get married, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't by choice. It was by the judge saying marry this girl, or either we're going to send you away. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us a little bit about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, now we're going to get real personal now, huh? Yeah, well, you know, I used protection and the protection bust, and then my son [Otis Lamont Williams] was conceived. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was nineteen and she was sixteen. And so, I explained to the judge. He knew I was trying to be an honorable, you know, guy and not just be--thing get hard and just want to do it. So he said, "Well, that's mighty commendable of you, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], you know. But you got to marry this girl, or either we're going to send you away." Bam. So, I made a joke. I said, "Okay, which way to the county building?" And everybody in the courtroom busted out laughing. And so, that's why I had to get married. And so Josephine [Josephine Rogers Williams] and myself and my son had our little apartment. And that's when, like I said, when Dennis, I mean David, along with Jimmy Ruffin, was standing up in the kitchen of my apartment, and David said, "I want to sing with your group, because you guys, you know, are so popular, and I love the showmanship." And so, that's how that happened. Speaker 1: So, Josephine was part of that history, she was there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, like in the movie ['The Temptations'], yeah, you know, my life's story movie. You know, she was at the beginning. Speaker 1: So, how did she like the whole--? Speaker 2: Oh, she didn't want me to sing. She wanted me--I had to go do, you know, find work, because I had two mouths to feed. And we were popular, but we weren't making any money to, you know, to live off of. So I had to try to make ends meet and still wanted to sing so-- Speaker 1: So, what did you do? What were some of those odd jobs? What did you do? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I used to work at different parks, you know, menial work. And I used to work for Jackson Contraction--Contracting Company [Jackson Contracting Company, Detroit, Michigan]. We'd build up old dilapidated homes, build them up. Speaker 1: So you had a day gig, so to speak, in the meantime? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And that's--I never will forget; I was thinking about it not too long ago. I was working for Jackson Contracting, and I'm taking out some trash after, you know, cleaning up a house, and I saw some kids. They said, "Look, there's a nigger." And I stopped and I said, "You can't get mad at them, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams]. That's the parents." You know, and I turned around and went back into work, and I told Jackson that. And he said, "Well, Otis, just overlook them, they're kids. That's parents." But that was the first time that I had been called that by kids. Speaker 1: Early '60s [1960s] in Detroit [Michigan], huh? Speaker 2: In Detroit. Didn't hear it at all down in Texas; got all the way up to Detroit and heard it from some kid. Story_ID: 442903 Speaker 1: So '65 [1965], you--so now David's [David Ruffin] in the group going through 1965. And Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] has a song that he writes for you all called 'My Girl.' Speaker 2: Well, the first one is 'The Way You Do the Things You Do.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I got to give the respect--that was the one that really catapulted us out into being known for The Temptations, because then they could see what we could do on the stage. And-- Speaker 1: Now, were the steps always a part of it? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, when we would rehearse at my, at me and Josephine's [Josephine Rogers Williams] place, you know, we'd stand and sing just about anything, from gospel to modern harmony, to whatever. But Paul [Paul Williams] said, "Now, we're not just going to be the kind of group that just stands there and sing." He said, "We got to dance." Speaker 1: Because most groups just kind of stood and sang, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I said, "So--." He said, "Now we got to be more showy," you know, because Paul could really dance. He said, "You know, we got to sell sex," you know. And I said, "Oh, sell sex? What you mean?" And then Eddie [Eddie Kendricks], I never will forget. Eddie said, "Oh, you know, I can't dance. You know, I can't dance, I'm stiff." He said, "That's all right, we going to work it out." And true enough, we started rehearsing and putting steps together. And the next thing you know, as we would perform, people started liking the movements that we were doing, and I have to give credit first and foremost to Paul, you know, because he would come up with some beautiful moves. And people--you know, that's part of the reason why David wanted to sing with us. You know, because he would come to our show, and then the women--oh man, the girls, whenever they heard about wherever we were performing, they would be there. Speaker 1: So you considered Paul a natural dancer pretty much? He was--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So he was able to impart the steps to you all? Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Paul was--to have not had any technical teaching, you know. It was just an innate God-given thing. Story_ID: 442904 Speaker 1: So, now '65 [1965], you've got--we have those two songs, "The Way You Do the Things you Do," and 'My Girl' is coming (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let me tell you about 'My Girl,' how that came about. We were appearing at The 20 Grand [Detroit, Michigan], and Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] came to see us, because we had 'The Way You Do the Things You Do,' 'I'll be in Trouble,' 'Girl, Why You Want to Make me Blue?' And then at that time we did a medley of songs for various other artists. And David was singing 'In the Board--' 'Under the Boardwalk,' and each one of us did our bit. And after the show Smokey came backstage and said, "Man, you guys are fantastic, marvelous. I love you." And he looked at David [David Ruffin] and he said, "I think I have a song for you." So David said, "Hey, man, bring it on. We'll sing anything." So both groups, Smokey and The Miracles and The Temps [The Temptations], we had to go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and appear at the Apollo together, and Smokey was headlining. And in between shows, Smokey and Ronnie White [Ronald White], who was one of the writers, they would rehearse us, you know, show us the background and the melody. So, okay, we did that. And then after the show we flew back to Detroit [Michigan], went in the studio and we recorded 'My Girl.' And when we finished putting the vocals on, I said, "Okay, I like it." But when Paul Riser, as I often would say, when Paul Riser added the strings and the horns to 'My Girl,' I told Smokey in the studio, I said, "I don't know how big a record this is going to be, but," I said, "this is going to be a big record." Man, when they released that, which was the 27th or the 28th of December, 1964--1965 of February we were at the Apollo Theater, and I have it today in my house; Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] sent a telegram congratulating us. We were number one, and sold over a million records. And The Beatles also sent us a congratulations telegram, which I have also. And, you know, and from that point on all the way up to today--in fact, I just heard 'My Girl' coming here. We had been so ingrained with that song, that when 'My Girl' had sold over a million and went to number one, they said, "Okay, let's take it out of the lineup." Man, whatever show that was that we didn't do 'My Girl,' the audience went off. They called us every name except a child of God. That is the song, regardless of what repertoire we might have, or lineup. That song is a mainstay. We cannot take that song out of the lineup, so-- Speaker 1: Well, let's go a little deeper into 'My Girl.' Because from another standpoint, a musical standpoint, there's a famous something--now, and a lot of people might not think about this, and I want to get your take on this. Al White [sic.] put down the guitar lick on that, the front-- Speaker 2: (Imitates guitar riff) Oh, Robert White. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, Robert White, the guitar lick. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: The guitar lick. That's probably one of the most famous instrumental introductions to any song, and people automatically know. What did he do? I mean, did he realize how big that was when he put that lick down? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. You know, they were just being musicians that would do, you know, the thing that they were hired for. And if they-- Now, The Funk Brothers would always come up with a plus, you know. The producer would say, "Okay, this is the song. Here's how it goes." And once they got the concept and the track, then they would start adding those other little colors to it. But yeah, that, and you got to give credit to Jamerson (imitates bass line) (imitates guitar riff). Yeah, so those two, yeah, are very identifiable for that song (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, you were there in the studio. A lot of times, like, you know, with the advent of the electronic instruments--but if I was correct, I heard Jamerson used to play a lot of that stuff on the upright bass. Speaker 2: That he played on it. But let me tell you this. When I first became aware of James Jamerson, through Johnnie Mae Matthews, he was playing on our first record, 'Come On.' The brother came to Johnnie Mae's house. And when I saw him coming down Lawton [Street], he had an upright on his back, and he'd strapped it on. And you're right, at the beginning he was known for playing the upright. But the riffs and the things that that brother would put in there, it just amazed the world. Speaker 1: I don't think people realize how--that he wasn't just an electric bass player. He was-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he was up there. Speaker 1: --a well-rounded bass player. Speaker 2: Yeah, well-rounded. Story_ID: 442905 Speaker 1: So now '64 [1964], '65 [1965], you all are doing big, because these records are going through now. But now this little boy who comes to Motown [Motown Records] too now, around this time. Isn't he--a young man, a young man coming through with a harmonica comes around. Speaker 2: Stevie Wonder. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that experience. Speaker 2: Well, I heard that Ronnie White [Ronald White] of The Miracles brought him, and was very impressed. Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] and them were very impressed with the talent--that musician thing, you know, the harmonica. And then he could play drums and keyboard. So, he was a multi-talented guy from the beginning. And Stevie, when we all toured together on the Motortown Revue tours. You know, after you do those shows, you know, you want to get in your chair and sit on the bus and try and get some sleep for the next night. Sure, Stevie would be in the back of the bus with whatever instrument at the time that he could find. And little did we know, Stevie was woodshedding, as far as learning different instruments and getting his chops together to write his own songs. So somebody hollered out, "Stevie, shut that damn noise up. Man, we need to get some sleep." You know, we laughed and got on him, but little did we know, Little Stevie Wonder was becoming very proficient at being one of the greats of songwriting. Speaker 1: So, Stevie was doing that. Who else was there at this time on this review? It was The Temptations, Stevie Wonder-- Speaker 2: Oh, Stevie Wonder, The Marvelettes, The Supremes, The Contours, it could be anybody. Speaker 1: The Supremes, was Diana Ross with this group? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, at the time, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, no, they were together at that time, yeah. Speaker 1: How about Marvin Gaye? Was he there yet? Speaker 2: Marvin was--yeah, he was coming into the fold, yeah. Yeah, Marvin was there, because he had hits before we even got out there, you know. So, Marvin would be on the tour. A lot of times they would have different lineups, you know, of the Motown artists. But there were times when we all would be together on a show, yeah. Speaker 1: So, how--so how were things financially now for you? Are things getting better as far as everybody's personal finances are concerned? Speaker 2: Oh, well, at that time we were making consistent money. You know, I remember we'd get off our Henry Wynn--Motown tour and get on a Henry Wynn tour [Henry Wynn's Supersonic Attractions]. We'd finish the Henry Wynn tour, and we would get on an Irvin Feld tour. We'd finish the Irvin Feld tour and then we'd get on the Cavalcade of Stars [Motown's Cavalcade of Stars]. I mean, it was almost back to back to back. We were young, you know, so yeah, we would energize, re-energize ourselves enough to do that. Because each tour would be like a month long, a month and a half long, you know. So were working consistently, and we were getting, you know, royalty checks, you know. Our royalty rate at the time was next to nothing, but you know, we weren't realizing the royalty checks anywhere, you know, even though there's always room for improvement. But I've since learned that you have to earn to get those big royalty rates, you know. But we did receive royalty checks. Story_ID: 442906 Speaker 1: So now you have television shows like Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show']-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you're playing those kind of shows-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and doing things. Tell us now about some of the other icons. Let's talk about for instance Diana Ross and [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves. There's two girl groups there. How was that getting, how was that working out? Speaker 2: Well, it worked out well. You know, it's still a competitive thing, and whoever the producer or the songwriter felt would do the best song--the concept of what they hear, as far as song-wise for whatever artist, that's who the song would go to. Or Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] would say, "I think The Supremes should do this." Holland-Dozier-Holland was doing both groups. I mean, because Holland-Dozier and them are doing the early hits of Martha and The Vandellas, and then later on in '64 [1964], they started doing The Supremes and 'Where Did Our Love Go?' and The Supremes didn't look back. So, it was just whoever the song would fit, you know. Speaker 1: There's been about, you know, Berry having his--having his affinity towards Diana. Did you all see anything like that, and wonder like, "What's going on? Why is she getting special treatment? And--" Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, we didn't. Well, with The Temps [The Temptations], we were too busy doing our own thing to worry about, well, how come Berry's doing that. And I guess Berry just could hear another commerciality in Diana more so then. Because see, Florence [Florence Ballard], Florence could go. Florence could sing. She had another kind of thing in her voice, because they used to do 'Night and Day,' by Ray Charles. And then Margie Hendricks part, (singing) "The night time is the right time," when Margie Hendricks would come in and do her bit, Florence could eat that up. Because we used to do shows back then, and when she would come in with that, (singing) "Baby," oh Lord, them people would go crazy. So Florence had those kind of chops, but Berry just heard another kind of commercial thing that he felt as though Diana would carry it off. Story_ID: 442907 Speaker 1: Motown's [Motown Records] growing now. The sound is getting, and there's a sound developing, the Motown sound. Now, now, when people talk about the Motown sound, do you think that--and you mentioned, you alluded to it that it had a lot to do with The Funk Brothers, too, don't you think during that time period? Speaker 2: You know, it-- Speaker 1: There seems to be a formula that was there. Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know, like I've been, like I said a lot of times, it's hard to really say. It was just one of those things that evolved, you know. Everybody added their contribution for the development of the Motown sound. Holland-Dozier [Holland-Dozier-Holland], you hear a lot of people say Holland-Dozier was responsible. Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] was just as responsible. The Funk Brothers, Norman Whitfield. You know, I just can't isolate and say, "Yeah, The Funk Brothers." Yeah, they laid the tracks and what have you, but you had the engineers that knew how to capture a certain sound and things. So, it's just a potpourri of things that happened for the Motown sound to develop, so-- Speaker 1: How about Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy]? Did he have a certain sound he was trying to get, and he kind of kept it--how much creative input did he actually put in? Speaker 2: Well, Berry, he had a lot of creative input, because he'll tell you himself. He's a creative person before he had to become a businessperson. You know, but he knew what he wanted in his songs--you know, a strong, heavy, thick bass with a tambourine, you know. So they had a definitive kind of thing. But, you know, we were just kind of like shooting in the dark. And as time would have it, it developed into becoming a Motown sound. Because you know, when I would be out on the road you could hear the Stax [Stax Records] sound, you would hear the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] sound, and you would hear other labels. But when Motown came, you said, "Oh, yeah, that's Motown right there." Speaker 1: You knew exactly. Speaker 2: No question about it. Speaker 1: Now, through the years, there had been things called race music, and the music was different; it was primarily black music. When did you notice now that maybe your music was starting to cross over, the Motown sound, into other circles? Whereas the main--now everybody is listening. Speaker 2: Oh, sure. That started back during the '60s [1960s], you know. Because all before then, like I say, when I was growing up, and when I moved to Detroit [Michigan], you know, I started hearing 'Annie Had a Baby' with Hank Ballard and The Midnighters, and what have you. But it wasn't getting that mass exposure, you know, like on a pop station like what we got later on, you know. But I must give credit to first and foremost God, for letting Motown come along at that point and time. And then The Beatles were very instrumental in helping black music become acceptable on a wide basis. Because I never will forget, I heard them being interviewed, The Beatles being interviewed. And the guy said, "Well, where do you guys get your inspiration? I mean, who inspired y'all to want to be singers and songwriters?" And they said, "We listen to the James Browns, the Little Richards, and the Motown sound." And it seemed like when they said that about the black--those artists and the company, it seemed like white America just opened up. "Oh, wow, if The Beatles listen to them, let us check it out as well." So a lot of it, you know, I would say that they kind of opened the door for Motown, as far as greater acceptance. But Motown's music was not to be denied. I mean, it was just sort of those kind of times where Motown's music was just knocking down doors, because the songs and the whole embodiment of what Motown was doing, far as producing and writing the songs, was just something that had to be accepted. Story_ID: 442908 Speaker 1: Now, at this time, '65 [1965] and between--we'll say between '65 [1965] and '67 [1967], you had a lot. You had 'Get Ready,' 'Ain't Too Proud to Beg,' all those. 'Skin Deep' ['Beauty Is Only Skin Deep'], 'I Know I'm Losing You' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: All those hits came out pretty quick, in a short-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --in a short period. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now during that time period, also there's a lot of stuff going on racially, like the Watts riots-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and things are going on. How is this affecting you when you go around the country? What's going on with the--? Speaker 2: Oh, well, we were faced with certain confrontations of black and white. I never will forget, we were on our tour bus, and we wanted to stop and eat, you know, in my great state, Texas. We walked in there to get something to order, something to eat, and the guy said, "We don't serve niggers." So, somebody said, "Yeah, and we don't eat them." You know, but still and yet, we couldn't get anything. So we had to get back on the bus and go down the road and try to find a place that would serve us. The restrooms, we couldn't use the restrooms. So-- Speaker 1: This is in the mid-'60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, the '60s [1960s], during the mid-'60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Down south was still the same way? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. And had to find--go to bus--go down the road, and everybody had to go in the bushes and do what they had to do. Speaker 1: And this is the great Temptations, still have to be, to put up with this. Speaker 2: Well, not only The Temptations. That was all the Motown acts, any black act back during that time. Yeah, so it wasn't just--yeah. We were in--I'm trying to think where it is. I think it's the place where Daniel Boone was from. And we-- Speaker 1: Virginia or somewhere. Speaker 2: Yeah. And we stayed at the Daniel Boone Hotel. But anyway the Four Tops was on the show, we were together. And Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson], it might have been Smokey. Anyway, it was a Motown setup. And it was racial tension, so much so that when the Tops was on stage, The Temps were standing in the wings, and we had clubs and bats and whatever. And when we went on, the Tops would stand in the wings with whatever. So if anybody jumped up there, you know, it was going to be a mess, I tell you. And then when we got back to the hotel and we were packing our bus, some white guys came by, (imitates gunshots) and everybody dropped to the ground. And luckily none of us, the Tops and the Motown, the other Motown acts, were hit. But little did I know, Motown acts were carrying guns, because they came up with guns. And so if they had come back around, boy, somebody would have seriously been hurt. So, yeah, we had our moments down there. We were in Columbia, South Carolina, and there's a rope that was down the center of this auditorium, blacks on one side, whites on the other side. Speaker 1: And what year was this, about? Speaker 2: Oh, it was '65 [1965]. Yeah, '65 [1965], '64 [1964] thereabout. We came back that next year and the rope was gone. And we were singing, and luckily we were sweating so, that had it not been for the sweat, you would have seen our tears, because we were crying just to see what music could do to bring people together. Story_ID: 442791 Speaker 1: So there was racial--racial tension still going on in '66 [1966], but The Temptations are growing, the t- the country has a different climate. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Vietnam is starting to come in. Speaker 2: Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was making his move. Campuses were having their ups and downs, because they were protesting the Vietnam War. They didn't like the curriculum; blacks wanted a better curriculum in colleges. Speaker 1: The women were having (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Women's lib [liberation] was strong, you know, because they had the attitude of, "Anything you can do, I can do better. Pay me the same thing you would pay a man. Don't discriminate because I'm a woman," which I wholeheartedly agree with, you know. So, it was--I mean, you could sit at home and see, you could see world leaders get killed right on TV. So it was very--I often say the '60s [1960s] were the most tumultuous decade in the last hundred years. And from the '60s [1960s], a lot of those ideologies we're living from today were spawned from the '60s [1960s]. Because it just changed everything, you know, far as views and attitudes, and accepting--and won't accepting this and that. The Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] were making their moves. Very crazy times, but through all that, great music was being woven through all that to soothe the troubled soul. Speaker 1: Motown [Motown Records] was doing good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Stax [Stax Records] was doing good. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Everybody had their labels--the Philadelphia sound. Speaker 2: Well, you know, like a guy told me a few weeks ago, you know, we were talking about the shape of our country now, about being in a recession. And he said, "What do you do?" I said, "Well, I sing. I'm in show business." He said, "Well, one thing I must say, what you do is recession-proof." He said, "People need to be entertained or get away from whatever, you know, to escape some of their woes." And I said, "You know what? I've noticed that through my career," because we've been doing it for forty-seven years, you know. I said, "I notice that." And he said, "Yeah, people are going to find a way to be entertained, or, or kind of escape whatever they're going through." And a lot of truth is in that. Story_ID: 442792 Speaker 1: So you're going through and everybody's--all this is happening. Now, in '67 [1967] in Detroit [Michigan], a terrible thing happened. There's a big riot-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Detroit. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, Motown [Motown Records] is--was located right in the middle of it. Speaker 2: Man, let me tell you. I was out that night, and I started to go up to the Chit Chat Lounge [Detroit, Michigan]. And something said, "Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], you need to go home," and I went home to my apartment. I mean, I hadn't got into my apartment a half hour at max, and all of a sudden hell broke loose. Speaker 1: Do you recall what the catalyst was for that? What the riots started about? Speaker 2: No, I really don't. I just knew, I guess it was something that was slowly building within the black community, and--but it started right up there on 12th [Street], near the Chit Chat Lounge. Speaker 1: Which is now called Rosa Parks Boulevard. Speaker 2: Right. And I stayed right around the corner at La Salle Gardens North [North La Salle Gardens]. And Aretha Franklin lived right around the corner from me on La Salle Boulevard. Speaker 1: And didn't [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy have a house on the corner there? Later on maybe he had a-- Speaker 2: Berry's-- Speaker 1: --pretty nice house on the corner. Speaker 2: Berry's house--no, that was over on Boston [Boulevard]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, on Boston Boulevard. But I don't know what started it, but it got ugly. And the girlfriend that I was seeing at the time, we had to jump, lay on the floor, because the tanks were shooting. Man, I said, "Man, if this is what war sounds like, I'm glad I didn't make it." You know, because you could hear those tanks shooting those machine guns, and all kinds of things were happening. And the next day when I got up to go to the store, I saw the National Guard, and everything was just-- Speaker 1: Looting had been going on. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, some uniforms we never got again, never saw again. Because the cleaners we put our stuff in, looted, and the uniforms were long since gone. Speaker 1: Somebody's out there now with a Temptations [The Temptations] outfit (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, what, forty-something years later. Speaker 1: So, so, the riots--now, how did that affect the morale of the--because all around there was the headquarters of Motown. Now, how did that affect the morale of--? Speaker 2: It changed, it changed. I mean we tried to keep up a strong front, but you know, just to see our city demoralized the way it had become, it just never was the same. You know, because all prior to that, you know, man, I loved Detroit, which I still do. But back then, we just would ride around and just be in love with the vibe that Detroit was, you know, having at that time. So, we would ride around after the riot, you know, and just, houses just sitting up there just decaying. Story_ID: 442793 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, Motown [Motown Records] had a studio. You all had your own in-house studio over there. Hitsville [Hitsville U.S.A., Detroit, Michigan] had its own, it's a museum [Motown Museum, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Motown had two studios. Speaker 1: Right. But you didn't have to go out to record. You already had--Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] had set it up so you could record-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, we had to go out to get to the studio-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --as far as the one on West Grand Boulevard. And then we had one on Davison [Avenue]. Speaker 1: But I'm saying Motown owned their own studio at that point? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, around '67 [1967], Norman Whitfield comes into play. Tell me about that situation, when Norman Whitfield becomes full production--now, what was he doing prior to this? Speaker 2: Producing and writing his own--see, I told you earlier that Norman and myself go all the way back to when we were at Motown--at Johnnie Mae Matthews. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was the tambourine player for Popcorn Wylie and The Mohawks [Popcorn and The Mohawks]. And then I heard after Popcorn and The Mohawks disbanded or whatever, he went over to Thelma Records, and he was writing and producing, because Richard Street was over there with Thelma Records, which was Berry's first wife. And he was writing and producing, and I think Berry must have bought Thelma Records out or whatever. And then, next thing you know, Norman was part of Motown. And he was writing and producing, because he did some earlier stuff on us, it just didn't click, but great song, you know. But, and that competitive thing is what made everybody excel, because Norman really started flourishing with us in '60s [1960s]--I think it was about '66 [1966], or '67 [1967]. We recorded 'Get Ready' with Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson], and Smokey had a string of hits on us. And during the course of it, Norman had recorded 'Ain't Too Proud to Beg.' And Norman has always been a very aggressive kind of personality and, you know, he would stay up in Berry's face, "Man, I got this song, I got this song. You know, you got to hear it; you got to release it." So one day I had the pleasure of standing there listening at Smokey, and Berry, and Norman. And Berry had to make a very interesting decision. He said, "Okay, here's what I'll do. I'm going to go with Smokey, because he's had a string of hits," talking about 'Get Ready.' He said, "So, I'm going to release 'Get Ready,' Norman. But if 'Get Ready' don't make the top ten, you got the next release." And 'Get Ready' did well, but it didn't crack the top ten nationally, and Norman got the release of 'Ain't Too Proud to Beg.' And we went from, what's that, '66 [1966], '67 [1967], all the way up until about '91 [1991], yeah, when our last big hit with Norman was 'Papa Was a Rollin' Stone.' But our huge hit--well, 'Papa' was a huge hit, because we got two Grammys [Grammy Award]. But 'Just My Imagination,' which was Eddie Kendrick's last song with Temps [The Temptations]. So we had a great run with Norman, a great run. Speaker 1: And he became pretty much the head producer at Motown. After a while he became the top producer for a while? Speaker 2: Yeah, because at that time--well, Smokey's always been Smokey, you know, as far as his hits. But Holland-Dozier-Holland, you know, they decided to leave. And so, there was a void. So Norman, through it all, you know, Norman and us; and then Norman and Undisputed Truth [The Undisputed Truth]; and Norman with Edwin Starr; and Norman with Marvin Gaye. You know, so he was, as he would tell me and others, he's keeping the lights on at Motown (laughter). Story_ID: 442794 Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968] now comes around, now Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is assassinated, but also, David Ruffin gets fired by The Temptations. What happened with that? Speaker 2: Well, you know, at the beginning David was a wonderful talent, you know, a wonderful spirited person, you know. We got along real good. But you know, like I always say, success can either make you or break you. And David, us having so many hits with David, you know, I guess he felt this little--at some point and time that he should have it David Ruffin and The Temptations. Because, you know, Diana went to Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] and they started calling them Diana Ross and The Supremes. So, we had a meeting down in San Juan, Puerto Rico when Don Foster was our then manager. And we had to let David know that under no circumstances was there going to be any David Ruffin and The Temps. Because Eddie [Eddie Kendricks] had hits, Paul [Paul Williams] had hits, Melvin [Melvin Franklin] was doing some leads, you know. I was about the only one that wasn't doing anything, but still yet we weren't going to--let me say that I was the only one that wasn't doing any leading, you know, in a real sense, but we weren't going to start having the group called David Ruffin and The Temps. So it started to become a slow progression of David's ego kept getting bigger and bigger, to the point--what made us decide to let David go, we were in Cleveland, Ohio at the Versailles Hotel [Versailles Motor Inn, Cleveland, Ohio]. And it's a club at the top of this here hotel. And Dennis, I mean David, sent a guy named Ronnie [ph.] to tell Paul, Eddie, Melvin, and myself, "David said you guys hold it down. He'll be back tomorrow to finish out the show. He's going to go and see this girl open up at the Cherry Hill casino, the Latin casino, I mean, in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, the Latin Casino." And that's when we said, "We got to let David go, you know," because he was dating one of Dean Martin's daughters. So that's, that's what made us, you know, decide to let David go. Speaker 1: And up until this point, you all hadn't had any problems with who sung lead and none of that kind of stuff? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It was always, it kind of just worked itself out, because whatever the song--? Speaker 2: The guys that would write and produce it, they would be very matter-of-fact about who they would want to sing the lead. And Norman would come with whatever he thought was good, you know, 'Ain't Too Proud to Beg,' and 'I'm Losing You.' And then he would turn around and do 'You're My Everything' with Eddie. Or Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] would come, you know, with his. So, they were very matter-of-fact who they would want to sing the lead. Paul would sing lead on 'Don't Look Back,' that Smokey would write. You know, so it was just that kind of thing that was happening. Speaker 1: Now you, you were--did you consider yourself an anchor? Because you didn't necessarily sing lead, but your role has been very important. What did you consider--you never had a problem with any of this-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --as far as--? Speaker 2: My thing was as long as we stayed as a group--because we were all getting the same money. It wasn't like because I wasn't singing lead they were getting more money than me. Now, that wasn't happening, and I would have raised up then, you know, because of me, you know, holding it together. And all the greats there, Berry Gordy, Cholly Atkins, Maurice King, Lon Fontaine, Harvey Fuqua, my manager Shelly Berger said, "You're the glue. You're the glue." They said, "Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], if it wasn't for you, The Temps would have been through a long time ago, and wouldn't even be around today." And I reflect back on all that's been said, and I say, "Well, I guess God said, 'This is the role, Otis, that you must play.'" And I'm happy, because I'm doing what I love, you know, and-- Speaker 1: And you're still here. Speaker 2: And I'm still here. Story_ID: 442795 Speaker 1: Now in the late '60s [1960s], you all started getting really kind of political with some of the music. 'Cloud Nine,' Run-- 'Run Away Child' ['Run Away Child, Running Wild'] 'Psychedelic Shack.' Speaker 2: 'Message from a Black Man.' Speaker 1: 'Ball of Confusion' ['Ball of Confusion (That's What the World Is Today)']. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now who, who, who were the writers of these tunes? Speaker 2: Norman Whitfield and Barry Strong [Barrett Strong]. And a lot of people, when we did 'Cloud Nine,' people were thinking that we were talking about getting high. Norman and Barry didn't get high, you know, and they wrote and produced the song. How that came about, we were influenced with--as far as 'Cloud Nine' is concerned, by Sly and the Family Stone, because they had just come out with 'Dance to the Music.' Speaker 1: And music was changing again, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: I mean, from the time period of '60 [1960] to about '66 [1966]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In '67 [1967], you all had a very strong Motown sound. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, Jimi Hendrix, Sly Stone, things were changing. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. How did that happen? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, psychedelic soul started coming in. Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff], [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble and myself have always been friends. And we were in New York City [New York, New York] at the time, and we were at the Warwick Hotel [Warwick New York Hotel] in New York City. And Kenny and myself, we were talking about the record business, you know, like we always do when we got together. And as we were talking, we heard this here, (singing) "Dance to the music." And when they broke down, (scatting) I stopped and I said, "Who is that?" I said, "Now, that's different." Kenny said, "Yeah, that's interesting, very different." I said, "Well, I like that. That's different." And I went back to Detroit [Michigan] and I asked Norman had he heard of Sly and the Family Stone. And Norman said, "No, no, I ain't heard that." I said, "You need to check it out, man." I said, "That might be something we need to go and do." Now at that time, it was a very ticklish time, because we were coming off of 'Please Return Your Love' ['Please Return Your Love to Me], which was a beautiful ballad. We were losing David Ruffin, enter Dennis Edwards. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when Dennis came in the group, when we did 'Cloud Nine.' So, we went out of town and then-- Speaker 1: How did you meet Dennis, real quick, and then we can-- Speaker 2: Well, Dennis was very popular. He used to be with The Contours, and then after he left them, he had his own group called Dennis Edwards and The Firebirds. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he would work different clubs throughout the City of Detroit. Speaker 1: So you all had your ear to the ground on who was who? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, we watched Dennis when we were--Eddie [Eddie Kendricks] and myself in particular watched Dennis. We were at the Howard Theatre in Washington, D.C., and we watched him from the stage. And Eddie and myself said, "That's who we should get," because Dennis is tall, nice-looking, and could sing his behind off. And so we told Motown [Motown Records], we said, "That's who we would like to get." So, we made that transition, recorded 'Cloud Nine,' and for about oh, I guess about a week and a half, maybe two--you know, in most cases when we would release a record, it would be instant action; it would just--but this time it was like, "What are The Temps doing? What kind of--?" So we were saying, "Oh, my god, did we make an error?" And all of a sudden, took off, and went and sold over a million. And we have a Grammy [Grammy Award], our first Grammy; the first Grammy for Motown, first Grammy for The Temptations. And after that, 'Runaway Child' ['Runaway Child, Running Wild'] and-- Speaker 1: And you all, you all were probably one of the only groups that really made that psychedelic transition from Motown-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at that point. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And across the music scene, other people were doing it, too. Like Miles Davis was recording some other kind of stuff now at that point-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because I think that was influencing a lot of people across the board. Speaker 2: Sure, yeah. Story_ID: 442796 Speaker 1: In '68 [1968], '69 [1969], now also now another little boy and his brothers come to Motown [Motown Records] out of Gary, Indiana. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Tell us about that situation. Speaker 2: Well, you know, we had heard about Michael [Michael Jackson] and the Jacksons [The Jackson 5], you know, before they came to Motown. And they said, "Man, you should see this little boy and his brothers." Boy, you know, and then when I saw him, it made me think of Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers, you know, as far as Michael being able to sing his little behind off and then dance, you know. So, when we met him up at the studio in Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 1: What year would this have been? About what? Speaker 2: That would have been about like '68 [1968], '69 [1969] thereabout. And they were in the process of, you know, getting ready to record. And man, the next thing you know, when they released, what is that? Speaker 1: 'ABC,' 'I Want you Back'? Speaker 2: No, 'I Want you Back,' yeah. It was, the sky is the limit. And man, we had the pleasure of being on the stage together when Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Jesse L. Jackson] had Operation PUSH [Rainbow/PUSH] and he was based in Chicago [Illinois]. So, The Jackson Five and The Temps [The Temptations], we did the show. And it was, those people were in there. And when we were finishing up our songs, both groups were on the stage together for the thank you's and the bow. Boy, the girls came for both groups. And somebody said, "We're going to have to get them out of here in a U-Haul, because the limousine ain't going to--they'll turn the limousine over." So they put the five of us and the five of the Jacksons, plus a security guard, in this here big U-Haul truck, and they got us in there and they closed the door. And I never will forget. I can hear Michael talking about, "Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], where's Otis? Where's Otis?" And cut the light on, and I said, "I'm here, Michael. I'm right here." And he gave that little boy look, like, "Okay, you know, all right." And I never will forget it. It touched my heart, the way he was so concerned. Speaker 1: He was concerned about everybody being on the thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And I said, "Wow, Michael, Michael." So yeah, one of a kind talent. Speaker 1: So, when you first saw him perform, were you amazed? Because if we look at all the clips, it's really amazing to see. Speaker 2: Oh, he's like a little old man in a boy's body, you know. And the amazing thing about Michael--like when I listen to him sing 'Who's Loving You,' and he did that rift and those little runs and minor notes, I said, see, now young kids--that little boy has been--well, he's a natural. Because when he did that run on the end of 'Who's Loving You,' I said, "Oh, that's a Jackie Wilson, Sam Cooke, David Ruffin kind of riff." So, you know, he's an exceptional singer now, you know. I mean even the great Frankie Lymon, if I recall, I don't remember hear him hitting any rifts like what I heard with Michael. Speaker 1: And it was natural for him. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was natural for Michael. Speaker 1: Very natural. And they were well-behaved kids when you saw them around Motown family? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Joe Jackson I guess had really put the discipline thing in them real good. Story_ID: 442797 Speaker 1: So in 1970 you all do a greatest hits record, which is only about five years after the hits had come through. So you all were able to put together a greatest hits record, 'Temptations Greatest Hits, Volume'--oh, Volume II ['Greatest Hits II']. So you had one before? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: You had it, you had it early. You all were putting it out and then-- Speaker 2: Oh, see, back during those days Motown [Motown Records] would release--shoot, man, it was nothing for Motown to release at least two to three singles, and sometimes two albums a year, at least. Speaker 1: So, it didn't take long to have a greatest hits record? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You'd do it pretty quickly. Speaker 2: Yeah, because they were dropping them on us, you know, back to back. I mean, within every three to four months we'd have a single coming out. So it was great. Speaker 1: So in '71 [1971], Eddie Kendricks leaves. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about that, why he left. Speaker 2: Eddie just had a feeling that he wanted to go out on his own. And he had mentioned it a few years--and I guess at the time I couldn't understand it. He said, "Well, I don't want to leave the group. I just want to do my own thing, you know." And I said, "I'm not fancying doing that, Eddie." You know, because I thought if, okay, if he gets a single out, an album out, then he'd sure enough leave us, and this is when we were really hot. So, I guess it was just something that was meant to happen, you know, and he became very disenchanted. And the last time we worked together before he came back and when we did that reunion thing, we did 'Just My Imagination.' And I said at that time when we recorded for Norman, our sessions would start at seven o'clock or eight o'clock in the evening. Man, you would not walk out of that studio from a Norman Whitfield session until the next morning, one song. And so after we laid the background on that, then Eddie stayed. And when I talked with Eddie the next morning, I said, "So, what time did you get out?" He said, "Man, I didn't get out of there until about eight or nine o'clock this morning." I said, "Jesus Christ, Eddie." He said, "Yeah." But you know, 'Just My Imagination' went through the roof. And there again, I often wonder what happened to Jerry Long, the arranger. Because when I heard the strings put on that, I said, "Oh, my God. Whoever did the strings, it sounds like a movie theme." (Imitates guitar riff). Man, the next thing you know, that record went through the roof. But we did a Ed Sullivan Show ['The Ed Sullivan Show'], and that was the last one we did with Eddie. And when I look at it now--because I have Ed Sullivan's productions. They sent us years ago all of the times we were on Ed Sullivan, and they showed this clip with us singing "Just My Imagination," and I look at it and you can see the unhappiness. Because Eddie was singing "Just My Imagination," and no kind of thing-- Speaker 1: No kind of expression? Speaker 2: No kind. Just, "Yeah, I'm here, I'm going to sing it." And Paul [Paul Williams] at that time was, you know, fighting his alcohol thing. So, we were fragmented. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, the whole bands and things are on the road. Now, was [HistoryMaker] H. B. Barnum a part of that at that point, as far as live performances? Did he go out and arrange? Or who is-- Speaker 2: No, he never did arrange. Speaker 1: Who did the band arrangements live when you all--? Speaker 2: Oh, well, we had our own, like Maurice King would do it. Or either Cornelius Grant would-- Speaker 1: Okay, Cornelius, yeah. Speaker 2: Johnny Allen, you know. So, we had our-- Speaker 1: A lot of different directors, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they would be from within Motown, you know. Speaker 1: After Eddie Kendricks left, who did you all get to replace him? Speaker 2: A guy by the name of Damon Harris, yeah. Speaker 1: And did he stay with the group for a while? Speaker 2: Oh, he was there for about three, maybe four years. Speaker 1: And Richard Street came in also? Speaker 2: Richard Street came in, I would say '68 [1968], '69 [1969] thereabout, when Paul was really, his health started deteriorating. And we let Richard in back during that time-- Story_ID: 442798 Speaker 1: And then in '72 [1972], 'Papa Was a Rollin' Stone.' Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us about that hit. Speaker 2: 'Papa Was a Rollin' Stone' almost didn't get recorded because we were tired of the psychedelic stuff, you know. We wanted to get back to the ballads, you know, and--because our fans being out there--and I would come back, and Norman [Norman Whitfield] and myself always would have a great rapport about what we should do or shouldn't do, and what have you. And our fans would say, "Well, when are you guys going to come back to 'My Girl' and 'Since I Lost my Baby'?" They said, "The psych is all right, but we're getting tired of that sound." So, I would let Norman know, and so when he recorded 'Papa,' I said, "Oh, another one, Norman?" He said, "Man, I promise you. I promise you this is a hit," you know. So, it was a verbal confrontation between The Temps [The Temptations], and Norman, and the studio. So anyway to get on over with, we went in and recorded it. And we had to fly to Hawaii and do some dates. And then from Hawaii, along the way we had to come into Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], because at that time, they used to have what they called the disc jockey's convention all over different parts of the country. And-- Speaker 1: Like the Jack the Rapper and stuff? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, all the notables would be--you know, Columbia [Columbia Records] and Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Records], all the biggies of the record companies, would gather and they would talk about various productions, and what--and they would seminars on what route the business was going to go in. But every suite I would go in and come out of, they were playing 'Papa Was a Rollin' Stone.' I said, "Wait a minute. Let me go outside and look at this. That says Warner Brothers. Okay, I go to CBS." At CBS, 'Papa Was a Rollin' Stone.' All the majors were playing 'Papa Was a Rollin' Stone.' And the next thing you know, over a million copies, two Grammys [Grammy Awards]. So, yeah, it was a wonderful time. Story_ID: 442799 Speaker 1: Were there any--did--did you all have any competition? Anybody, any group, male group, that was directly trying to overshadow The Temptations? How about the Four Tops? Because they were at the same label with you all. How was that? Speaker 2: Oh, it was healthy competition, you know. The Tops, I mean, to stand there and sing that beautiful four-part harmony like The Four Freshmen or The Hi-Lo's, you know, they were untouchable, you know. So, but, and then the great voice of Levi Stubbs, oh, yeah. You know, so they were fantastic, you know, they would keep it healthy, as far as giving us comp-, but hey, the thing that we had, we had another kind of uniqueness. We had that one microphone, and we walked up there with the four heads on it. And then the suits and, you know (dances), all that. Speaker 1: It was a show. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. And then after while they'd be talking about, "Who was that group before The Temps came along?" Because it was all Temps, you know, after that. So I mean, I don't take anything from anybody, but I must say when I reflect back on us--and I love, you know, The Moonglows, Frankie and Teenagers [Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers], and The Cadillacs, and The Flamingos. But I must say The Temps had, we had our own setting, you know. Speaker 1: I mean, so, it was great vocals. Like The O'Jays had great vocalists and stuff-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But the show, the entity of The Temptations became a national entity. Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody I hear, they were talking about, "Boy, we wanted to be like The Temps. We had our own group of The Temps, you know." So yeah, it was just a unique bunch of guys that I had. Speaker 1: Would you say that The Temps were as unique as a group as James Brown was as a solo artist? Speaker 2: I would, yes, I would. Speaker 1: Because every--each one had--people wanted to be The Temps, and they wanted to be James Brown. Speaker 2: Yeah. And see, we were-- Speaker 1: And Michael Jackson. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And what happened is we got caught in something that we didn't even really necessarily design. All of us were six-footers. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And we were all slim. Speaker 1: Which is really unique, for a group. Speaker 2: For a group, yeah. Because-- Speaker 1: Most musicians are short. Speaker 2: Short, or you know, a mismatch in height, you know, whatever. But no, all of us were six-footers and slim, you know. So, that added--and the disc jockeys started that. Because when we got together, we just wanted to sing. But the next thing you know, you start hearing disc jockeys, "Tall, tan, tempting, all six-footers. The Temptations." So, that just laid on through the years, you know. So, yeah. Story_ID: 442800 Speaker 1: So now Paul Williams left the group in what year? Speaker 2: Paul left I think around about like '71 [1971], '72 [1972]. Yeah, about '71 [1971], '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: And he died around the same time, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Paul told me that he was going to--he had been thinking about committing suicide. And I jumped all over him verbally, you know, because I had this group called Swiss Movement, and I had got a deal at RCA [RCA Records]. And Paul was still choreographing us, even though he wasn't in the group, because we wanted him to still feel a part of the group. So, as I'm playing 'Take a Chance on a Sure Thing' by Swiss Movement, he loved the track. He said, "Oh, man. Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], Otis, man, let me do that." I said, "Oh, Paul, I can't do that. This is RCA Victor's money for Swiss Movement." So he said, "Man, I don't know, man." He said, "You know, y'all, The Temps [The Temptations], are still recording. And now they're recording Eddie [Eddie Kendricks], and they're recording David [David Ruffin]." He said, "If Motown [Motown Records] don't do something for me, I've been thinking about killing myself." And boy, Melvin [Melvin Franklin] and myself jumped all over him verbally, "Don't do that, man." And you know, "We love you," you know. "You gonna be all right." We came to the hotel. We were in New York City [New York, New York], and Damon Harris had just got married. And I came back to the room and sat down and got a call. And that's when we were told that Paul Williams committed suicide. And-- Speaker 1: And back then, I guess people didn't know about, you know, referring people to therapists, and all-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because it was a different time period. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And how did that affect the group? Speaker 2: Oh, a piece of my heart was gone. Because Paul never harmed anybody. He did more harm to himself than anybody on the outside. So, to lose a wonderful person, aside from him being so talented, is just like a piece of my soul and heart was taken. Speaker 1: You think the alcohol--it was the alcohol and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, alcohol, yeah. Speaker 1: And just disappointment-- Speaker 2: And then the smoking. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, and I often tell people--you know, you hear a lot of people say, "Man, if I saw a ghost, I'd run asshole and elbows." Not necessarily the case. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm out on the road reading, and Paul came to the foot of the bed. And looked at me and said, "Otis, I'm all right where I am." And I'm sitting there, and I say, "That's Paul." And when he said what he said, he was gone just as quick as he came. And Eddie said, "Yeah, he came to me." And I said, "Wow." So, yeah, that was the last time I saw him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 442801 Speaker 1: So, '74 [1974], Edwards [Dennis Edwards] leaves the group also. He leaves, '75 [1975] Damon leaves the group, Damon Harris leaves the group. So you all are going through a transition period now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in the mid-'70s [1970s]. How does it--are things going up, or have things kind of leveled off to a plateau? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was like--one of the fortunate things for us, we've always had--when Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] owned Motown [Motown Records], he was very supportive of Melvin [Melvin Franklin] and myself, you know. He said, "Hey, you will always have, Motown will help you through your transitional thing." Because, so, we always had that support, and we always got some kind of sign from our fans that they still wanted us around, even though we were going through different personnel changes. Speaker 1: And the transition from Detroit [Michigan] to California. That happened about what year? Speaker 2: Oh, well. I moved here in '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. And Motown moved officially what year? Speaker 2: Oh, I would say about a year or two before that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because Berry started coming out here in the early '70s [1970s], because he wanted to get into movies and TV. And when he started coming out here, he would come out and he would stay. And there was a time when he would come out here and he would come back to Detroit, and he'd be in Detroit for a while. But it got to the point he started coming out here and then he was staying. Like we would say, "What? Berry's still in California? Man, when you bringing your behind on back here?" you know. Speaker 1: He liked it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And next thing you know, he bought a house up there in the Hills [Hollywood Hills, Los Angeles, California]. And so, little by little, everybody started, you know, moving out here, except for--the Four Tops stayed back, and Martha [HistoryMaker Martha Reeves], she moved out here for a while. But yeah, so The Temps [The Temptations] moved out here in '74 [1974]. I moved here in-- Story_ID: 442802 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, can you please give us your name? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Otis Clayborn Williams. Speaker 1: And we're finishing up an interview we started in April of this year [2008], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 442803 Speaker 1: We were, I think we left off in the mid-'70s [1970s], or the early '70s [1970s]. What was--I think the last time you discussed the--Eddie Kendricks leaving the group-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and the circumstances around that. Can you tell us who was in the group after Eddie Kendricks left? Speaker 2: Well, after Eddie Kendricks left, which I think was about like '71 [1971], Dennis Edwards was still in the group, Melvin Franklin. Richard Street had joined the group, and we had put in a young man named Damon Harris, and myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That unit was together up until like '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And '75 [1975], we had to let Damon Harris go, and then enter Glenn Leonard. So it was Dennis Edwards, Melvin Franklin, Richard Street, Glenn Leonard, and myself, and that unit was together up until '83 [1983] when we did The Temptations reunion. Speaker 1: Okay. Now already, by 1970, even into the-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. Then in '70 [1970]--so I can keep it chronically right--Louis Price joined the group, because Dennis Edwards left. And that was '76 [1976], '77 [1977], thereabout. And Louis Price was in the group up until like '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dennis came back into the group. So when Louis came in the group it was Louis Price, Richard Street, Melvin Franklin, and myself. Yeah, the five of us were that unit, and then when Louis left, enter Dennis Edwards--Glenn Leonard, Richard Street, Melvin, and myself. So many different guys get in, it's kind of hard to keep track of. And that unit was together--we did the reunion tour in '83 [sic. 1982], and that's when David Ruffin and Eddie Kendricks joined Dennis Edwards, Richard Street, Glenn Leonard, Melvin Franklin, and myself. Speaker 1: Okay. So, everybody came--some of them came back in '83 [1983] for the Reunion Tour? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. But now this happens to all--a lot of groups. Personnel leave and come and they go. But okay, can you tell us what some of the dynamics were, as to why people would leave something-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --as successful as The Temptations, you know? Speaker 2: Well, in all honesty, we were our own worst enemy. You know, we let things matter that shouldn't matter. You know, I mean truth be told, drugs was a big influence, you know, egos. And, you know, I mean I don't want to sit here and, you know, just slam-dunk nobody, but I mean truth be told, that was it. And sad to say, you know, it altered a lot of what we were doing, and our priorities got shifted and what have you. And so--but, you know, that was one of the prime reasons why we were going through changes, egos and drugs. Story_ID: 442804 Speaker 1: Now there's, I think in--even in the early s- late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], people started doing retrospectives on Motown [Motown Records] and the acts. I think there was a movie called 'Sparkle' that came out-- Speaker 2: Oh, I remember 'Sparkle.' Speaker 1: --in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was fictionalized, but it was supposed to, you know, reflect on, you know, something, things that were going on in Motown at some point. And that's what people, you know, said, that this was like the real story of The Supremes or this is, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, I saw 'Sparkle.' I can't remember exactly--I remember seeing it and hearing about it, but it's been so long ago. But ah, I think Motown was such a phenomenon, you know, that people would draw all kind of stories to make it seem like Motown. But from what I can remember of 'Sparkle,' there might have been some similarities, but not really the true fact of what was happening at Motown. Speaker 1: It didn't ring a bell, it was--for you? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. And subsequently, I think 'Dreamgirls' was based on, you know, 'Sparkle' or something like that. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they say that was, loosely. They seem like they lifted certain things, maybe from reading certain biographies and what have you about Motown. But, you know, that's part and parcel of what you have to deal with when you are with a company that has become so institutionalized and iconic and all that, like Motown. It's that people always want to draw, you know, fictionalize, you know, or think they're telling the story of what went on behind Motown. But that's what happens when you're part of something that has become so much of Americana, you know, like Mar- like Motown did. Story_ID: 442805 Speaker 1: What was The Temptations' status with Motown [Motown Records], in say, 1972? We interviewed, I think, [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves about four years ago, and she was just telling us how she sort of--Martha and The Vandellas just kind of--they came back to Detroit [Michigan] from a tour and found out that they weren't working for Motown anymore. You know, they just found out. Speaker 2: Oh, well, we didn't have that problem. Speaker 1: No, I know. Speaker 2: I guess each group, you know, has a different kind of story to tell about their existence at Motown. You know, it ebbed and flowed, you know. There were a lot of wonderful highs, speaking of--you know, not high, getting high--but wonderful highs as far as emotional and, you know, being very aggressive in the thing of what we wanted to do, singing, what have you. And there were some down sides, you know, which is, that's life, you know, in general, you know. But, you know, it's just something that we learned to accept, you know, because that's part of being in the business. Speaker 1: Yeah. How did you feel about the move from Detroit to California? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I was saddened, you know, because, you know, by starting out in Motown, and being such an influencing factor and loved in Detroit and what have you, you know, it was sad. You know, but, you know, Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] wanted to come to California and get into movies and television. So Berry was the heartbeat of Motown, and so when he decided to move to the West Coast little by little, you know, everybody--not everybody--but most of the acts and what have you, you know, moved out here. You know, still some artists like the Four Tops stayed, you know, in Detroit, and I think The Originals stayed in Detroit, but by and large, everybody else--The Supremes, The Temps, Marvin [Marvin Gaye], you know, a lot of us moved out here to the West Coast. But, you know, it was sad, because it had left a very definite impact on Detroit when Motown moved. I never will forget. I, you know, going to one of the many places that I would go and shop for clothes and what have you, and I went to this here place called Green Eight mall [Green Eight Shopping Center] out there on Eight Mile Road [M-102] in Greenfield [Greenfield-Grand River, Detroit, Michigan]. And the guy told me one day when I came in, he said, "Man, you guys just don't know what y'all did to us when you moved to the West Coast." I guess we took such a large percentage of money out of Detroit, you know. So, he said he felt the impact of Motown moving to the West Coast. So, you know, but it was one of those things, you know, we had to adjust to, because Berry decided to move here to the West Coast. Speaker 1: So, did opportunities increase out here, you know, in terms of--were things actually better here for you businesswise than they were in Detroit? Speaker 2: Oh, for us, it stayed busy for us even here as well as in Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, we were still working our fannies off, and we were still doing a lot of television work. So, that didn't change as far as The Temptations' existence was concerned. We stayed very busy, you know, even still. Speaker 1: There was an article about five years ago I read in the Michigan, is it the Michigan Citizen [sic.]? Yeah, I guess it was the Michigan Citizen, the black paper, about-- Speaker 2: The Chronicle? Speaker 1: The Chronicle, I guess it was the Chronicle, yeah. Speaker 2: The Chronicle, yeah. Speaker 1: The Michigan Chronicle. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's about the destruction of one of the downtown buildings to make way for the Super Bowl. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they knocked one of the buildings down, and it had like the files, the Motown files in it. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And contracts, old contracts, were like blowing down the street, you know. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. And people (laughter), I mean it was just--and the brother who wrote the article, Paul Lee, he's a historian in Detroit, and he was just lamenting how Detroit just seems to throw its history away, you know. And he just--it was-- Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: You didn't hear about that? Speaker 2: No, I didn't hear about that. No, that I really can't speak on, because that's the first time I've heard of that. I wouldn't say Detroit is just throwing its history away, because you can never throw the history of Motown away, you know, concerning Detroit, because it is part of Detroit. Like I often say when I'm being interviewed, you know, Detroit has primarily been known for the big three--General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], Ford [Ford Motor Company], and Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC]. Well, now, you have to move over the other three and say Motown, because Motown is so synonymous with Detroit. So, it's like the big four now. But I wouldn't say--I guess it was just one of those things that just happened, you know. Because a lot of things have happened in Detroit, and with that happening, this is my first time hearing about papers blowing away of tearing down a building to make way for the--what is it--a baseball park or football park? Speaker 1: Well, they were-- Speaker 2: A stadium? Speaker 1: Just to make room I think for parking, or something for the Super Bowls. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: You know, they were like buildings that they were trying to get rid of. Some were-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they-- Speaker 1: --re-done. Speaker 2: Yeah, they did-- Speaker 1: --and some-- Speaker 2: --tear down a lot of buildings downtown Detroit, yeah. Story_ID: 442806 Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s], now you all are doing--a lot of groups are--you know, starting up. A lot of new groups are starting up in the '70s [1970s]. A lot of funk is becoming popular, but The Temptations are actually a group that's seen as a retro act, as well as doing new things at the same time. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: So that puts you in a unique position. You're like a legend, but you're still-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're still producing new material. Speaker 2: We got our feet in the past, as well as one in the present, and if we had a third leg, it would be in the future, you know. So, we have never wanted to be pigeon-holed, you know. We always like to try fresh and different approaches to stay up on it in the business, you know, so I think that's one of the dynamics of The Temptations, you know. With the voices that we've had within this group, we've been able to sing anything--modern harmony to gospel, naturally R and B, pop, you know, and country and western should it be. So, you know, we, we have a very broad demographic of being able to touch on all mediums of music, pretty much. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What were some of your biggest hits of the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Of the '70s [1970s], I would say "Papa Was a Rollin' Stone," which was in the early '70s [1970s], and "Just My Imagination," early '70s [1970s]. What else? 'A Song for You,' was a big album for us. That was like '75 [1975]. And from, after 'A Song for You,' it was a cooling spell, you know. Because we left Motown [Motown Records] and went to Atlantic Records and recorded two, I think two or possibly three CDs for Atlantic, which didn't do that well. And then we came back to Motown in 1980, and things started on the upswing again. Speaker 1: I remember this song, "Aiming at Your Heart." Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Was that like with Atlantic or Motown? Speaker 2: That was with Motown. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: That's shortly after we came back in 1980. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thom Bell produced that album. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, Thom Bell, he was famous for the Philadelphia sound? Speaker 2: Yeah, Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenneth Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And Bell, uh-huh, yeah, a wonderful person as well as producer and songwriter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nice guy. Story_ID: 442807 Speaker 1: I know in the early days, when [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson wrote a lot of The Temptation songs (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, our first hit was written by Smokey, you know, 'The Way You Do the Things You Do,' which was in 1964. You know, Smokey, he wrote a few things prior to 'The Way You Do the Things You Do,' but that was the one that started us to really, you know, becoming famous and getting a lot of work, and touring and television and all of that, but Smokey was the catalyst for The Temps jumping off. Speaker 1: Okay. With unique sound and unique, I guess, presence of The Temptations--the sophistication and that sort of thing--you had to be kind of careful in choosing who's producing, who's writing your music, right? I mean (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, not so much then, because Motown [Motown Records] was like--Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] just left it open to whoever would come up with a great song. You know, like I said, Smokey did some on us. Berry himself did some, and Norman Whitfield, Clarence Paul. Various guys, you know, would do songs on us. So, it wasn't like something that we just had to be boxed in. Berry was just interested in us getting a hit record, and he was willing to try most anybody there in Motown, you know. And as fate would have it, Smokey came up with the one that really started it. But we had various other producers producing us. Like I said, Norman Whitfield did some earlier stuff, but he didn't really become successful with The Temps until 1965, sixty--no '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Which ones did he do? Speaker 2: Well, what started us really rolling with Norman was 'Ain't Too Proud to Beg.' That was the one that started the ball rolling. And we had from 1966 until 1974, I think it was--no, 19--yeah, '74 [1974], because we did 'A Song for You' in '75 [1975]. So, '66 [1966] to '74 [1974], we had a great run with Norman for that amount of time. Story_ID: 442808 Speaker 1: What happened to bring about the reunion? Speaker 2: Well, you know, people had for the longest time had been asking and wondering and hoping that they could see us together again, you know, minus Paul Williams, because Paul passed in the early '70s [1970s] I think, like '71 [1971]--'70 [1970], '71 [1971]--'71 [1971] to be exact. But David [David Ruffin], Eddie [Eddie Kendricks], Melvin [Melvin Franklin], and myself, Dennis [Dennis Edwards], fans wanted to see us together one more time. And for the longest time I resisted it, because I knew where some of the guys heads were, you know, over into the, you know, the drug thing. And--but we did, you know, give it a shot, yeah. And it didn't--it was all right, could've been a lot better, but there again, it seeped on back onto those old bad habits. But we let it go all the way through '83 [1983], until the fall of '83 [1983]. And then David, Eddie, and Dennis started their trio. And then Melvin and myself got the now Temps [The Temptations], and we parted ways. Speaker 1: Now, we mentioned some of the problems of drugs. Just give us an example. You don't have to name anybody. But-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What specific problems happen when people are-- Speaker 2: On drugs? Speaker 1: --using drugs and stuff, that mess the-- Speaker 2: Well, your priorities shift, you know. As at the beginning when we started singing, you know, we were all focused, you know. I mean, the worst thing that we would do at the beginning was drink a little beer and wine, you know. You know, but as time would have it, you start making money and, you know, I guess, you know, we became experimental, and, "Give me get me a joint." You know, then from the weed, then you got some cocaine. And then here comes, during the '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s], here comes the freebasing and all that. Which I'm not going to sit here and make myself like no saint, you know, but the freebasing and the cocaine wasn't, you know, a thing that I did, you know. But I liked me some grass, you know, truth be told, you know. So, I don't want to sit here and make myself sound like I'm a saint and everybody else was--no. You know, but there was certain limitations that I would set, you know, have on myself. But, you know, once you start getting over into other things, you know, it's almost like another alternate kind of person would come about, as far as attitude and wanting to do things a different way from what we had agreed upon as being a unit and things. So, other things, you know, just set in that just made us say, "We need to part, and I'll go and start me a set and y'all do what you want to do," because drugs was just that prominent. And when guys starting missing shows, you know, that was a no-no. You know, because, you know, dealing with drugs, you know, even the young ladies, "Well, you don't need to be with--you need to get more money, you're the lead singer. You're the--," bip, bop, bam, this and that. So, you know, it was all those kinds of things that were setting in, and it just fragmented the group. Story_ID: 442809 Speaker 1: In a group like The Temptations, I guess over the years it probably--I mean there's so much talent in the group that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I remember one of my favorite songs in the '60s [1960s] was 'I Truly, Truly Believe' where Melvin [Melvin Franklin]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --actually sang the lead, you know. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But he didn't get a chance to sing the lead much (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, he did it on 'Ol' Man River.' Speaker 1: Did he? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Ol' Man River.' Speaker 2: 'Ol' Man River,' we-- Speaker 1: And 'I Truly, Truly Believe.' Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, 'Ol' Man River,' they loved to hear Melvin-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --you know, do 'Ol' Man River' with that wonderful bass voice of his, and then the way we had the harmonies and things behind it. So, he did that quite a bit. Speaker 1: So, I guess there were so many great voices. Like when you compare, say, The Temptations with the Four Tops--now, I don't know what the rest of the Tops sound like. Levi Stubbs is the one-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --that everybody hears. Speaker 2: That's true, yeah. Levi was the sound and the voice of the Four Tops, right. Speaker 1: And the rest of them just kind of blend-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --back there, you know. Speaker 2: But they could sing that four-part modern harmony on you, though. Oh, yeah, they were like, I always considered them like our black Hi-Lo's [The Hi-Lo's] and The Four Freshmen, because they could--Lawrence Payton could voice them so that they could sing that modern harmony and shoot, just as good as anybody--The Modernaires and anybody. The Four Tops are dynamite in singing four-part harmony. But yeah, Levi was the voice of the Four Tops. Speaker 1: You had so many voices in The Temptations. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we, you know, we've been very fortunate. Because when we started out, it wasn't by design that, okay, each one of us could take a lead. That really started happening once we got over to Motown [Motown Records] and, you know, writing--I mean being produced by, you know, Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy], Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson], Norman [Norman Whitfield], you know. "Hey man, you take this here line." "Melvin, sounds like you'd be good on this here line." "Oh, that's an Eddie Kendricks song." "David [David Ruffin], that's got that rough kind--David, you should try this." You know, so it was that kind of, you know, figuring out who would be the best voice for the song. Story_ID: 442810 Speaker 1: I know I was really surprised in the '80s [1980s]. I think it was a Rick James song, 'Standing on the Top' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, 'Standing on the Top,' yeah. Speaker 1: The Temptations have a bit part in this, but it became like--I'll tell you, in the family I'm in and the neighborhood I was in, people, kids--it was their introduction to The Temptations in a way. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Because they didn't know anything about The Temptations until--but they knew about Rick James. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: When Rick James said, "Temptations, sing." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That was, well, 'Standing on the Top?' Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Standing on the Top.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, Rick was such a dynamic producer and performer, the whole nine yards that when we were going through the reunion, that's when we did 'Standing on the Top.' And so Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] wanted us to come out with a single, so that it would, you know, it would ignite the audience, "Okay, The Temps are back," you know, and we'd have that kind of strong song presentation. And Rick James came up with the track of 'Standing on the Top,' and Berry heard it and said, "This is one that The Temps have to do." And so, Don Rick [ph.] got the green light to go ahead on, and produce it, and it did very well for us, you know. We did it, and the people seemed to enjoy it. So, it was a great tune to do. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Rick James had his problems with drugs and stuff (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --as great as he was, major problems, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. The sad thing about it, you know, when them drugs step in, boy, it just, it change- can change everything. Story_ID: 442811 Speaker 1: --Let me ask you about this I guess, or maybe I'll save that. Let me say this, and pick up with the '80s [1980s]. Just kind of walk us through the '80s [1980s]. What happened in the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Oh, well, '80s [1980s] is pretty much just like the two, the three decades before that, constantly working. There again, personnel changes, because the '80s [1980s], that's when Dennis [Dennis Edwards] left again, and enter Ollie Woodson [Ali-Ollie Woodson]. And we had a nice size hit that Ollie Woodson and myself wrote, "Treat Her Like a Lady," and we were, you know, constantly touring and constantly recording and, you know, staying busy. But "Treat Her Like a Lady" was a sizeable hit for us, which in parts of the world--when we go, like when we go to England, they look forward to us doing "Treat Her Like a Lady," you know. So, very popular hit for us, even today when we do it. So, but, there again, you know, Dennis in and out during the '80s [1980s], and his final time of coming back, being let go, was like 1990, '91 [1991], '90 [1990]. And then Ollie came back in, and Ollie was with us up until--'For Lovers Only' was 1995, because that was the year that Melvin [Melvin Franklin] passed, and that was the last album that Melvin did with us, and he only was able to do one song, "Life is But a Dream." And that was the last album that Ollie Woodson did with us, was 'For Lovers Only.' And then, but prior to that, I think like '82 [1982]--'92 [1992], I'm sorry, Theo Peoples joined the group. So the lineup then was Ollie Woodson, Theo Peoples, Ron Tyson, Melvin Franklin, and myself. And then when we lost Melvin, Ray Davis from Parliament Funkadelic came in as our bass singer. So, it was Ollie Woodson, Theo Peoples, Melvin Franklin, I mean Eddie K--Ron Tyson, myself, and Ray Davis. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, okay, so it's interesting that a man from Funkadelic comes over to sing, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, Ray had such a deep, beautiful, rich bass voice, that we told him we'd give him a shot in being with us. And he did that one CD with it, 'For Lovers Only,' and then after that-- Speaker 1: Ollie Woodson, now he's--I was in the Quad Cities in Alabama, and everybody talked about Ollie Woodson being, you know, there he's the pride of the Quad Cities up there in Tuscumbia [Alabama], Muscle Shoals [Alabama], Sheffield, Alabama. They love him up there. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, Ollie's a-- Speaker 1: A great voice. Speaker 2: Yeah, a great voice. A heck of an entertainer. Speaker 1: But once again, you know, the personnel was changing. So-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, that's the curse of The Temps. You know, like I said earlier, we have always seemed like, been--to be our own worst enemy. You know, as talented and as loved as this group is, there was a lot of times we couldn't get out of our own way, out of our own self's way, you know. And, you know, so I often sit and think as great as people look at this group, we do more harm to ourselves than any outside factions could ever do. Because we're such a well-loved group, in spite of all the changes we have gone through, they still love this group. You know, so it's something that is so perplexing, that a lot of times I just go with the flow. Because, you know, wonderful talent has been in and out of this group, but they just have not been able to maintain a certain unit during the course of it. And it's sad in a lot of ways, because like I say, we are so loved as a unit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The name, you know. Like Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] said, "No one man is greater than the sum total." And the sum total is an eleven letter word, "The Temptations," though we've had guys in and out of this group that thought they were bigger than The Temps, (shakes head) no. Story_ID: 443065 Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you about--before we leave talking about the different changes in the group, I want to ask you about the lawsuit that was in the news, you know, way back when Dennis Edwards was performing as Dennis Edwards and The Temptations--or, and (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when Dennis left, he tried to formulate a group calling his group--and the manager that he had at the time, Ben Crosley [ph.]--they felt as though they could call, you know, his group The Temptations, because Dennis also was on sizeable hits with The Temps, you know. And so we had to go to court, and the judge said--well, you know, after he ran down all the hits that Dennis had been on with us, the judge said, "Well, that might be the case, but you know, The Temps were in existence before Dennis joined the group." The Temps had a number of hits before Dennis joined the group, and so the judge felt as though--not to deprive Dennis being able to work--he said, "You can call your group Dennis, The Temptations Review featuring Dennis Edwards." Because before that, like I said, they were saying The Temptations, which was confusing our public and our audience with my group. And we didn't want that even, because it still had a certain amount of confusion, you know, even with it being like that. Because certain promoters--a large amount of promoters--instead of adhering to, okay, this is what the courts decreed, "The Temptations Review featuring Dennis Edwards," a lot of promoters just said, "Later for that. We're just going to say 'The Temptations,' and Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams] and them have to catch us, you know." And so it was always a constant vigilance trying to stay up on it, as far as that was concerned, you know. You know, so, you know, it's an ongoing thing. Now we have all these different other factions of groups calling themselves The Temptations. So, we're always trying to put out the brush fires of all these different so-called Temptations. Speaker 1: Now, this has been a protracted struggle, I would guess, going all the way back from the beginning. Speaker 2: Protracted is a good word to use in this. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: We interviewed The Impressions about three years ago in Knoxville [Tennessee], and they were telling--Sam Gooden [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] was telling us about how as soon as The Impressions had its first big hit, they were, they had all kinds of calls about themselves performing in places down south where they'd never been (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, so The Impressions was going through it also? Speaker 1: Yeah. Nobody had ever seen a picture of them, so they didn't know what they looked like. Speaker 2: Oh, what they looked like. Speaker 1: They were promoting--they were like in Florida, and they'd be someplace else. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And it wasn't them. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, they-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Four Tops even had that problem over in England. Duke [Abdul Fakir] had to go to court because there was some guys over there calling themselves the Four Tops. So, you know, yeah, it's a shame that, you know, you work hard all these years, and you get a name and you work with the name and you build it up, and you get people that is probably in a lot of cases never been in the group, and they want to siphon off some of your star power and what have you. So, yeah, it's a constant vigil, you know. But, hey, we've survived. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a story about the most egregious misuse of The Temptations name that you can think of? Is there any one story that sticks out? Speaker 2: You know, nothing comes. No. No more than, you know, like over in Las Vegas [Nevada]. But that wasn't so egregious. It's just these Marshaks [R.C.I. Management] feeling as though they could take our name and use it. And my attorney had to go over there and shut them down at the Sahara Hotel [Sahara Hotel and Casino; SLS Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 1: These are, the Marshaks are promoters or what were they? Speaker 2: Yeah, out of New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they had this show in Las Vegas at the Sahara, "The former lead singers of The Temptations." And they had--Ollie [Ali-Ollie Woodson] was a member for a minute, and Damon Harris, Bo Barrington [Barrington "Bo" Henderson], and who else? And Glenn Leonard, you know. So, we had to go over, my attorney had to go over there and we had to sue them, and they had to shut it down, but it's nothing so egregious that it would just bring shame. It just more or less brought confusion, you know. So, it's never been, our name has never been used in a very maligned kind of way; just people just try to use it as far as making money off it, you know. Now, this guy that we're looking for, Nate Evans, you know, has never been in The Temptations. He's got him a set of Temptations over in Japan, and we hear they work quite a bit. And, you know, so we haven't been able to get into Japan because they work those little dives and places over in Japan where you have to do two to three shows a night, and we're not doing that, you know. And litle sometimes we have some of our fans that know of us at some of the places that they work, The Temps would work. So, but nothing really egregious to the point of just being, bringing the name down; just people just trying to make money off of it. You know, so we have to do what we have to do. Story_ID: 443066 Speaker 1: Now, I don't think the last time when we started the interview we talked about your musical style. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't read about where they had discussed it. But where does your--where did the style come from, the five-part harmony? I think we were discussing off-camera as to how you, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, it was just something that--it wasn't like we sat down and designed, "This is the way we're going to sound." You know, it was just five guys coming together, five beautiful voices coming together with Melvin [Melvin Franklin] with that beautiful, rich bass, to Eddie's [Eddie Kendricks] high soaring tenor, and all the wonderful gospel that's in-between with Paul [Paul Williams], Eddie, and, I mean Paul, David [David Ruffin], and myself, you know. So, it was just something that developed. And that was one of the things that Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] always said that he loved about The Temps, was our harmonies and the rich gospel overtones and things that we had. But it was just guys coming together that could sing, and just had that kind of intrinsic thing in our voices and things that made us, I guess, as time would have it, developed a sound. Because I listened to a lot of our stuff, and I say, okay, we do have a distinctive sound. But at the beginning, all we wanted to do was just sing. And it just developed into, "Man, y'all sound like The Temptations." I said, "What do The Temps sound like?" "Oh, well, you know, they got Eddie singing way up here, and Melvin down there, and all that in-between." But like I said, when we first got together it was just a thing that we wanted to sing, and it just developed into a sound. Story_ID: 443067 Speaker 1: Were there any particular--I mean, as a singer yourself, like, is there any particular song that you wanted to lead that, you know, that you didn't get a chance to? Or did you--or you--? Speaker 2: No. Well, my role I think--like, I look back and I say well, we all have a role to play while we are on God's earth. I think when I look back, mine's is keeping The Temps [The Temptations] together. You know, because at the beginning when we were with Johnnie Mae Matthews, I was one of the lead singers, and so, you know, we all got paid the same money, you know. We all had the same wonderful enjoyment of the fruits of our labors and what have you. So, it wasn't like because I wasn't singing lead I was getting less money or anything. No, it wasn't anything like that, but I've been told by the late great Cholly Atkins, who was our choreographer, and the late great Maurice King, our vocal coach, and Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy], and quite a few--Shelly [Shelly Berger], my manager. They said, "If it wasn't for you, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], there would be no Temps. Because you are the only one that I guess had the thing of, hey, let's take care of business. Whenever something would happen, when Berry was president and when he owned Motown [Motown Records], he loved Melvin. But he would say, "Get me Otis on the phone. I only want to talk to Otis." So, I guess that's been the role that I would, that I had to play, in just keeping us together. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're the last surviving member of the original Temptations (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I am. Yeah, the last, the only, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 443068 Speaker 1: Now, did you--now I think, I guess it's in the '80s [1980s] that Robert Townsend produced a movie called 'The Five Heartbeats.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that, that seemed to be also like a movie that seemed to parallel The Temptations on some level. Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, no, even though Shelly [Shelly Berger] and myself sat and talked with Robert Townsend and Keenen Ivory Wayans, but it was really closer to The Dells than The Temps, because Robert Townsend I think is from Harvey, Illinois. Speaker 1: Right, he's from the Chicago [Illinois] area. Speaker 2: And that's where the Dells--yeah, and the Dells are from Harvey. So it really was closer to the Dells, even though when I saw the movie there were some similarities as far as traveling in the South, and what we had to go through, you know, during the very racial tension--times back during that time. You know, but it was closer to the Dells. Because when I saw that one scene about--I said, I don't know if they exaggerated that just for the thing of making a movie--about fighting on the stage. As long as we've been in the business I've never seen, you know, a group get out there and whatever happened they start fighting right on the stage. I've never seen that, and we've been doing this here, coming up in January it'll be forty-eight years, you know. But when I saw that I said, "Wow, did the Dells do that? Or where they out there on the road and saw that? Or was that just dramatized to make it more exciting, you know?" But--but it was closer to the Dells than The Temptations. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you wrote your own memoir called 'Temptations' [Otis Williams with Patricia Romanowski] right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And it was, and you helped produce it as a movie [sic.] for NBC. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, NBC. It was a very successful mini-series for the two nights that it was on. It was shown the end of October and the first of November, 1998, and the ratings went through the roof. And I never would have imagined that it would be as successful and strong as it turned out to be, because I remember when we were shooting in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], because that's where they ended up making the movie. So I was on the set and I watched the set, whereas Leon [Leon Robinson] played David Ruffin, Charles Malik [Charles Malik Whitfield] played me, and D.B. Woodside played Melvin [Melvin Franklin]. So, there was this scene where Melvin and myself had to go to David's apartment back in Detroit [Michigan] to tell him, "Hey, man, you straighten up, or either we're going to do, we're going to have to move on with somebody else." So, as they were getting ready to shoot this here scene, I'm standing there watching. And Leon was getting into character, and he was standing there. So Allan Arkush, who was the director, he said, "All right, action," and they did the little clasp board. And then when they started shooting, all those emotions that I had back then resurfaced. And I'm standing there, and I said, "No, I don't think I'm going to be able to watch this." You know, here we are talking about over thirty years ago, and it's still fresh, like it just happened yesterday. So I said, "No." And to this day, I have yet to sit and watch that movie. So, I saw Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] two years ago at the lifetime achievements [Kennedy Center Honors] in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] when he was getting honored as such, and he was told that I hadn't watched the movie. And he calls me Oak, "Oak, you mean you haven't watched your movie?" I said, "No." He said, "Oh, man, how come?" I said, "Well, I don't feel like crying. And everybody that had seen it said, 'You will cry,' even grown men." He says, "Oh, yeah, you will do that." He said, "But you need to get you a box of Kleenex and sit down and watch your movie. It's a fantastic movie." I said, "Yeah, one of these days, Smokey, I will do that." Even Shelly, him and I both, we haven't sat down and watched it in its entirety. Because everybody that have seen it said, "Man, yeah, you will well up. You will cry." You know, saying, you know how we men are. We try not to show those emotions. But most guys who have seen it, say, "Oh, yeah, you're going to get some tears in your eyes, you know. It's going to make you want to cry." But, yeah, it was taken from my book. And hopefully, I don't want to jinx it, but I hear some other wonderful things might happen about it. So, I'll just leave it right at that until everything is signed, then I'll be on another journey of telling about something else. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's another book that's coming out about The Temps, but that won't be until next year. So, it's being written now by a young man out of New York [New York]. Story_ID: 443069 Speaker 1: Just like, this story like speaks to the closeness of the group [The Temptations] in a lot of ways, not just that--I mean I guess you can imagine, people being in a group but maybe not being that close. But this is, this speaks to, you know, a close association. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were very close at the beginning, you know. Like I said, see, success is a strong--can be a strong aphrodisiac, you know. At the beginning we vowed--you know, speaking of David [David Ruffin], Eddie [Eddie Kendricks], Paul [Paul Williams], Melvin [Melvin Franklin], and myself--we said we weren't going to be like The Cadillacs. We weren't going to be like Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers. We weren't going to be like The Flamingos, groups that we grew up with and loved. We were going to stay together, you know, and we made that vow, and shoot. Man, when them hits started coming and we started making money on a regular basis and royalty checks started coming in, you know, you get a--you flex; you start getting another sense of independence. "Oh, I can go out and buy me pretty much whatever I want," you know. So, your whole mindset changed from the dedication. You're still dedicated to the group to a certain extent, but you know, other things start setting in, whereas, you know, like I say, you know, you start tripping. And that just made us kind of thin out, you know. But, like when I wrote the book ['Temptations,' Otis Williams with Patricia Romanowski]--because there's a lot of stuff that I could have said, but it was in a negative sense, and I'm not the kind of guy. I'm not the kind of guy that wants to just be negative. When I wrote the book it was about how we survived, and the changes that we went through to continue on as a unit. But some people said, "Well, he was, he did--he was slam-dunking David." I never would do that, but I was just telling the truth, that David was David, wonderful talent, you know, a wonderful person until, you know, things started getting to the point where he started using them drugs and we had to let him go, you know. But I had to tell the truth, but not the thing of just wanting to just put down David, put down Eddie. No, no I've never been like that, no, never. That wasn't what the book was written about. Story_ID: 443070 Speaker 1: When you examine your own, I guess, response to the success, I mean, how do you think that you, like, maintained without succumbing to drugs and--? Speaker 2: You know, I--you know, before I point the finger at somebody else, I always do a self-analysis check on my own person, and I've learned that I learn a lot from observation. And I won't name this here artist, but he was big at the time. We were recording a song that he wrote, and this is the first time I'd seen somebody freebase. So he came into the studio as we were singing and getting the balance for the engineer to record us. Speaker 1: About what year is this, about? Speaker 2: This was, it had to be about like seventy--who was in new group then? Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-five, [1975], yeah, '74 [1974] or '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he came in and he had a black attache case. And when he came in he said, "Oh, Temps [The Temptations]. Damn, y'all sound good. Sing it, Temps. Y'all sure sound good." And we're just singing, you know, so Barney [Barney Ales] could, you know, record us. He went over to a piano, he opened up his attache case, he took out like a mountain of cocaine, ether, butane lighter. And he had his back towards us, and he was like a chemist. He was mixing that stuff (makes sounds), and flames just jumping out. And then all of a sudden we heard him say, (inhales) and then he stopped. And we're singing. And when he turned around and looked at us, whole 'nother person. And I said right then and there, I said, "That, I'm not going to do that." Because it altered him to a whole 'nother person. I said, "I'm not doing that." So, I learned that I learned from that; that if I see something that's a negative--um-hm. But you know, a lot of times people say, "Yeah, okay, but I can control it. It ain't going to control me." This is what I've heard a lot of them say that got on it. And they say, you know, once they were doing it, it controlled them. And the best way to not let it control you, is don't do it. So I learned that when I see something that will alter you to a great extent that's in the posi- negative, I'm not doing it. So, I learned that about myself, and I guess that's been the thing that has kept me whole or kept me sane to the point of being able to function forty-seven years later. Story_ID: 443071 Speaker 1: And how I got this role as being the spokesman [of The Temptations], or the leader, or however you want to phrase it--when we were with Johnnie Mae Matthews as The Distants--that was the name of the group that we were called at that time--and whenever she would call rehearsals for us to come over to her house to record or to rehearse, at that time we didn't have cars. You know, if one of the guys, you know, my buddies had a car, they would take me to rehearsal, then that's one thing. But if not that, I would have to walk. So, I would always leave out in ample enough time to make sure I was on time. So, one day I get to Johnnie Mae's house, and I'm waiting for the rest of the guys to come. And she said, "Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], you know what? You're never late." I said, "Well, you know, you said be on time, and I just leave home in plenty of time to be here." She said, "Now, don't get me wrong. That's good quality, you're never late. You be the spokesman." And little did I know what that would encompass. But that's how I got this role of being the great leader, because of me being on time. So, when we left Johnnie Mae and came to Motown [Motown Records], which is like 1961, Mickey Stevenson [William "Mickey Stevenson] was the A and R [artists and repertoire] man for Motown at that time. And when I met Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] at St. Stephens Community Center [Detroit, Michigan], he gave me a card, and said, "Hey, if you should become unhappy where you all are now, come see me. I'm starting my own label." And so I made the contact, and Berry said, "Well, Mickey Stevens would like to hear what songs you have." And when we met with Mickey, he said, "Okay, you guys sound good. We're going to record you." He said, "But Mr. Gordy wants to talk with you." And Mickey said, "Now, if you want to make Mr. Gordy mad, be late." And that's when I said, "No, no, we don't play late. We'll be on time." So I learned even back then that being on time is very, very important, because you're judged by the time you keep or don't keep, you know. So I look back and I say, you know, I guess I've always been that way. I don't know how it happened, you know, about being on time, because my mother [Hazel Williams Little] and father [Otis Miles] them, well, you know, they instilled the things of being a good person and conscientious about this and that. But this being on time was just something I just felt I always had to be, get mad at myself today if I'm late. Because I know I was supposed to have been here at 10:30, and the traffic--because I'm about thirty-five miles out. And you leave enough, ample enough time to get here, but boy, the traffic was--so I'm driving, and I say, "I got to be more careful. I'm going to be a little late." So, I hate to be late, even if it's two minutes. You know, I pride myself for being on time, before time, but never late. Speaker 2: Okay. Anybody I guess who's interested, no matter how much talent they have, if they're interested in being a success in music, being on time is-- Speaker 1: Being on time. See, you can have all the talent in the world. But if you can't be on time or take directions, oh, you'll lose. Your talent is secondary. You know, like I often tell people when I'm interviewed, I say, "You can go to a movie and you see Denzel Washington, Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt, Julia, Julie whomever. But it says at the end of the movie, during the credits, 'Directed by,' and if you can't take directions, they're not going to use you." They don't care who you are or, what your name is, or how great a talent--if you can't take care of business, take directions and be on time, sooner or later, they'll fade to black on you. And so a lot of people say, "You know, I never thought of it like that." I said, "Oh, yeah, being direction--being directed is so important." You can have all the talent in the world. You'll negate that talent if you're an asshole. Story_ID: 443072 Speaker 1: Speaking of talent, I mean, I think it was touched upon earlier I guess in the interview, you know, the other--the first part, but I, I wanted you to speak about the, what they call now The Funk Brothers. I don't know if you all called them that then. But-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we called them that then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, The Funk Brothers was one of a kind, a great bunch of guys, you know. I, I was at Motown [Motown Records] a few months ago, because they were doing, you know, Motown was getting ready to celebrate their fiftieth anniversary, and I had to fly into Detroit [Michigan] to be part of this Vanity Fair magazine issue about Motown's fiftieth anniversary. And as they were setting up the cameras in the snake pit, which is what we call the Studio A [Detroit, Michigan], I'm standing there and I'm looking around, and I see all the hits that came out of this little room. And I see--you would see Benny Benjamin's drums still sitting where it was forty years, almost fifty years ago; the organ and the piano that Joe Hunter and Earl Van Dyke used to pump on; and the guitars where Eddie Willis and Joe Messina and, dang, I can't think of his name. Speaker 1: A bass player? Speaker 2: Oh, no, James Jamerson, yeah. No, but it's another wonderful guitarist that started off, (imitates guitar riff from 'My Girl'). And I'm standing there just thinking about all those guys, and just about all of them are gone except probably about one or two, you know. But The Funk Brothers were something else, oh, one of a kind. See, and James Jamerson, we go all the way back when James played on our first little local hit, 'Come On,' by The Distants. And at that time, James Jamerson would come to his session to work with an upright bass strapped on his back. So, when we were rehearsing, getting ready to rehearse, we said, "Okay, here comes James Jamerson," and he would be coming with the bass strapped on his back. So, to see him come from the upright bass to the Fender bass, and all the wonderful things that he could do playing the Fender bass with all those different runs in-between--my, he just revolutionized bass playing, you know. But, very unique brothers. I mean, they could play anything. Because when they weren't up in Motown doing session work, they would be around at the Chit Chat Lounge [Detroit, Michigan], or Rage Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan], or whatever, you know, playing jazz sets, you know, and gigs, you know. So they were consummate musicians, you know, but when they got together to play those hits, I think it's been said that they were on more number one hit records than anybody in the whole industry for however long, yeah. Speaker 1: And yet, you know, in those days we didn't know who they were. I mean, you'd see-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a record, a 45 [45 rpm record] that had The Temptations, and who wrote the song. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or the Four Tops, or who wrote the song. Speaker 2: Yeah, but not the musicians. Speaker 1: But not who played the--you know, because I used to wonder, say, "Who's playing the bass on this?" Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --or who's-- Speaker 2: Well, that was kind of like by design. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy]--you know, they kind of wanted it like that. Because, you know, they didn't want everybody getting those guys, and they'd start spreading that sound. And then you know, it would start, you know, over-saturation of the Motown sound, you know, if they started going. And some recording companies tried to do that, if not did do that--have them come to Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: I've heard that Carl-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think [HistoryMaker] Carl Davis was telling us-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that he got them in Chicago-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, Berry had to do whatever he had to do to keep them right there and localized, and keep that sound, you know. Because they were, they were cold. They were some wonderful musicians. Speaker 1: And I think in the movie-- Speaker 2: Ron White [Ronald White]--now Ron something, I can't think of his name. Speaker 1: The guitar player? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I know the little movie they made, they did on The Funk Brothers a couple of years ago. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They showed like the Motown tour that was getting ready to go to England. The people in England had signs up welcoming James Jamerson, though he didn't go. He ended up not going on the trip, but they knew who he was. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And we didn't know. Speaker 2: Yeah. The English people are so up on the American music--the song writers, the producers, the whole nine yards. Man, I am amazed at England. They're so knowledgeable about Motown's music, well, most music, any kind of music that comes. But Motown music, oh. Just last week, we had--now here we are getting ready to go to Liverpool, England next month, at the end of October. These two young ladies flew all the way from Liverpool, England to see The Temps, because the gig over there in Liverpool was already sold out. But, you know, the English people, they love them some Motown music and artists. Story_ID: 442820 Speaker 1: Jamerson played 'What's Going On,' laying down on his back. Speaker 2: Really (laughter)? Speaker 1: I said--he said, "Man, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], do you hear me?" He said, he was laying on his (unclear) on his back. He said, "Now, that's hard to do," and then to play 'What's Going On.' He said, "He was laying on his back when he played that. Speaker 2: Jesus, just--you were just telling us an anecdote about James Jamerson, who, you know, didn't have the proper technique they say, but could play anything. He was-- Speaker 1: Jamerson was unique, in the sense of the way he played the bass. Right, he would, you know, all up in here, he'd do that. But that finger, that one, he'd pluck it down there, you know. Because, I'm not a bass player by no stretch of the imagination. But when you'd see guys, they would be using more than--they would use that one finger and would be working it, and would be getting however many notes in-between what have--the chords and things. Unique, a unique guy. And from what I was told, he played "What's Going On" laying down on his back. And he said, "Now anytime you can just lay on your back and play those riffs and runs on What's Going On,' he said ain't too many can do that. See, Jamerson was that--oh, he was a unique individual, loved him. Story_ID: 442821 Speaker 1: Now, you all [The Temptations] tour like over two hundred gigs a year, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, many. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Two hundred days a year? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we're busier than a blind dog in a meat market when it comes to working, you know. I'm not going to complain. I'm sure we--you'll hear me talking about I'm tired, because we just got in from Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and getting ready to fly into Atlantic City [New Jersey]. But one thing that I learned a long time ago about this profession that we're in, far as entertainment and what have you, when America was, when we were going through the '60s [1960s]: Vietnam [Vietnam War]; the Civil Rights Movement; all kind of campus upheavals; women's lib [liberation], taking it and making it smooth and what have you--we would, as many refer to, we had a business that was recession-proof. And here we are as a country now going through our economic downfall right along through in here. But people need to get out and to be, we need to be used as an outlet. You know, they need entertainment, they need music, they need to go to the movies, or what have you. I was in the elevator going to see my business manager a few weeks back. And I guess whatever I had on, the guy looked and he said, "I like the way you dress there. What do you do?" I said, "Well, I'm a singer and dancer, show business." He said, "Oh, you're lucky." I said, "Really?" I said, "Why?" He said, "You guys are in something, in a business that's recession-proof." I said, "You know what? I learned that a long time ago." He said, "Oh, yeah, trust me." Watching TV the other day before we went to Vegas--and I love watching 'The Sopranos.' So, Tony Soprano was getting on his captain, "Y'all need to bring me more money." He was just giving his captains and lieutenants all kind of grief, because they wasn't bringing in enough money. And so he asked one of his guys, "You tell them the two things that survive, regardless to what." And one of his captains stepped up and he said, "The outfit," meaning them, "and show business." I said, "See, there it is again." Now, that was just here recently. So, yeah, we work quite a bit, and I'm very thankful, and I know I'm blessed because like I said, people need that outlet, you know. And you know, so we work, but I won't complain, because it would be like crying with a loaf of bread under my arm. So, I'm very thankful and blessed. Speaker 1: So, do you do most of your touring in the United States, or abroad? Speaker 2: Most of it here in the states, but we go abroad quite a bit. Next month, October, we'll go to England for about three weeks, three and a half weeks, and then we'll come back and do--finish out the year here in the states. Then next year we'll go back to England, Lord willing, the Four Tops and us will go back and do dates. You know, but we've been to Rio de Janeiro [Brazil], we've been to Monte Carlo [Monaco], Japan, Hong Kong, Australia, behind the Iron Curtain. I mean, some of everywhere, you know. But there are still a few places to go that I would love to go, like to Italy. But we've been to Africa, you know. So, yeah, we've been very extensive in our travels. Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard that there was an African tour being planned, but you've already been to Africa (unclear). Speaker 2: That was so long ago. We need to go back, because I would love to go back now that the apartheid system is no longer, you know, down in South Africa. But yeah, yeah, we would love to go back there. Story_ID: 442822 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about, now we're sitting in Shelly Berger's office at the present time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell us about your relationship with your manager. Speaker 2: Oh, Shelly and I, we've been together since 1966, and we don't have any contract, you know; it's just, a man's word is his bond, you know. But a wonderful person, you know. We're joined at the hip, kindred spirits, however you want to phrase it. But he's been there for us since 1966. He used to manage The Supremes, Marvin Gaye, Smokey and The Miracles, the Four Tops. He had, you know, all of Berry's [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] stellar acts, you know. Shelly was instrumental in getting us exposed on a much broader scale, you know. I mean, he got us away from ABC booking [Associated Booking Corporation], and put us with William Morris [William Morris Agency]. And through the efforts of going to William Morris, we started doing the bigger things like the Copacabana [New York, New York] and Ed Sullivan's ['The Ed Sullivan Show'], TV specials, just such a broader scale of doing things. And it was all through the efforts of Shelly, with Berry believing in him enough to see if he could open his acts up to a broader market. And Shelly was there; he was the one that got us through all those big-scale, you know, kind of situations. And I'm very fortunate and happy to have him as a friend first, and a manager second. Story_ID: 442823 Speaker 1: Now, recently, I guess I'm looking now in the office. You all have, The Temptations won a Grammy Award recently for (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we won four. Speaker 1: Four, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. We had one for "Cloud Nine," that was in 1968. Then in 1972, I think it was, when we had "Papa Was a Rollin' Stone," we had two. We won two for "Papa Was a Rollin' Stone." And then 2001, I think we got another one. Really it was supposed to have been for 'Phoenix Rise' and "Stay," but we got it for the next album, which was 'Ear-Resistible.' Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, we have four. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And does it--how does it really feel to be thought of as--and this is true. I mean, I know it's true, because I live in black community--that people think of The Temptations as the coolest, or the most, I guess, sophisticated or coolest group of all the groups. Speaker 2: Yeah, I've heard that. Even at one time they used to refer to us as the black Beatles, because The Beatles were, you know, naturally over in the pop thing, and they were having a lot of hits. And we were having a lot of hits for the R and B thing, as well as filtering over into the pop area. You know, we never would have known or guessed that we would have such wonderful accolades bestowed upon us in the great manner that--how our fans look at us. And of course, it's just five guys that wanted to get together and sing. But I guess through the efforts of having such talented people around us like Cholly Atkins, and Maurice King, and Harvey Fuqua, and Shelly [Shelly Berger], and Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy], you know, and then Lon Fontaine, you know. Then I think one of the things that kind of made us unique was when we came out with the four-headed microphone. No group, as far as I could remember, had that kind of set-up whereas--that microphone, when we were at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], or just about anywhere when we were using it, we had a guy named Benny Wilburn who was a bodyguard, as well as he took care of the microphone. When Benny would bring that microphone out and the curtains would be closed and they would put the microphone in front of the curtains, the microphones got just as much ovation as The Temps. So, I guess they said, "Oh, my God, The Temps getting ready to come on, because here comes this here four-prong headed mic." But I think that kind of set us a little bit--you know, a lot different from all the rest of the groups, you know, during the course of history. And, you know, in most cases when you see a group, there's going to be two or three short ones and then some tall ones. Here, everybody was six-footers, slim; everybody was slim. So it was a unique presentation, but it wasn't by design. It was just, we came together and everybody at that time was six-footers and slim. And, you know, so the disc jockeys started saying, "Five tall, tan, tempting," you know, "tantalizing Temptations." So, you start having those kinds of accolades. And then we had our own TV show ['The Temptations Show'], you know. The Supremes and us had 'TCB,' 'G.I.T.' ['G.I.T. on Broadway'], and then we had 'The Temptations Show,' and all kind of television exposure. So, you know, when you get mass exposure like we did, and breaking existing records at the Apollo and at the Copacabanas [Copacabana, New York, New York], you know, it just takes on another kind of hue. And so, I guess with all the accolades that have been bestowed upon us, I guess it can lead to people looking at The Temps as such a unique group of all time. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a whole generation, I think of groups that found that--I mean I know from Dayton, Ohio that Tommy Shelby [Thomas Shelby] of Lakeside, you know, wanted to be a Temptation. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: They used to practice on the basketball court. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the moves and, you know, they-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was one of the--you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I've heard that even girls say, "Oh, yeah, we had a little girl group we patterned after The Temps," you know. So, you know, I think being caught up in such a wonderful entity like Motown [Motown Records], and like I said, you know, when Motown came along during the '60s [1960s], there was a lot of upheaval going on, you know, in the world then. But here comes this little two-story family flat on West--2346 West Grand Boulevard to house all those wealth of talented people--songwriters, producers, engineers, everybody that worked at Motown--to make such an impactful meaning to the world. You know, you get caught up in that, and that could bring about a whole lot of different--wonderful accolades. Because I think it was, when I look back on it, it was God's infinite wisdom to bring Motown along at that time. Because like I said, we were going through it as a country, you know, with the Vietnam War, and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther king, Jr.] making his move. And all kind of things were jumping off, with the riots in all our major cities and what have you. But through it, Motown was kind of, like I always said, the soothing ointment on a troubled soul. So it was a very, very unique times, but through it all, we have been able to survive. Story_ID: 442824 Speaker 1: Did you--now I think you talked about this the first, I think in the first session. But I'm not sure, so I'll ask anyway. Up, the--during that time of upheaval I know a lot has been made--a lot has been made about Marvin Gaye's desire to do more meaningful lyrics-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or lyrics that address the social conditions of black people. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Did you have the same kind of--? Speaker 2: Now, Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy]--when we--well, all the music up until 'Cloud Nine' was, you know, the regular norm, 'My Girl,' 'Since I Lost My Baby,' 'The Way You Do the Things you Do,' you know. So they were pretty standard kind of love songs, or what have you. When we chartered over to 'Cloud Nine,' 'Runaway Child' ['Runaway Child, Running Wild'] 'Ball of Confusion,' 'Message from a Black Man,' 'Papa Was a Rollin' Stone,' you know, we never did get any guff from Berry and Motown [Motown Records], because I guess when we got with Norman [Norman Whitfield], he's had 'Ain't Too Proud to Beg,' and then 'Beauty's Only Skin Deep.' So we were having hit after hit after hit with Norman. But Norman said, Berry and them said, "Oh, leave them alone. Just let whatever Norman and The Temps [The Temptations] come up with, just release it." You know, so we didn't have any flak like that. Now, Marvin was a different story. You know, Marvin wanted to get over into the social commentary kind of songs. And for the longest time, 'What's Going On' sat in the can, because Berry didn't like it, you know. Berry said, "Don't nobody want to hear all those multi voices, and you're singing about you know, what's going on in the world. You need to stick to the love songs, you know." Like, "You're a nice man. You know, you need to--women want to hear you sing ballads." And Marvin, now, from what I was told and read, shut down, you know, because he wanted to do other kinds of music. And so, when 'What's Going On' was finally released, I'm driving--at the time, we still lived in Detroit [Michigan]--and I'm driving down the freeway going to Motown, and Motown had moved down on Woodward Avenue at the time. So, as I'm driving, the disc jockey said, "Well, here's a new one by Marvin Gaye. Boy, if this ain't some kind of record." And he played it and I'm driving. I had to pull my car off the freeway, and I sat on the shoulder of the freeway. And I sat there and I listened at that, and I said, "Oh, this is going to be a huge record. What happened?" Because everybody always admired Berry's ears, you know, because he always could, "That's a hit, that's a hit, you know. You need to do this and that. But it's a hit." But Berry didn't like it. And so when it came out and 'What's Going On' went through the roof, I said, well, Berry's ears must have, just couldn't hear that, because that song--and then they couldn't wait for, you know, everybody couldn't wait for the album, you know. So, Marvin had his share of that with Berry and Motown about wanting to do meaningful records, other than just little ballads and love songs. Story_ID: 442825 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: You know, I often ask myself that. And I wonder, because I think when I look back, everything was--well, I had a purpose, even going through the changes that we went through. Naturally, I would have loved for the original Temps [The Temptations] to stay together. You know, I wish we could have done that, you know, but through it all, I guess it was something that just had to happen, you know. Because sometimes you're tested. God tests you, to see, you know, what you're made of. He knows what we're made of, but he wants to see if you know what you're made of. And it's hard to say, because like I say, I would have loved for the original Temps to stay together. But we went through what we went through, and here I am sitting here today still being very fruitful, and enjoying what I'm doing still. But I'm living to talk about it, and like I was taught, take a negative and turn it into a positive. Story_ID: 442826 Speaker 1: Now, also when you look back on what you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Wow. Our legacy I think was being able to endure, in spite of all the changes, not only personnel-wise, but changes we've gone through with Motown [Motown Records]. Strength, our legacy will be the strength of being able to--the willfulness to continue on in spite of all the different obstacles that have been placed before us as a unit. And never die, never say, "I give up." I'm going to continue to fight on. Speaker 1: It's interesting that you answered the question as a we, rather than as an I, you know. You answered it as-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as what we would do. Do you see yourself as a consummate team player, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I know that's been my role, even though I'm the last one. But I still--I'm still the last man from The Temps [The Temptations], but I still have four guys that's still with me today, you know, to carry on the legacy, speaking of The Temps of now with Ron Tyson; who's been there for twenty-five years, Terry Weeks, who's been there for eleven or twelve years, Bruce Williamson, two years, and Joe Herndon about five years, you know. So I always think of myself as we rather than just I, even though I know primarily, I carry the history. A lot of it has been standing on my shoulders and what have you, but I still see myself as a team player. Story_ID: 442827 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family. Now, do you have children (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a daughter that's forty-two, and she don't look it, but she just had a little girl that's two months, and a little boy is four years old. And I lost my son, Otis Lamont [Otis Lamont Williams], in '85 [1985], '86 [1986], I think it was. So, and I do have a son, a young man that took me on as his father, you know, Theron Derrick, and a beautiful granddaughter by him and his former wife. So, that's about it, that's it. Mother [Hazel Williams Little] and father [Otis Miles] passed, you know, a long time ago. So, I have brothers and sisters back in Detroit [Michigan], and cousins down in Texas as well as in Detroit. And so, yeah, I still live--but I'm out here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], a bachelor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm in this here wonderful house enjoying it. Now I'm not saying that I enjoy being a bachelor, you know, because sometimes you get kind of lonesome. But as it is now--you know, because I've been divorced for about ten or eleven years. Speaker 1: How many times were you married? Just--just once, or--? Speaker 2: I've been married three times. Speaker 1: Okay. Was the entertainment life hard on wives (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, it can be. Oh yeah, it can be rough on a relationship or on a marriage, you know. But most cases, the relationships I've been involved with, they knew what I was doing before we made that commitment. You know, because I've been singing ever since I was, wow, about fifteen years old, you know. So, my first wife [Josephine Rogers Williams], she knew. You know, my second wife [Ann Cain] knew, and the third one [Arleata Carter Williams] they--so it's not like they stepped into something, "Well, geez, if I had known this here, I wouldn't have married you." You know, so they knew what they were getting into from day one. Like, if it was a role reversal. If I were to run across a young lady that's an aspiring actress or a singer and she's been doing this here, I would have to have the same kind of understanding and the capacity of understanding to say, "Hey, well, then we just have to work at it." Because I always tell people, "Saying I love you, that's not enough." It's a great ingredient to have, love. When you're in a relationship, you have to work at that. That's a full time job, you know, because it's a lot of give and take, and what have you. So, I've learned quite a bit, and I would love to find that special, as I call it, OAO, which means one and only. So, in time. But I just got my divorce, you know, eleven- yeah, going on the eleventh year now. So, but I'm enjoying life still, you know, I'm enjoying it. Story_ID: 442828 Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't touched upon we need to raise before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, you're pretty good. I mean, this and the connection with the first one, I think we've got a pretty broad perspective of The Temps [The Temptations]. But what's your last one? Speaker 1: The last one is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Like I, I've been asked that, and there used to be a very popular show during the '60s [1960s] that I enjoyed. It was called 'Now That's Entertainment.' And that's how I would like for the Temps to be remembered, as, "Now, that's entertainment." And the reason I say it in that sense is because anybody can bring their family to see the Temps. You do not have to worry about cupping your child's ears because they're out there cussing. You do not have to worry about, "Man, pull your pants up. Didn't nobody come to see no butt crack." You know, you don't have to worry about seeing that from them. You come to see The Temps, you're coming to see head up entertainment, you know, a little joking, a lot of singing, a lot of dancing, and a lot of history-making music that you have come to know and love, because of our audience loving the music that we do. So, that's how I'd like to be remembered, as a Temptation. Now, that's entertainment. Story_ID: 442829 Speaker 1: Now, in re- just one more question in regards to that. Like, what is your perspective of today's music? Speaker 2: Oh, I get asked that all the time. I'm not impressed; I'm not impressed. There's a few things that I hear on the radio that I say, "Oh, okay." I'm crazy about Alicia Keys. I like Neo, I like what his music is. He's got a nice little bounce, and his lyrics, you know. I can't get with these lyrics that, you know, you're cussing, and so you don't leave nothing to the imagination, and you know, it's just so oblique that it's ridiculous. No, so I'm not that impressed. You know, I don't want to rain on anybody's parade, you know, because it kills me when I hear them say, "Well, you know, that's the way it is in the hood, you know. That's why we express it the way we--," I just tell them, "Well, geez, I wasn't born with no silver spoon in my mouth, and I'm from the hood." You know, so they don't necessarily have to always put it on the hood, you know. I love Will Smith, because he does--when he's rapping, he don't say nothing derogatory about no woman, "B, I'll whip your ass if you don't have my money or--" you know. You know he--it's clean, it's music, it's entertainment. So I guess that's from the era that I'm in, that I'm from, rather. But I listen at it, and now I told Maurice White of Earth, Wind and Fire. Him and I were getting our cars washed a few years back, and we were talking about, you know, the music of today. And I said, "Yeah, man, it's going to be interesting to see how this here rap does." I said, "Because, you know, you might get a 'My Girl,' or Tony Bennett might say, "I want to record that song, 'My Girl' by The Temps [The Temptations]. Or you might get, Tony Bennett might say 'Reasons,' I want to do 'Reasons' by Earth, Wind and Fire." You're not going to get no Tony Bennett talking about I want to do a rap tune, you know. And see, the importance of a song--when you get a Tony Bennett, or if he were still alive, a Sinatra [Frank Sinatra]--they want to do something that Earth, Wind and made, or the Temps made, or what have. That takes, the song takes on another kind of livability, you know, because you're talking about iconic figures talking about doing your music. You're not going to get that happening with no rap tune, or rap anytime soon, if ever. It ain't got no melody, you know. You know, you rapping and what have you, and half the time you can't understand what the hell they're saying. And in most cases, you know, I was listening at--a young lady was playing me something by a famous rapper. And he said, "I'll scramble you like eggs," and so on. I said, oh, Jesus Christ. But hey, what can I say? They're making money, you know, and they--see, when we were at Motown [Motown Records], we had to go to school about being in show business. It's our vocation rather than our avocation, and that's that wonderful thing of artist development. We had to be at artist development sometimes at ten o'clock in the morning to five o'clock in the evening. And the Cholly Atkins, the Lon Fontaines, the Maurice Kings, the Johnny Allens, the Harvey Fuquas, Shelly [Shelly Berger], Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy], all of them would, you know, we had to go to school to learn what to do onstage, how to get on stage, how to get off stage, how to carry yourself, not only when you're not on stage, how to carry yourself as a professional. And so, we were taught about being in show business. That's why The Temps are still around, forty-seven, almost fifty years later. Story_ID: 442830 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you the last question again. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But this time, just, I mean, just tell me about how you feel, rather than the group, you know. But how would you like--how would you like, Otis Williams [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams], like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as straight ahead. I know there's obstacles, but I just think straight ahead. You know, I'm going, I know that's there, but I'm going, like Ben Wright [HistoryMaker Benjamin Wright] said, "Straight ahead, straight ahead. Yeah, I hear you." But with the will of God or what have you, I've been able to always think that way, straight ahead. I think like, what little martial arts I learned, the master would say, "When you hit somebody, you just don't think about hitting them here (gestures). You're thinking about going all the way through." I said, "Oh, really?" He said, "Oh, yeah. You just don't just (gestures) like that. When you throw a punch, you try and make it go all the way through, if it's a brick wall, you know." I said, "Oh." And he said, "So, that's where you have to have your mind." So, I like to stay straight ahead, focused, and let nothing stand in my way. Speaker 1: All right, thank you, sir. Speaker 2: You're welcome--..