 Story_ID: 661076 Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and observing is Eric Garner. Speaker 2: You did not just say Eric Garner? Is there an Eric Garner in the room? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICES): (Laughter). Speaker 2: Richter. Eric Richter [sic. Eric Victor (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Wow. She made history. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Eric Garner's, wow. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right. I'm sorry. Okay. What's on my mind (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That guy can breathe. Speaker 2: Okay. Matthew Hickey (laughter). That's true (laughter), sorry. Oh, my god, I'm getting everyone's name wrong. Stop. Okay. Dionti Davis and Adam Manta. Okay. Okay, so, we're gonna start out by slating the interview. And, I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spell it for us. And, give your date of birth? Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Malik Yoba. M-A-L-I-K, (clears throat) excuse me, Y-O-B-A. Born September 17, 1967. Speaker 2: Okay. And, today's date? Speaker 1: Today is December 9, 2014, which makes me old. Speaker 2: No. You're one of our--you're in a younger category with us. You're young. Average age in the collection is in the mid-seventies. Speaker 1: I'm leaving (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, you can't, you can't be vocal over there. I'm sorry. Okay. Sorry. The other thing is, let me have your place of birth, too. Speaker 1: Born in the Bronx, New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. And, I'd like to have our location today. Speaker 1: Today we're at 1900 State--South Michigan [Avenue], Chicago, Illinois six zero something, I don't know. Speaker 2: 60616, that's good. And, I'd like to have your occupation? Speaker 1: My occupation. So, actor, writer, director, producer, teacher, author, entrepreneur, and I actually do make money doing all of those things. So, I guess that keeps me occupied. Speaker 2: That's good. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's musician in there as well. But, yeah. Story_ID: 661077 Speaker 1: And, we ask five People magazine-ish questions, so, short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food. I'll go with pizza. I like a lot of food, but pizza. New York [New York] pizza. Thin crust. Margarita. Simple. Well done, yeah. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color. Today, I think it's gray. See, I have a lot of gray on. But, some colorful socks. See, if he [Matthew Hickey], if he was on it, he'd pan down to get my socks. But, we're not gonna do that. I don't know if I have a favorite color anymore. I tend to not really have a favorite anything. There's a lot things that I like; color, food, people, teams, sports. Speaker 1: So, this is gonna be--so favorite, what about a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of year? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's a good question. Favorite time of year. Well, given that I am a New Yorker, I would say that favorite time of year is probably when it's warm. Although I do like to wear layers as you can see today. But, yeah, probably when it's warm. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation. Wherever I'm at. I travel all over the world and so, people ask that question a lot. Depends on the mood I'm in, you know. I was just in Miami [Florida] for Art Basel, on a boat, on the water and I'm like, this is my favorite. But, I could be in Cape Town [South Africa] or in the mountains somewhere and, you know, somewhere else in Africa, or in the jungle somewhere, you know. When it comes to travel for me, I'm always just so appreciative of the fact that I get to see the world. I was talking to some friends--like, I like Chicago [Illinois] a lot, you know. I was talking about just the different places you could go, just in this country, and discover history, you know. Like, Kansas, Kansas City, you know, I forgot the guy's name [Jesse Clyde Nichols], but who went to Spain in the '20s [1920s] and saw all the Spanish architecture and came back and built this plazas and these fountains in the middle of America. Unless, you travel, you'd never go, you would never know that. You know, St. Augustine, Florida, building built in the 1500s that people wouldn't know about because they don't really get to travel. So, depends on what I'm doing, what mood I'm in. But, I tend to--there's very few places that I've been in the world that wouldn't go on a favorite list in some, some kind of order. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what about a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: First one that jumped in my mind, when you asked the questions, favorite phase is, "Lean not on your own understanding" [Proverbs 3:5]. That's a longer scripture, but that's really important to stay in constant evolution and growth, and, you know. The older I get, you know, take the more of the less I know for sure. So, I continue to seek knowledge. Speaker 1: That was nice, I'm always amazed at how people can get that favorite phrase or saying without knowing. Story_ID: 661078 Speaker 1: So, I'd like to, I'd like to start out by asking about your family background. And, can we start, I wanna start with your father. If you could give his name and what you know about his growing up? Speaker 2: So my father is named, birth name was Milton Myers [Abdullah Yoba], M-Y-E-R-S. Which is the English spelling. He was born in Aliquippa, Pennsylvania in 1927. He left home when he was about fifteen. His parents--and I know on his mother's side, I believe she was half Cherokee [Native American]. He always talked about her and her skin color and her beauty. Even though I never got a chance to meet her, I knew her name was Sarah [Sarah Covington Myers]. And, there's six kids in my family mate. My sister [Aminah Yoba] that's right old- of--above me, apparently looked a lot like this mother. And, so, of all the kids, I got beat the most. The oldest sister got beat probably the second amount, second. And, then this one that looked like his mother, he never touched her. And, she grew up to resent him, for that reason. Because my father was, he was generous with spankings for sure. And, I was, I was an often (laughter), I was like the top recipient. But, he--it's funny you would ask about him, because I was writing about him this morning. I've been working on this solo show ['Harlem to Hollywood'] about my journey from Harlem [New York, New York] to Hollywood. That's actually the name of the show. And, it's interesting in writing about him, you know, as you write this narrative, the desire is not to write it in sort of sequential order. And, so, I was writing a section about growing up and dreaming about being an actor. And, how important that was for me. And, it's interesting to revisit those memories of what did it feel like to be like fifteen, sixteen years old, fourteen, thirteen, twelve, and six. And, very specific memories of certain instances and my father wasn't a supporter of that. He didn't want me to pursue a career in the arts. He was a musician. Charlie Christianson [sic. Charlie Christian] was his, his hero. He told, he told a story about walking by a window and hearing this music and he didn't know what it was. And, it was a guitar player, Charlie Christianson. And, he had to find out how to do that. And, he--since he ran away from home, Aliquippa, and went to New York [New York], this, at this time this was like in the early '40s [1940s], and tried to make his way as a musician. And, it didn't really work out for him. Not the way he would have liked to. So, he used that as his motivation to try to convince the kids not to pursue life in the arts. Even though he blamed it on Islam; we were raised Muslim. And, he would say things like, "You can't make money off of god given talent." And, part of the reason why I was beat so much as a kid because, if you say something like that to me, that just sounds ridiculous. Like, what do you mean, I'm not supposed to make money off something that comes easy to me? And, I was always accused of taking the road of least resistance, which also didn't make sense. 'Cause I felt like if I have to, if I can get to where I'm trying to get to a lot easier than you're telling me I have to struggle to do something. Just the way I thought as a kid, it didn't make sense. So, he'd try to beat that outta me, like literally. I had an inner voice that just told me like, go left. It doesn't matter. Like, go that direction, and I followed that my entire life. Sometimes it got me in trouble, but for the most part, it got me here today, talking to you because, you know--I gave my teachers my autograph when I was thirteen. And said, "I'm gonna be famous and you should keep this." And, there's certain things that you know, you just know them. It's like music, I was a musician. I can't tell you where songs come from, but they come through you, and you trust it. And, you know, melody comes, and chord progression will come, or lyrics will come, and you don't have to write them down, they come. It's like a gift. Story_ID: 661079 Speaker 1: Malik [HistoryMaker Malik Yoba], let me ask you, did your father [Abdullah Yoba] share much about his growing up? And, what really formed him? Speaker 2: Yeah. My father, he, yeah, I mean, my memories of my father in his stories about growing up, were generally always in some sort of struggle. Like, his grandfather was a slave. So, his father [John Myers] used to tie him to a chair and beat him like as a kid. So, like, that corporal punishment that I (air quotes) enjoyed was direct result of the legacy of slavery. He talked about being beat up by cops when he was thirteen years old. He had a tooth missing because some cop knock his tooth out when he was a kid. He talked about, you know, just what it was like growing up in a mining town [Aliquippa, Pennsylvania]. And, having to work in, you know, had, you know, whatever kind if of manual labor he had to do to make some money as a kid. So, yeah, there's, there's, I mean, there's all kinds of stories from childhood until his early twenties. And, he never--it's interesting because I, as a--I'm a parent, right, of three kids [Dena Yoba, Josiah Yoba and Pria Yoba]. And, so, I'm very careful and mindful of not just sharing the hardships and the practical aspects of life with the kids, but also how I feel. And, how I think, and how I process. And, so he grow up in a time where, that isn't what you did. You just, this is what it is. This is how you do it. It wasn't about, well, how do you feel about, or what do you think about it, you know? There wasn't that level of sensitivity, so. But, yeah, he, he shared a lot. Story_ID: 661080 Speaker 1: So, how did he come to Islam? Was that, do you know at what point that he came? Speaker 2: He came, he became a Muslim in 1959. So, that would've made him in his early thirties. (Cough) And-- Speaker 1: The Nation [Nation of Islam] was active then. Speaker 2: No. He wasn't a Nation (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wasn't--oh-- Speaker 2: He was, he was a Sunni Muslim. Speaker 1: Oh, so, he was Sunni Muslim (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. My father [Abdullah Yoba] was, he prided himself on being avant-garde and not a follower. He was definitely a man with his own ideas about the world and who he was supposed to be. And, so, he was playing music. He was playing in some club or something. He had an out of body experience. He said that he could see himself on the bandstand playing and he was crying, and he felt the tears. But, he literally saw himself from, you know, that perspective and needed to find the god of music. That's what he told me. And, he had some friends from West Africa that were Muslim, and they introduced him to Islam and, you know, that was how he kind of found that, in New York [New York] back in, like I said, the late '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: So, did he--did you grow up going to the mosque, then? Speaker 2: I did. I grew up--My full name is Abdul-Malik Kashie Yoba [HistoryMaker Malik Yoba]. So, I grew up studying Arabic. I grew up going to the mosque. I grew up having to fast. But, I would rebel and eat pork rinds during Ramadan, 'cause I was that kid. That's probably why I got beat a lot, doing stuff like that. But, and I was rebellious. Because the way that we were raised was, you know, Islam requires a lot of discipline; praying five times a day. You can't eat certain food. You have to dress a certain way, you know. You can't work on Friday. It's like, so, it's very hard to grow up in a Judeo-Christian society. And, as a kid in Harlem [New York, New York], trying to practice Islam. And, you don't feel like it's yours. It's his, you know. So, there was a lot of rebellion on my part. Story_ID: 661081 Speaker 1: And, you know, so, the, the, the--could I have the siblings' names and birth order before I ask about your mother? Speaker 2: So, my oldest sister, Akoshia Fatimah [Fatimah Yoba Tolbert], my brother Abdul Rahman [A. Rahman Yoba], my sister Aminah [Aminah Yoba], myself, and then I have a sister name Suhailah [Suhailah Yoba], and another one Rahimah [Rahimah Yoba]. Speaker 1: So, six kids and you're fourth out of the six. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, your mother. Can you tell me about her? Speaker 2: My mother was born Diane Clark [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] in Harlem [New York, New York] in 1944. She met my father [Abdullah Yoba] when she was sixteen. He was thirty-two. So, he was a dirty old man. She happened to be walking with her little girlfriend on 125th Street in Harlem, and my father was speaking in some, like storefront. And, he was that, like, black nationalist as well. Like, back to Africa. So, this was like 19--maybe '61 [1961] or something, '2 [1962], or something like that. Even, no, before that actually. I think that was also like the late '50s [1950s] and, and she, she saw him speak and she was taken by this charismatic, handsome, guy. And, he saw her and he did (laughter) whatever he did to convince her. And, she, she likes to tell the story now. He passed when I was twenty-eight. But, she says, "You know, he said he wanted to have these kids, and I agreed to have these children for him." And, even though their relationship didn't work out, they separated when I was ten. She, you know, like, she felt like, "This was the reason why we met. So, that you guys could come forth." Speaker 1: So, did, so, she--they met really when he was speaking, and then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --she became involved with him. Story_ID: 661082 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what about her growing up? What about--what do you know about her family? Speaker 2: She, I wish she was here, 'cause she'll tell you, I mean, I love to listen to her talk about growing up in Harlem [New York, New York] in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. She was an only child. My grandmother, her mother was a domestic. She had a relationship with my grandfather. They never married. My mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] actually spent most of last summer researching her father. 'Cause she never really knew much about him, and discovered that he was from the British West Indies. We always thought he was Jamaican. But, she found out that, he was actually from Guiana [British Guiana; Guyana]. And, or at least one of his parents was from Guiana. That he was also Muslim. He served in the service. I forget which one. I think it might have been the [U.S.] Navy. I'm not sure. And, but, she grew up as a, as a latchkey kid. You know, left on her own from like ten as my grandmother took care of her family on Madison Avenue. But, they were very close. And, my grandmother was a very elegant woman. There all these old family photographs of like the cousins, and the aunts, and you know, as folks liked to look their best at the time. (Cough) I know she was a seamstress. She made all my mother's clothes and hats and took her to museums and the theatre, and like afternoon tea and that kind of stuff. So, even though they were born at a certain time, and of a certain color, they enjoyed some of those niceties, if you will, and culture (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so that side of the family in New York [New York], or is it from any other place? Speaker 2: New York. Yeah. My grandmother was from New York as well. Speaker 1: So, steeped in New York (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 661083 Speaker 1: And, so, I want to ask you about your earliest memory growing up. You had, you mentioned six but I'm wondering if you have a memory earlier than six? Speaker 2: Yes. Some of my earliest memories; I was four when I saw 'Alice in Wonderland' on stage. It's a play off Broadway and I said I want to do that. I remember jumping in a pool in Barbados trying to swim and in Bar- at four. And, all my siblings got in trouble because no one knew I left the hotel room and jumped in the pool because I believed I could swim. And apparently, I was swimming 'cause I didn't drown. I (laughter) don't know what the hell I was doing in the water. But, so, this is some early memories, yeah, definitely. Story_ID: 661084 Speaker 1: So, where is your family living at this point when you're young? Speaker 2: So, we're between--mostly in New York [New York], and L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: No. I mean, when you're young? Speaker 2: Oh, when I was young, we were living in New York. Speaker 1: No. But, where? What was-- Speaker 2: The Bronx [New York]. Speaker 1: No. But, do you remember what the street address? Speaker 2: Yeah. There was, let's see, 1148 Bryant Avenue. Which I went to go visit a few years ago, which was a trip. 'Cause I have very, very vivid memories of living in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s], with the gangs, and the fires, and the sirens, and the conga drums in the streets. And, you know, the Puerto Ricans, and the black, and the Irish, and the Italian, like all in that neighborhood at the time. Speaker 1: So, can you describe your block and since you're already doing it. I'd like to, you know, you're talking about some of the sounds. But, I'd like you--and the sights, but I'd like you to talk about the sights, smells and sounds of your, your neighborhood. Speaker 2: Well, one of my, you know, one of my favorite memories of growing up in the Bro- in that apartment in the Bronx, was back in the day, the soda delivery guys would come with these trucks that had all the sodas on the outside. They'd come in these crates. And, it wasn't like Coke [Coca-Cola] and Pepsi, it was whatever brands they were. And, they would stack 'em out, like on the outside. There were no, like, sliding door. And, when the guy would pull the truck into the neighborhood to deliver the sodas, like the local kids would attack the truck and steal the sodas. And, I'd be out the window looking at this. And, although my father [Abdullah Yoba] was like, "Boy, if you ever think about it, don't do it." But, I remember wanted to do that. Like, 'cause those were the bad boys. I remember Saturday mornings Little League, they were like the older guys. And, they'd meet on the street corner to go and play in the ballgames. And, I just couldn't wait to be older and like meet with the older guys and put on my baseball uniform and go play. But, I do remember, like I said, the si- the, you know, Savage Nomads, the Black Spades. There's a documentary done recently called the 'Rubble Kings,' about the gangs in New York in the '70s [1970s] that I really wanna see because I saw some photographs on Facebook recently. And, it jarred all those memories about being a kid in the South Bronx at that time. Some horrible memories, watching my friend's mother get hit by a car and literally splattered against the wall right in front of that window that I used to see the guys steal the, the sodas from. Speaker 1: Someone just came and ran-- Speaker 2: So, the car came around the wal- the corner and hit his mom and she went flying into the wall, and died on the street. So, that was an early memory that was--I don't know how traumatizing is was but it's one of those things as a kid that I always just remember that yellow wall, yeah. And, when I went back to that area of the Bronx, just kind of replayed all those, those kind of memories. I remember making mud pies. We used to make mud pies in the backyard. So, we lived in like a tenement building. And, each building was connected in the back by, like a yard. And, so, we'd get water and dig up the dirt and make little pies and put 'em on the window sill and dry 'em out. I don't know what we did with them, but we'd make mud pies. Story_ID: 661085 Speaker 1: What about sounds? Speaker 2: Sounds. The sounds are, you know, I just remember like the drum circles, and the Puerto Rican cats like, you know, the salsa music. Those are the things that really jump out to me. Other than the sounds in the house. My father [Abdullah Yoba] used to have musicians come over and play. So, he played guitar. He had a guy with the bass, and the saxophone, and drums, and they'd come and they jam in the house. The sounds of Casey Kasem before music was so segregated. When it was just Top 40 and you'd hear, you know, The Jackson 5, and then Cat Stevens, and then Stevie Wonder and then, you know, whatever. It wasn't like black music or white music. It was just everything. And, I remember those, those like, yeah. Because we grew up without television, too. So, my father refused to put TV in the house. So, there was music. There was definitely music from the radio. Music that he played. He was a huge jazz fan. So, there was always Billie Holiday playing; Miles Davis, Charlie Parker. And, he'd play on a reel to reel, old school tapes, yeah. Speaker 1: So, and, what about smells? I don't hear smells. Speaker 2: Incense. Oils. It was always incense burning. My father always burned incense. And, he would buy these, these oils from the Muslims. So, you could always smell 'em. Like, you know, if you came home, if he got home before you, you'd smell 'em. If he was leaving, you know, you knew when he was coming, yeah. Speaker 1: So, what is family life like? That's what I'm trying to-- Speaker 2: Another smell. Baking bread. So, every Sunday, my mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] used to bake bread, biscuits or loafs of bread. And, even though we had no television, we used to listen to those radio plays. 'The Shadow,' the old school radio play. And, 'Lone Ranger' ['The Lone Ranger']. And, would--like got--you'll think this was like the '50s [1950s], this is like the '70s [1970s]. But, we'd gather around the radio to listen to the 'Lone Ranger' on Sunday night. And, you'd smell like, my mother baking bread in the apartment. Story_ID: 661086 Speaker 1: So, what, what is family life like, in some respects? 'Cause it seem- you know, I mean. This is a time where lots of people have TV in their, you know, in their households or being raised with TV. And, but, I'm just trying to sort of get a sense of the hierarchy in the family. What the expectations were? Were people sleeping, also? Speaker 2: Where we slept? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, we always had, we always had big apartments. 'Cause there were six kids. So, we usually at least had like a four bedroom. So, I shared rooms with my brother [A. Rahman Yoba], and then my sisters would share rooms. They'd like double up and then my parents [Mahmoudah Young Lanier and Abdullah Yoba] had the other room. Speaker 1: Now, I, is this the building that had a pool in it? Also, is that a later time? Speaker 2: No. That, that happened later. So, in the Bronx [New York] my earliest memories, old school like Bronx tenement apartments with the glass doorknobs and the glass, plain doors. No. We, we moved up to a co-op in the early '70s [1970s], 1974 we moved to East Harlem [New York, New York]. And, actually, we moved to a tenement across the street from my elementary school. And, we moved when the new place 1199 Plaza which is now called, East River Landing [1199 Housing Corporation, New York, New York]. My father was a member of the 1199 hospital union [Local 1199; 1199SEIU, United Healthcare Workers East]. And, they put the funds together to build this--these high rises that had like Olympic size pool, and the sauna, and a gym, and views of the East River and duplex apartments, and doormen, and indoor parking and, which is a huge thing in the '70s [1970s]. Especially, in East Harlem. He was very, very proud. That's probably one of his greatest accomplishments in terms of being able to provide for his family. And, you know, he was very, very, proud of that. The view in the morning, watching the sunrises, and the sunsets in the evening. And, you know, we had space so, yeah. That's yeah. That's where the pool was. Story_ID: 661087 Speaker 1: So, what was your--what about your earliest memory of the mosque? Do you have an earliest memory or experience? Speaker 2: The earliest memory of the mosque. It was a mosque on the West Side of Manhattan [New York] on 72nd Street and West End Avenue, which is still there. The memories are being surrounded by a lot of Arabic speaking people from Africa, from the Middle East. So, we weren't, like I said, we weren't part of the Nation [Nation of Islam], we're Sunni Muslim. And, so, I just remember always smelling feet (laughter) as a kid. I ain't kidding, 'cause we'd go to the mosque like before you pray, you have to wash, right. Washing your hands, and wash your feet, and you ears, and your mouth, and your face. And, you know, people from people from different parts of the world, bring their flavor with them. So, through the food, there's just natural body odor. I remember as a kid always feeling like, why do we have to do this? Especially, in the summertime. Like, really? We gotta sit in this place and speak Arabic, and you know, and do these prayers. It wasn't something that I enjoyed as a kid. But, we did it, you know, 'cause we had to. Story_ID: 661088 Speaker 1: And, and s- okay, so, you're speaking of really in some respects a very international experience. I mean, when you, you know, I mean, I know New York [New York] is, has that aspect to it. But, it--this is--so, you have Puerto Ricans in the neighborhood. The, so, what is the, what do you think Puerto Ricans and black in the Bronx [New York]? Is that-- Speaker 2: At that time? No, we had everything. I mean, you know, we had Italian neighborhoods. We had Irish kids, you know. Some of our, like there was a family called the Heads [ph.], they were Irish. And, like, you know, Little Richie [Richard Head (ph.)] was my best friend as a little kid. And, you know, my--so, they had--it might have been three of four of them in their family. It's like the older siblings were friends, it kind of went down the line. But, yeah, we grew up with Puerto Ricans and Irish, Italian. Those of the memories that I have the most, in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] at that time, like on our block. So, its kids that play baseball. It was like a mixer--mixture of the kids. And, funny enough, you know, we weren't aware of any division. I'm sure it existed. But, I wasn't aware of it. In fact, Richie's little sister, Patty, I kissed her right under the steps. Like in--you know, so, the first girl I ever kissed was a white girl. Holla. How 'bout that (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Patty Head [Patricia Head (ph.)]. Speaker 1: So, also, what about schools? So, where was school? What was your elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to three different elementary schools (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, did you go to preschool at all? Speaker 2: Did not go to pre-school. Did not. Well it started in kindergarten. So, kindergarten--they were in the Bronx, like two elementary schools [P.S. 198 and P.S. 109, Sedgwick School] in the Bronx, and my third elementary school was in Manhattan [New York], 'cause we moved to Harlem [New York, New York]. So, and then I went to school for the rest of my life in Manhattan. Speaker 1: So, why did you switch elementary schools in the Bronx? Do you remember why? Speaker 2: Because we moved. Speaker 1: Oh, you said you moved across the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --across the street? Did you say, you said, you moved from one building-- Story_ID: 661089 Speaker 1: What are the things that you're learning in the, in the mosque? I mean, what is being taught there? And, how is it affecting family life and the structure of family? Speaker 2: There was Sunday school. I'm sorry, 'cause we went to mosque on Friday, so it wasn't actually Sunday school. But, there was definitely the equivalent of Sunday school. They'd send the kids off to learn about the Koran [Qur'an] and the hadith, where all the instructions of how to be a dutiful obedient Muslim are. I just remember always feeling rebellious. I never felt like that was my religion. At a very early age, I always felt very aware, like, this is my father's deal. I always felt there was a God and I felt like, I believed in a higher being. But, you know, even though Allah just means God in Arabic translation, the, the pract- the act of practicing as a Muslim just never felt like what I wanted to do. And, I don't know if that was just become of, you know, again, in growing up in a Judeo-Christian society, you feel like that odd man out. You know, don't celebrate Christmas, you don't celebrate Thanksgiving. You don't do any of the holidays that your friends do. You know, you get a Christmas break and everyone comes back from school talking about the toys that they got. And, you'd make up stories about stuff that your friends got, you know. And, go back to school and say, oh, yeah I got a pinball machine. And, everyone knew you were Muslim so, they knew you were lying, they didn't say anything about it. They just kind of went with, went with it, you know. But, it, you know, my father [Abdullah Yoba] definitely, you know, there was no pork in the house, there was--weren't allowed to put photographs of, there were no idolatry allowed, right. So, you couldn't put a picture, poster of Michael Jackson up on the wall, or somebody else that you might've admired. So, it was definitely very much feeling like outsiders. We had names that were strange. I had to keep my head covered. As a kid, I'd get in fights because of that. But, at the same time, you know, I came to appreciate the--so you had this black nationalism going on but, it wasn't Nation of Islam, and very strong sense of identity. Like my last name, Yoba. My father made the name up. And, he gave it a meaning, last of the slaves of new generation. Story_ID: 661090 Speaker 1: And, he was very, very intent on raising children that had a strong sense of self, and purpose, and mission. And, you're not just gonna fall in line. You're not gonna pray to a blond hair, blue eyed Jesus. You're gonna be, I mean, you gonna--in fact, you're gonna go back to Africa. 'Cause that was his plan. I was supposed to move to the Sudan when I was sixteen, seventeen, when I graduated high school [City-As-School, New York, New York]. That was his plan for my brother [A. Rahman Yoba] and I. So, he was very much that guy that wanted to raise, you know, strong black men who identified with being different and other. You're not gonna follow the rules. You not gonna listen to everything everybody else is listening to. You're not gonna dress like that. You're gonna be a leader. You're not gonna be a follower, so. In some ways, that really served us. But, in other ways, you know, I think about this a lot as I got older. So, my father [Abdullah Yoba] was so strict. So, of the six kids in my family, four of us were kicked out of the house by the age of seventeen; me included. I got kicked out at sixteen. So, and, even though he really wanted to create a family where we took care of each other, and supported one another, and that was the most important thing. My parents separated when I was ten. And, my mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] left. My grandmother and my mother lived with us. And, I remember the cops coming to the house and them asking my mother to leave. This is 1977, where a black man, in a house, with his wife, his mother-in-law, six kids; the wife calls the cops, they get into an argument. The cops come and they ask the woman to leave. I don't know if that's happened anywhere else in the history of America, but that happened. It was white cops that showed up to our house, and asked my mother to leave. And, so, the six kids stayed with my father, which is--yeah, your mouth is wide opened. Her mouth is wide opened right now, yeah (laughter). Can't believe, yeah. Speaker 2: But, do you know what the context for that was? You don't--at that--you don't know what the-- Speaker 1: No. I'm tel- I mean, we've--it's something we've discussed. It's our family history a long time. But, you know, it was just a very freak kind of situation where, you know, officer said, "Ma'am I think you should probably, you know, step out," and she did, with my grandmother. Speaker 2: Was she distraught, you think at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of course, yeah. Yeah. The youngest was two. They were like two and five, and I was ten, and, yeah, the oldest was fourteen. Speaker 2: And, he raised you from that point on? Speaker 1: (Cough) He did. Speaker 2: By himself? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 661091 Speaker 1: So, why--this is--no, this, this narrative is a, is a little different than the narrative that I'm, you know, I'm used to. And, I just--this--so, I--how are the girls faring? I mean, if you're, you know, the--how are the girls faring under your father [Abdullah Yoba] then? And, what are they, what is their role within (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, like I said, of the six kids-- Speaker 1: Oldest is? Speaker 2: So, the oldest at this point is fourteen. So, then it's fourteen, thirteen, twelve, I'm ten, and then five and three, are the two youngest. And, the four oldest all got kicked out by the age of seventeen. So, my oldest sister [Fatimah Yoba Tolbert], she actually left at fifteen. So, she left soon after my mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] did. She had a boyfriend. My father didn't want any of us to have boyfriends or girlfriends. And, no sex before marriage, and so she violated. And, first she ran away from home because she felt that she needed to. And, she--my grandmother ended up moving into the building next door. So, it wasn't like she was actually that far away. But, my mother had to go somewhere else, because my father was threatening her life at that point. And, so, my sister, the oldest one, left. And, then came back, and then left again. She ran away and then came back, and then she was asked to leave. And, then my brother [A. Rahman Yoba], he got his girlfriend pregnant and he was seventeen. And, my father said, "Either you're gonna marry the girl or you have to leave my house." And, my brother was too young to get married, or so he thought, and so he left. My other sister [Aminah Yoba], the one that my father used to never beat and looked like his mother [Sarah Covington Myers], she had a little rebellious moment and stayed out one night with her boyfriend. My father asked her to leave. And, then there was me. And, yeah, he caught me with a girl, yeah. Speaker 1: And, you were how old? Speaker 2: Sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen. Speaker 2: He walked in on us and he kicked me out. So, I left home at sixteen with a BMX bike, twelve dollars in my pocket, my book bag and my guitar. And, pretty much been taking care of myself since then. Speaker 1: So, where is everyone going though, when they're leaving? Speaker 2: We go--(laughter), we went wherever we went, we could find, so. Ultimately, we all ended up with my mother. So, my mother got herself situated; had a place in the Bronx [New York]. And, then slowly, one by one, all of us ended up back with her. So, my oldest first, and then my brother, and then my other sister, and then me. And, one sister ended up staying with a family friend; the one right above me. And, then I moved in when I got kicked out. And, then within a year and a half maybe, I moved in with a girlfriend. So, by eighteen I was, like, living with a girlfriend. Story_ID: 661092 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm just trying to--so, you, but you've already moved to East Harlem [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --at this point, right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And, you're staying--so, what age were you when you moved? You said, nineteen. Speaker 2: What age am I when I moved where? Speaker 1: When the family moved to East Harlem? And, the co-op [1199 Plaza; 1199 Housing Corporation, New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, when the family moved to East Harlem, I was in second grade, so I was like seven. And, so, from seven to sixteen, I lived in East Harlem. So, when I got kicked out, I went back to the Bronx [New York] for a little bit. And, then around that time, my mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] was also getting remarried. And, so, she and the husband [Curtis Young], they found, they moved into another co-op in the Bronx, and moved to a brownstone in Brooklyn [New York]. And, then I moved with them for a while. And, then she, my mother and her ex-husband moved here to Chicago [Illinois] in the '80s [1980s], and left the apartment to my sister and I. And, then my sister had her boyfriend. I had a girlfriend. We were all living together as roommates, and then kind of went from there. Speaker 1: So, how are you managing? 'Cause you're basically kids in some respects, you know. Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, how does the family structure even sort of stay together with that? Speaker 2: So, this is the irony in it, in this, you know, we talk about it now, when--as we're older; so, with all this work that my father [Abdullah Yoba] did to create this unit and protect it and ultimately destroyed it. And, we are, you know, we're living all over the place at this point, you know. Not all over the place, but the two younger ones are still with him. Three of us are with my mother. One of us is with my, my--family friend at one point. And, like I said, I went and moved with my girlfriend, and everyone sort of went and got their own place and did whatever they did. But, even though we ended up all over the place, we all still remained pretty close. And, we still are, 'til this day. So, it all kind of worked out. And, so, it's interesting because my mother did this history of her life and she told the story through--it started with some emails with my oldest sister, just their recollections of my father and their life growing up. So, it's interesting to hear it from my mother's perspective. Because my mother, she started practicing Buddhism in the '80s [1980s], and she--her greatest prayer was to have her children return. So, when you hear it from her perspective, she talks about, I can tell you with absolute conviction, the thing that brought us all together was her chanting, nam myoho renge kyo. And, that was her intention and that--actually, by the time I started living with her, this--that was the summer of--so, I got kicked out was Sep- October of '83 [1983]. So, I was six- I just turned sixteen. That summer, right before that, I was doing a school play. I was doing 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents] actually, and we broke for lunch. And, across the street from the school is this girl, Theodora [ph.] and went to her house and her mother had an altar set up. And, I had no experience with that, and I asked, "What is that?" She goes, "Oh, my mother's a Buddhist," blah, blah, blah. Cut to a few months later, my father kicks me out. I go to my mother's house and here's this altar. I say, "Oh, I know about that." And, so, I started practicing Buddhism. And, that made a lot of sense to me because Nichiren Sutra [Lotus Sutra] Buddhism wasn't about and isn't about anything other than understanding the laws of nature. The law of causality. And, that made a lot of sense to me. That it wasn't trying to connect with something outside of myself. But, rather understanding that essentially, you know, every action is a reaction whether it's a thought, an idea, whatever. And, so, it became important to focus your intention always in a positive way. Because you knew that even if no one is seeing it, you know, whatever you'd say or do, that the law of causality is absolute; like gravity. If it goes up, it will come down. And, so, that was really helpful to me as a teenager because it just sort of gave me another layer of, of consciousness. So, it really did impact my behavior as I moved in the world. 'Til this day, I mean, you know, you move in the world with a level of righteousness because you just get it. You know, like, okay, I'd rather spend my time being positive and doing the (air quotes) right thing than not. So, it's--I find it's been very, very helpful for me. Story_ID: 661093 Speaker 1: Malik [HistoryMaker Malik Yoba], I--what I'm trying to also understand is how are you finding your way when you know, you're in an environment where you know that this, you know, that, you know, the religion that you're practicing is not for you. You know, you're attracted to the arts, but you're, you know, you're in an artistic household, in a lot of respects. And, you talk about, you know, going to, you know, going to see the play. I think you--at four-- Speaker 2: 'Alice in Wonderland.' Speaker 1: 'Alice in Wonderland.' But, your mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier], what is her influence? Because, I had read also that she exposed you to a lot. Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother's influence, you know, so, even though she left when I was ten and I didn't see her again until I was fourteen. So, I didn't see her for like four years as a kid. The, the exposure was pretty thorough early on. So, the trips to the theater and not just 'Alice in Wonderland,' but we would see theater on a regular basis. Or, go to the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] and see some artist perform or her. She had a lot of artist friends. My mother was a child of the '60s [1960s], like for real. Growing up in New York [New York], in the Village, hanging out with hippies, you know, she was all in that mix. And, she tried to bring that to us anyway she could. My father [Abdullah Yoba] resisted it. But, I was still able to get my fill in school. So, I was in the drama club. I was always in school plays from elementary school, middle school, high school. Story_ID: 661094 Speaker 1: So, where is your elementary school? You said there were three. But, what are their names? Speaker 2: So, so, there was P.S. 198 [Bronx, New York], which is the one that was across the street from where we used to live. The place that became the mosque. And, then there was 109 [P.S. 109, Sedgwick School] that was in the Bronx [New York]. I can't remember the one where I was in kindergarten; what that name was, but, so, in the city, in East Harlem [New York, New York]. Well, the last one was, actually, not even East Harlem. It was like the border; 96th Street and 3rd Avenue. It's kind of the border of Yorkville [New York, New York] and East Harlem. Speaker 1: So, are there teachers that are influencing you or what? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, Miss Terrell [ph.] was my fifth grade drama teacher. It was probably one of the first teachers that really recognized that I had talent. She put me in my first lead in a school play when I was ten. A play called 'Rowdy Kate' [Claire Boiko]. I played Sheriff Sam. But, she believed in me as a kid. And, I invited her to my productions all the way to high school. And, even with high school, my father [Abdullah Yoba] wouldn't let me go to Performing Arts high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. I had to take the test for the science and math high schools, which I could care less about. And, then ended up going to a school that my brother [A. Rahman Yoba] went to, to take engineering, which I could care less about. And, ended up getting shot, when I went to that school. And, so, I ended up in a little scuffle after school, and I told my father, "See if I was in the theatre program, I wouldn't've gotten shot." (Laughter) "'Cause the theatre kids aren't trying to shoot people." So, that's how I ended up going to another high school that had a theater program. And, it was that school that I did the play, 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents]. And, it was that school where I met the girl that my father kicked me out the house and so-- Speaker 1: So, that school was named? Speaker 2: That was Julia Richman [Julia Richman High School; Julia Richman Education Complex] in New York [New York]. And, they had a program called Talent Unlimited [Talent Unlimited High School, New York, New York]. Kadeem Hardison went through that program, Mos Def, Lisa Lisa, the singer, yeah. Speaker 1: So, that school was located? What's the name? What street is it on? Speaker 2: It's on 68th Street and 2nd Avenue, Manhattan [New York]. Speaker 1: So, it's on the ea- on the-- Speaker 2: East, East Side. Speaker 1: East Side. Okay. So, tell me about the school and how you got in. Speaker 2: I ended up, you know, going to the school called Park West High School [New York, New York], where I got shot. And, then, my father finally acquiesced and let me go to performing arts program. And, I was there for about, not even a year, and then he kicked me out the house. And, then once, so, when he kicked me out, I stayed with friends for a couple days. And, then I located my mother's [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] apartment and I went to live with her. And, it was like night and day, so. She immediately, like, got me a job. I was working at the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] which is the preeminent black theater company in America at the time. Denzel [Denzel Washington] came through there. I watched Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] do plays, and [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad, and Angela Bassett. Which is crazy, 'cause most of those folks, I ended up working with later on in life. And, it crazy, 'cause this is part of what I was writing about this morning. I express it more eloquently as I write it for a show ['Harlem to Hollywood']. But, this is really interesting that we're doing this today. 'Cause I was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, because I find it sort of--so this--tell me about the schools though. What was the school like that you, you know, the Julia Harden [sic.]? Speaker 2: Julia Richman. Speaker 1: Julia Richman. Tell me about the student body and all of that. Speaker 2: Julia Richman was a school that no one wanted to go to. That was like the ghetto school. So, we always went to some of the best elementary, public elementary schools in New York. So, my elementary school 198 and Wagner Junior High School [J.H.S. 167, Robert F. Wagner, New York, New York]; those are Upper East Side [New York, New York], really mixed, you know. We had kids from all over the world. So, I was used to that. And, in Julia Richman was all the black and Latino ghetto kids. And, I, you know, so, that was the last thing you wanna do. So, my preference would've been Performing Arts high school. The same school featured in the movie 'Fame.' My father was like, "Absolutely not." So, my other choice was Park West 'cause the science schools, I got into one of 'em, but it was in Brooklyn [New York]. I didn't really wanna do that. I don't even think I told my father and I ended up just going to the school that my brother went to. My brother was a little bit of a hero of mine at the time. And, so, I said, well, if he went, then I'll go there. It didn't work out for me. So, and, I ended up going to Julia Richman, the school I didn't wanna go to. But, it did have a very strong theatre, a musical theatre program and dance program. So, I was at least able to be in that community with artistic kids. And, and since my father kicked me out anyway, it all worked out. Story_ID: 661095 Speaker 1: So, you're saying that the, being back with your mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier], and him kicking you out and being back with your mother and of the Negro Ensemble is what got you sort of on a path in some respects? Speaker 2: You know, I never left the path, you know. Even though my father [Abdullah Yoba] said, "No." In my heart, I was like, no, I still wanna do this. So, the Negro Ensemble was great because my mother knew that this is what my passion was since I was a little kid. So, she got me working with a woman named Cynthia Belgrave, who was a pretty respected--she owned her own theater and was an acting teacher. And, so, I did the play 'Equus' [Peter Shaffer] with her when I was sixteen. She had--my mother had a friend that was the general manager of the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. So, I got the job there as well. But, it, I was always--just growing up in New York [New York] and, you know, once my father kicked me out. But, even before he did, I always had--we had--I went to the elementary school with kids that were on Broadway. Kids that were doing movies. Carl Payne [Carl Anthony Payne II], who ended up on 'The Cosby Show' was a classmate, so. He was one of like the famous kids. And, like I said, kids on Broadway, kids in commercials. So, just growing up in New York you were around it. So, I was never that far away from it, even though my father didn't want me to participate. Story_ID: 661096 Speaker 1: Now, you also talk in one of the interviews we came across was, being exposed to Jewish kids who had a lot of money. Where was that exposure at this point in? Speaker 2: So, again, growing up in New York [New York], going to school in the Upper East Side [New York, New York], and it's funny what you consider a lot of money, when you're a kid from Harlem [New York, New York] and your father makes thirty-five thousand dollars a year. Even though we always had what we needed. And, we were some of the (air quotes) better off kids. We lived in the doorman building with the duplex and the pool and all that stuff [at 199 Plaza; 1199 Housing Corporation, New York, New York]. My kids that lived downtown, their parents made six figures and they had houses in the Hamptons [New York], or one friend whose grandfather was a VP of General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]. And, General Motors had their building on 58th Street, where FAO Schwarz is in Manhattan [New York], overlooking Central Park and the apartment in the Park Five [5th on the Park] on 5th Avenue. Since the first time, you know, you walk in someone's apartment, there's a grand piano, and all white rugs and, you know, kids with duplex apartments on Park Avenue. I grew up with those kids and we all like ran around the city together, so. For me, it was always a sign. I remember I--'cause, a lot of the kids from Harlem where I grew up, they didn't hang with these kids. In fact, I was one of those black kids that like to do all the things white kids liked to do. I snowboard. I race BMX. I played football and basketball. I played hockey, you know. So, I was one of those people that even though I grew up with a very strong sense of, you know, my--the legacy of Africa, and who we are as descendants of kings and queens. My father [Abdullah Yoba] was very, very clear to tell us, "Listen, if you were in Africa, you would still be a prince. You would be a king." And, I believed that. Like, where--that was my, like, my retort if some kids try to make fun of me, I'm like, whatever. Like, "You stupid African, with your stupid name," whatever. "If I were in Africa I'd still be a prince." And, we would, like, and it's funny how that works out because, it wasn't until I was in my twenties, that I realized, how believing that got me out of a lot of situations. Because, I really did walk around, not with a pompous sense of self importance, but it was about, I believed that, you know. Yes, there's some royalty here and it should be respected. Even my name, Malik [HistoryMaker Malik Yoba]. Malik means king. And, Abdul-Malik means servant of the king. And, it's a Muslim name. So, for me, one, people never--black folks never wanna pronounce your name the way it's supposed to be pronounced. So, Abdul-Malik became, (pronunciation) Abdul, Abdul, like, everything but Abdul-Malik. So, for a long time, up until high school, my friends called me just Abdul. And, I was like, well, Abdul-Malik means servant of the king, or slave. So, it's like Abdul doesn't work. It means servant or slaves. So, I'll go with Malik which just means king. So, even though, you know, we had that indoctrination at home, I was also very curious and open to other. Anything that was different, I was open to it. And, so, I went to bar mitzvahs my--you know. All my friends, they went to Hebrew school. I'd eat the Shabbat dinner with the, you know, my Jewish friends on Friday night and sit around with their families and I was very, very opened to that. Speaker 1: This is in high school, you're talking--? Speaker 2: Middle school [J.H.S. 167, Robert F. Wagner, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: This is middle school you're talking about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Middle school. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 661097 Speaker 1: Okay. So, I wanna talk about the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], 'cause you were, were you working in concessions there, are you? Speaker 2: I worked in concessions, and I worked in the office, which was down the block from where the Performing Arts high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] was. So, here I am, you know, down the block, actually, it was down the block and around the corner where Negro Ensemble Company was. And, as it turns out, my very first agent, Ambrosio, Mortimer [Ambrosio, Mortimer and Associates, Inc.], when I became an actor, was in the same building as the Negro Ensemble Company, years later. The Negro Ensemble Company was no longer there, but. So, I sold subscriptions. I was a person making cold calls trying to get people to buy the subscriptions for the season. And, then I worked in the theater and sold concessions, and I was also an usher. But, I used to also take it as an opportunity to learn every single line from every play there, so. Some special memories, like, Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] before he was doing film, he was doing play there. I was sixteen. He was doing a play called 'Colored People's Time' [Leslie Lee]. And, he had to play the bones, which was essentially--well, slaves used to actually use bones, but he used two pieces of wood. And, I was fascinated by how he could keep these rhythms. And, I remember having him teach me to play the bones. Or, [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad did a play called, 'puppetplay' [Pearl Cleage] at the time there and knew all of her lines. And, I'll never forget, I would stay in the theater between the matinee and the evening performance. And, one of my first favorite things to do was to just stand on stage with no one in the theater and just imagine my life one day, like I'm gonna be doing this. And, again, it's so strange that we're talking about this today, because I was like, really digging into my sense memory today, writing this stuff. But, those are really special times. Imagining your life as a kid, this is what you wanna do. And, I remember visiting Phylicia in her dressing room. As I approach the dressing room, she's in the mirror putting her makeup on, and the door is to the left. And, you know, she used to practice, I don't know, it wasn't Hinduism, but it was some sort of eastern meditation. She had guru. She had a picture of the guru up and she'd do her makeup. And, I'm in the doorway and I'm asking her questions about, like, "How do you make it," and, you know, all the questions a young aspiring actor will ask. Cut to--and I was sixteen--so, cut to I'm now thirty-two years old, and she's playing my mother in a show called 'Bull,' which was TNT's first series. [HistoryMaker] James Avery played my dad. She played my mom. And, I was producing an event called, the great American father's day celebration, at the House of Blues [House of Blues Los Angeles] in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And, I had Debbie Allen, who's about to direct on the show--in Chicago [Illinois] shooting 'Empire.' Debbie, I reached out to Debbie to help co-direct it with me, and they were working on the play, 'Old Settler' ['The Old Settler,' John Henry Redwood] at a PBS station [KOCE-TV] in L.A. And, I go to meet them. And, I got to the dressing room and Phylicia's in a chair putting her makeup on and I'm standing in the doorway to the left of her, sixteen years later. And, now we're both working in the business and, you know, it's, it's crazy how it all works out. But, yeah, those are some of my memories of Negro Ensemble Company. Michael Peters who directed, you know, the 'Bad' video. I think he did 'Thriller' video, Michael Jackson who was a huge video choreographer in the '80s [1980s]. I met people like him. And, when I actually, when I got the movie 'Cool Runnings,' which was an open call. I had no agent, no head shot, no resume. I went in on an open call audition and they gave me a list. The cast director said, "Well, you're gonna have to get an agent. So, you can actually do this movie. So, they can negotiate your contract." She gave me a list. And, the first person on the list was not available; I called. And, the second company was call Ambrosio and Mortimer. And, I talked to them and when they told me that they represent Sam Jackson and Angela Bassett, I signed with them because I knew them from when I was a kid, and that was the only reason I did. But, it kind of worked out. Story_ID: 661098 Speaker 1: Okay. So, can you tell me how you felt though? You, you talk about being on the stage and imagining. But, can you talk about the Negro Ensemble theater [Negro Ensemble Company] at that point in time? Speaker 2: The Negro Ensemble theater, theater four it was called, West 55th Street, special magical time in my life. You know at that point, I was now at the Talent Unlimited program [Talent Unlimited High School, New York, New York]. So, I was in the theater program at high school [Julia Richman High School; Julia Richman Education Complex, New York, New York] but, I was also working at the theater at night. And, to me that was, like, was one of the most magical times in my life. Because I felt like I was getting closer to the dream, and it was, you know. It was, you know, to me it was, it was--and as I think about it, I'm actually trying to--I can still remember what it felt like walking into that theater. It was, it was, magic is the word that I use all the time, 'cause that's what it felt like. It was, it was the thing that transported me from my current reality to like one day, one day, I'm gonna, I'm gonna be up there, I'm gonna do that. And, it's crazy how that worked out. And-- Speaker 1: Who did you admire the most at that point? Who are you--did you-- Speaker 2: Everybody. I mean, any, you know, anybody who was doing the thing that I wanted to do. I was just like, in awe of, yeah. Sam [Samuel L. Jackson], you know, it's funny because, Sam was one of those people; he was struggling at the time. You know, he had drug issues (cough) and, but he was--I just remember him being really, really--Charles Fuller, another person, you know, so many people. I just remember, like, really being moved by this guy doing his thing, and just feeling, I wanna learn that, like, teach me that. I was just like a sponge, you know. So, that, that's what I remember more than anything, 'cause it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what were your, what were--were you taking acting lessons at school? Or, were you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I took--I was in acting my entire life. So, in school, like I said, elementary, middle school, high school, yeah. And, then for a short period, I took class at HB Studios, Herbert Berghof [HB Studio], downtown Manhattan [New York]. But, I was a little too young to appreciate the level of sophistication, if you will, and the teaching of theater. Because, when you start as a kid, it's essential instincts. So, you do improv classes and, you know, children, don't really have to have a lot of acting lessons because they're so close to the truth. I was watching an old Shirley Temple movie today, and I was just like, wow, it's amazing how good she was, you know. And, not just the ability to speak the words but the internal work that kids adjust closer to. There's less layers of bullshit and you can just get to the truth and express it. And, so, for me as a kid, I was just like, wow, this was--it was everything, it was everything. Story_ID: 661099 Speaker 1: Now, were you thinking at that point, a career on the stage? Or, in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Or, in film? Speaker 2: I wasn't thinking about film at all. I was thinking about theater. I wanted to be a song and dance man on Broadway. I wanted to do musicals. That what, that's what I grew up doing, you know, musicals and it was just--let me correct that. I wanted to do anything, in terms of acting, but the focus was definitely theater. Coming out of high school, I wanted to study musical theater and early childhood education. And, so, I didn't get to do that, but, I--yeah, that was the thing. And, film just kind of happened. The first film I did was in 1989, and it just--I went to an audition and got it. But, I auditioned for tons of stuff. But, I auditioned for anything. I auditioned for 'Fame.' I auditioned for 'Fresh Prince' ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air']. All kinds of other movies that I never got. There was a casting director in New York [New York], Debra Wheeler [ph.], who liked me as a kid, and even though I had no agent, she would call me in on stuff. Friends would tell you about, "Oh, they're auditioning for such and such, go check it out." So, I would audition for anything but my heart, you know, the tough part about theater, I was in Amsterdam [the Netherlands] a couple years ago. A friend of mine's family runs a bunch of theaters. And, we went to see these old theaters in Europe, and I just said, "Can we just sit here for a while?" And, I still do the same thing as an adult. Like, I just sat, and she's looking at me and I'm like, "I just need to like, you know, take it all in." There's something very sacred about the theater, you know. Story_ID: 661100 Speaker 1: And, yeah, I, yeah, so again, I'm still tripping because I spent about four hours this morning writing about this stuff. And, the importance of it because it's important to remember that we all have a unique story to tell. So, you're doing The HistoryMakers, and although there might be some through lines, each one of us has a different mission, and perspective and sometimes we can forget that our individual voice is important. And, when you work on film, you work in an ensemble, television shows, whatever, at the end of the day, you're being a steward to someone else's vision. And, that's important because that's what makes us a complete artist. But, it's so important to write your own story. And, it's an interesting thing from a catharsis standpoint. Because when you, when you do get to work as an actor in Hollywood, in Hollywood productions, there is a palpable energy of non-truth, right. People don't always tell you the truth, which is fascinating. An entire business could be run by people lying to each other. Not telling the truth. Not giving up all the information. Saying, love you man, love you, huge fan, huge fan, love--right. I have no intention of hiring you or, you know, people say, you know, make decisions based on fear. I can't do that because I don't wanna get fired. Or, we can't say that. We can't put that out. We can't show these two people together. We can't show this type of relationship. We can't represent all people. We, you know, so, there's a, there's a learning curve that you have to go on in order to navigate that. It's why so many people, particularly from the East Coast would say, "I don't like L.A. [Los Angeles, California] people, there's something fake." And, you can't always put your finger on it. But, it's a town, it's a town in an industry. Although, we could tell truthful stories, it's still a place that is run on people not telling the truth. Which is a very odd--and--it's like when you go to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], like you can feel the energy of politics in D.C. It's palpable. Whether you're in a restaurant, a bar, a bathroom, you just feel it. The same thing is true in, in, you know, in L.A. And, so, it's important, you know, a poem popped in my head this morning that's what kind of got me up out of bed and, you know, started writing. And, you know, it's, I can feel the transformation of anything that feels less than amazing. Any kind of doubt. Any kind of fear. Any kind of criticism. There's something amazing when you sit down and just write the truth. Just write it. And, so, when you live your own or re-live your own journey, it does something to you that's very important. And, you know, people ask me all the time, how do you--like, what's the secret to your longevity in this business? Or, how do you, you know, stay encouraged? And, I feel incredible blessed, I've been able to work for over two decades consistently. But, I don't take it for granted. And, my greatest work is actually ahead of me. And, I really feel like, the greatest work that I have to offer is the stuff that I write. Because, that's why I'm here. I'm not here just to spe- of, you know, I am here to be of service to humanity in general. That's how I feel. But, I'm not here solely to be in service of other people's idea of what I'm supposed to be doing. Story_ID: 661101 Speaker 1: So, Malik [HistoryMaker Malik Yoba], this is the thing, so you're, you're talking about--were you writing a poem this morn- you (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yeah, I woke up with some lyric, some lyrics and then I just dove into--so, I've been working on this piece for a number of years. I mounted it in 2008 and it was sort of a work in progress. Speaker 1: This is 'From Harlem to Hollywood' [sic.]? Speaker 2: 'Harlem to Hollywood.' And, then I've been wanted to remount it and I feel like I have to do it this year, just need to get it done. So, I've just bullet pointed some areas of my life that I wanna write more about that weren't in the original version. And, one was the early childhood dream and, you know, it's important to remember, like, why I started doing this in the first place. It was never about fame. It was never about money. It was never about awards. It was never about any of that stuff. It was about, I was taken in by the magic of theater. And, sometimes you have to keep going back to, you know, revisit the original dream, create new ones, and stay on your, your path, because you can get distracted by the world we live in now. Speaker 1: So, you know, something about being involved in the theater is very, it's sort of the baring of the soul in some respects, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, what I, what I wanna ask you is, you get this, so, you get the agent [Ambrosio, Mortimer and Associates, Inc.], right? You get the agent at what point? You get the agent because, you get casted? Speaker 2: In the movie 'Cool Runnings.' Speaker 1: In the 'Cool--' so, let's talk about that. How that--'cause you're--that's 19- (unclear). Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993]. Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993]. Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993]. Story_ID: 661102 Speaker 1: No, we gotta go to City, CityKids Foundation [The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York]. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: Okay. And, I--the only reason I say that is, so, you're working at Negro Ensemble, how did CityKids Foundation, 'cause you-- Speaker 2: So, when I, so, I'm at NEC, we can now call Negro Ensemble Company, NEC. I'm at six- I'm sixteen. I worked there for a couple of years and then I leave. Speaker 1: Why do you leave? Speaker 2: Why did I leave NEC? I don't even remember why I left. I don't know if they didn't invite me back. Honestly, I don't remember. But, I end up, I end up leaving and my mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] calls me one day and says, "How would you like to go to Hawaii?" I was like, "All right, cool." She goes, "Oh, but you have to start practicing Buddhism, 'cause there's this World Peace Culture Festival happening." This is now 1985. And, she goes, "There's this festival happening and if you wanna go, you have to start practicing." So, I'm like, "All right, however." So, I'm in high school, at this point now, I've left Julia Richman [Julia Richman High School; Julia Richman Education Complex, New York, New York] and the Talent Unlimited program [Talent Unlimited High School, New York, New York] because I felt like, even though that was a strong theater program, I was just hanging out way too much, just partying and having fun and not focused. So, I found out about a school called City-As-School [New York, New York], where you could work and get credit, or take college classes. And, so, since I was now (air quotes) out of the house from my father [Abdullah Yoba], and free, I decided that I would go to this school where I could make my own schedule. And, still kind of hangout and party because I could literally start my classes in three in the afternoon if I wanted to. And, that's what I did. And, so, I went to City-As-School, and my mother calls me up and says, "Would you like to go to Hawaii?" The way City-As ran, I could take off time if I needed to. So, I'd go to my counselor or whatever, I say, "Listen, I need to work for, like, six months, and make some money to take this trip." And, so, they gave me the time off and I became a bike messenger. And, so, I started working as a bike messenger to raise money to go on this trip to Hawaii, 4th of July weekend of 1985. And, the whole weekend was about promoting world peace. It was twenty thousand people coming from all over the world, who were Buddhist, to participate in this festival. And, I was in what's called the Young Men's Division Gymnastics. Which essentially meant, there were fifteen hundred guys and they were broken up into groups, I forget how many. But, on the bottom row were guys on roller skates. And, then we had these long ladders that were built. And, then we did like these four story human pyramids. And, we were part of this parade and we had to skate down Kalakaua Avenue in Honolulu [Hawaii] with these towers of men; fifteen hundred guys. And, in order to do that, the men had to come together and chant together, and pray together essentially for unity. And, we did this for months leading up to this trip to Hawaii. And, it was during that time that I started practicing Buddhism and started to see some things happen in my life. Story_ID: 661103 Speaker 1: And, it occurred to me that I wanted to study early childhood education and musical theater as a major in college. So, one day I'm at school [City-As-School, New York, New York], and I'm no longer a bike messenger. I'm back at school and I'm sitting with my counselor, Pat Offshef [ph.] who I'm still friends with to this day. And, was one of those teachers that believed in me as a kid. And, she goes, "Well, you need to get a job." And, so, I pull out the Village Voice and there's this thing for musical theater, this children's theater program. So, I go to this, to answer the ad and, when I get there, there's no job. Like, they've hired all the jobs at that point. But, I run into a young lady who was in Hawaii with me. So, we started talking to each other and a woman comes over and say, "Well, how do you guys know each other?" I say, "Well, you know, we were part of this, this program in Hawaii and this what we did." And, she goes, "You know what, I have the perfect job for you." And, what's crazy is, up until that point, I was chanting for the best job, working with kids. One where I can incorporate musical theater and just like, working with kids. And, that's the job that I got. She did actually recommended two places. One was called The Upward Fund [The Upward Fund, Inc., New York, New York], after school program, where I went first, at seventeen. And, I started tutoring kids and teaching theater in the summertime. And, the other one was called The CityKids Foundation [The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York]. And, so, after working at The Upward Fund for about two years, I was now nineteen. And, I kept thinking about this place, CityKids, and so, I called them up and they had--they would have meetings every Friday. And, then bring different people to come and talk to the kids about all kinds of subjects. And, there was this Brazilian dancer there teaching Capoeira. And, I went down and I met the founder, Laurie Meadoff. And, we started talking and I said, "You know, I'd gone to this trip to Hawaii and this whole world peace festival [World Peace Culture Festival] and I had a vision to create a place called the international youth culture center," which was gonna be a multiservice center for kids. But, it was all centered--the center piece would've been bikes. So, at that point, I think I told you at fifteen I started racing BMX. And, I was obsessed with BMX racing. And, so, I thought kids all over the world ride bikes. So, I can bring kids together around bikes, but then we'd offer all these services. As I'm sharing this vision with this woman, she goes, "Oh, my god. We're trying to build this place called the Manhattan Empire," which is a hundred million dollar real estate project in Time Square [New York, New York]--this is before Time Square became gentrified. And, she had the designs for this place to--it was, it was very similar to this vision of this thing I wanted to build. At the time, Laurie was about thirty-six and I was nineteen. And, so, she dug me, I was this kid with this crazy vision. And, she goes, "I wanna hire you." So, she hired me right before my twentieth birthday. And, when I turned twenty, I started working for The CityKids Foundation. And, my first job was to go around to the thirteen high schools that they had chapters in and hand out these surveys for kids to fill out to talk about the things that they wanted to improve about the quality of their education. And, I ended up at CityKids for six years. And, it was while at CityKids that I found out about the open call for 'Cool Runnings' and so. Speaker 2: And, you rose up through the ranks in CityKids too, right? Speaker 1: I started out volunteering. So, I started out first volunteering when I was nineteen, and then at twenty, right before twenty, they were like, "We wanna hire you. And, we're gonna pay you twenty thousand dollars a year." And, you couldn't tell me nothing. I was twenty years old, making twenty thousand dollars a year. I was excited. And, what--the crazy irony is CityKids had a repertory company [CityKids Repertory Company] that would go around and perform. And, people like Isaiah Washington was in it. Donald Faison came through there. And, Lauryn Hill at one point was at CityKids. And, Nessa Carlson [ph.] and a bunch of people that are now working as actors and performers. And, so, CityKids had the repertory company and they had a school base program. So, by twenty, I was working in thirteen high schools, and I was teaching, and it was a theatre component. And, I didn't have a degree. And, so, even though that's what I wanted to do, officially, I still ended up working with young people, working in theater without the degree. And, so, I did that for a number of years and learned a lot about designing workshops, facilitating workshops, bringing kids together around fundraising, around production, all kinds--it was an amazing, amazing, amazing time in my life. When most young people would've been in college, I was getting on the job training. Story_ID: 661104 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, you actually went out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] too, right? Speaker 2: We founded, yeah, so, in '89 [1989], we started CityKids [The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York] in Los Angles and went out there to help open that office. And, hired my mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier], who was living in L.A. at that time. She moved from Chicago [Illinois] to L.A. and hired her to help run the L.A. office. And, yeah, so, I started off volunteering and at twenty I was a junior chapter specialist, it was called. And, at twenty-three, the founder [Laurie Meadoff] asked me if I wanted to be the vice president. At first I said, no. I thought I was too young. And, then I decided that if I was asked that at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], I'd probably say, yeah. So, I took the gig and I stayed there and it was great. It was amazing, amazing, amazing experience that, I mean, 'til this day, so much of who I am is a result of those six years of my life working with that organization. And, one summer, we ran out of funding and most of the people working with us were older. And, they had families and other responsibilities. So, I told the founder, "Look I don't have any kids, I'll stay." Plus, I had a waiter job in--at the same time. So, I stayed and I went to work one day and it was a sign on the wall that was for an audition for film. And, it said it was paying $325 a day. I was like, I'm a go and audition. And, I went and I got that movie. And, it's the first time I made, like, one thousand dollars in three days. And, the guy who wrote that movie, a guy named Jamal Joseph had just gotten out of jail from doing ten years in Leavenworth [United States Penitentiary, Leavenworth, Leavenworth, Kansas] for his involvement in the Black Panther Party. And, I was fascinated by him and his story, and I said, "Hey, man, I work with these kids. How about you come down during Black History Month and tell your story?" And, so he did. And, we loved Jamaal so much that we ended up hiring him to be artistic director of CityKids Repertory Company. He's now been running Columbia film school [Columbia University School of the Arts, New York, New York] for the last, I don't know who many years now. But, Jamal Joseph is the guy who called me up one day and said, "Hey, they're doing a movie ['Cool Runnings'] about the Jamaican bobsled team, call this woman Jaki Brown [Jaki Brown-Karman], and go audition for it." And, that's how my film career started, so. Story_ID: 661105 Speaker 1: So, talk about your fil- because film is much different, you know. Did you, so, you, you're hired. Talk about who's hired and how the process all worked. The shooting and that kind of stuff (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, 'Cool Runnings' was crazy because like I said, I was running the youth program. I was happy with my job. At this point, I was making about thirty-six thousand dollars a year. I'm in my early twenties. Speaker 1: Which is a lot of money in your--at that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I have no degree. I'm working in schools. I'm--we're producing shows all over. We did stuff on Broadway. We did--we had a Saturday morning TV show. I'm flying in private jets. It was crazy because we had a lot of celebrities' support and a lot of support from Hollywood. So, it was interesting how my sort of introduction to Hollywood kind of came through the back door a little bit. And, then, so, I'm working at CityKids and-- Speaker 1: And, the celebrities, Laurie [Laurie Meadoff] had a lot of those contacts. Speaker 2: Yeah. From De Niro [Robert De Niro] to [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones to Bruce Willis. Demi Moore was our spokesperson at the time. And, Roger Daltrey and Michael Bolton. In fact, Michael Bolton, we got him to work with us because there was a guy that used to manage him at one point. And, then, we had gone to that guy and said, "Hey, we're doing this benefit at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] at The Theater at Madison Square Garden, like, New Year's and, well, right after New Year and we want Michael Bolton to perform." And, this guy goes, "Bolton will never perform. He's got a show New Year's Eve. There's no way he's gonna do a show with you guys January 17th." So, or 16th. I'm walking down 57th Street one day and here's Michael Bolton walking in the street. I was like, "Excuse me, sir. Do you know, So and So?" And, he goes, "Yeah, I do." I goes, "Well, that guy just told us that you would never perform for this youth program, because you have a show on Ja- on New Year's Eve at the Garden." He goes, "Well, if he told you I wouldn't do it, I'm gonna do it." And, so, I recruited Michael Bolton to perform for us at our benefit. And, it was--but, those are the types of things we would do. Like, I would, you know, sit across executive at the studios and demand they give us money for the youth programs. And, we were trying to do some really cool stuff around bring kids together. CityKids Foundation [The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York] was all about bringing kids together across culturally to make a different in the world around things they cared about. But, using the arts to do it. And, so, before the riots happened in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] with Rodney King, we were out there trying to find our way and get support. And, no one would feel us. But, the minute the riots happened, the phones are ringing. Can you bring the people out here and try to address this issue of diversity and racism in L.A.? And, so, it was a very, very powerful time, powerful organization at that time. And, so, you had a lot of people supporting. We would have celebrities support the voice of the kids. So, a kid writes a song; [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock plays the song with the kid. We were on Oprah ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] back in '91 [1991] doing that stuff. Donahue ['The Phil Donahue Show'] back in '89 [1989]. So, we had a lot of celebrity support. And, yeah, it was, it was great. Story_ID: 661106 Speaker 1: And, then, like I said, I answered that ad one day. Got that job. Forgot about it. Actually, I--well, I did the first job, the first film, and then when I auditioned for 'Cool Runnings,' I just went in, as I had over the years and, didn't really expect much. It was an open call. I was the last person, on the last day. And, I was asked to do some improv. Two months later, I'm at Greenpeace [Greenpeace USA, Chicago, Illinois], at a meeting, and the phone rings and it's Disney [The Walt Disney Company], saying, "We tracked you down." I was like, "How the hell did you get my number?" "Well, we called your office, they told us you were here. And, we need you to fly to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] tomorrow to screen test." And, I thought it was a joke. "No, I have a job. I have to ask my boss." And, so when I, I left the meeting at Greenpeace, went back to my office and asked my boss, "Would it be okay to fly to L.A.," (laughter), "the next day to screen test?" She was like, "Boy, you better get outta here and go au- you know, go screen test." And, that's how I got the movie 'Cool Runnings.' Speaker 2: So, can you talk about the making of that movie? You said it was somewhat-- Speaker 1: Of 'Cool Runnings'? Yeah. Well, 'Cool Runnings' for me was--the two things in my life early on that really drove home the power of positive thinking and the power of intention; probably three things. But, I used to always wonder what it felt like to get shot. Don't ask why, but I did. As, a kid, I was like what does that feel like? And, I got shot at fifteen. But, I also wanted to go to the Olympics and bobsled. And, when the Lake Placid Olympics [1980 Winter Olympics] happened in New York [Lake Placid, New York] in 1980, I remember looking at the bobsled competition thinking, I wanna do that one day. And, so every time the Olympics come around, I get all passionate. And, one of the reasons why I raced BMX is because in some way a BMX course if like a bobsled course without the jumps. And, I was into the speed and the turns and all that kind of crazy stuff. And, I remember shooting the movie 'Cool Runnings' at Calgary, Calgary Olympic Park [WinSport's Canada Olympic Park, Calgary, Canada] and being at the top of the bobsled run. We had our Jamaican bobsled uniforms on and a lot of the extras in the movies were actually people that were at the Olympics and this is where they actually did the bobsled run. And, I realized that here I was, bobsledding in the Olympic as I, as I wanted to do as a kid. And, that whole period of my life was pretty magical because I wasn't pursuing acting. I was really passionate about working with young people and I was pursuing more music. So, aside from all the stuff I did with CityKids [The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York], I was also playing my guitar and doing little band stuff, and writing music for the performances that CityKids would do. And, occasionally jump in on stage with them. And, you know, there were a lot of actors that were actively pursuing acting, and I just felt like, I don't wanna do that. I don't wanna run around and have people basically tell me no, all day long. 'Cause I'd see my friends come back and they were pissed off because they didn't get some job. But, with music, I could pick my guitar up and sing in the subway, or in the park, whatever, and that's what I did. I'd do showcases around the city. Story_ID: 661107 Speaker 1: And, but, when 'Cool Runnings' happened, it was literally like I was plucked from one reality (gesture) (makes sound) and placed in another. And, then all of a sudden, you know, five months after that movie comes out, I did two other films for Miramax, and an AT&T [AT&T Inc.] commercial and 'Law and Order.' And, then I booked 'New York Undercover,' and then my whole life changed. But, back to doing that movie, for me, it was, it was, you know, at that time, I was still identifying with my Jamaican roots. So, I knew that I had that connection. I'd written that song ["Jamaican Bobsledding Chant"]. It was a Jamaican bobsled chant in the movie that I wrote for my audition that ended up on the soundtrack. I just couldn't believe that I was actually doing this. I made more money in twelve weeks than my father [Abdullah Yoba] would make in a year. That movie--so at that point, even though my father had kicked me out some years earlier, we had reconciled. And, the thing that really kind of brought us back together, at the point that I was studying Buddhism when I was younger. Two of the things that really showed me that there was power in that practice was, chanting for the job working with kids, and the best job working with kids, I ended up with that job [at The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York]. And, my relationship with my father; about wanting to heal that, that riff. And, I remember sending him a card. I think I was eighteen, and his favorite artist was Billie Holiday. And, it was a card of Billie Holiday and I wrote to him, "Oh, I've been practicing nam myoho renge kyo," and I wrote it out. Knowing that he would have to read it. And, all nam myoho renge kyo means is the dedications to the mystic law of cause and effect through sound vibration. That's all it means. And, the practice is about setting an intention while at the same time chanting. So, science shows us, right, if we set an intention that we can actually make things happen by being focused on that and taking the action. And, that's really all it was. And, so, he--once I sent him that card, our relationship completely changed. And, so--there was a point I was trying to make about that. Speaker 2: Well, you were, you were saying the making, was it the making of the film. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You were talking about the making of the film and why that was magical and you were talking about the reconciliation with your father around that time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: And, you were talking about the rule of chanting. Speaker 1: Right. Right. Well, yeah, I think it's just about how things manifest itself, you know, ending up in the Olympics, even though it was vis a vis the movie. Those are very, very powerful times in my life, seeing things manifest that I'd thought about (simultaneous). Story_ID: 661108 Speaker 1: So, how long did it take to shoot the film? Speaker 2: Oh, I know what I was gonna say about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I remember I talked about making more money than my father [Abdullah Yoba] made in a year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: And, I remember, the night before I'd gone to do the movie, we had that event at Madison Square Garden [The Theater at Madison Square Garden, New York, New York]. And, Demi Moore was our spokesperson, she was still married to Bruce Willis at the time. And, I remember the night before-- Speaker 1: They were hot. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, yeah, they were on top of the world at the time. And, I remember saying to Bruce like, "Hey, man, I'm about to go do this movie." And, I'm all excited 'cause now I'm feeling, like, you do movies, I'm a do movies, we're in movies together. And, he goes, he looks at me and goes, "Whatever you do, don't give them 100 percent." And, I was like, that's weird, all right. So, I go off and do the movie, and I remember, getting in back of the limousine. And, they sent the stretch limo, and where we had the event, they had a reception. So, the event was like on a Saturday night, and a reception Sunday morning, like a brunch. And, that's where Bruce said that to me. And, I remember going to get my car. They were like, "Oh, a car is gonna come pick you up." And, there's all these town cars in front and stretches and stuff, 'cause all the celebrities. And, I keep going out looking for my car thinking it's just gonna be like some little town car or whatever. And, I said, "Man, they're late." And, the guy goes, "Oh, what's your name?" And, I said my name. He goes, "No, that's your car." So, it's like the stretch. I'm like, "Oh, my god, I can't believe it." So, I'm in the back of the stretch, I'm headed to the airport. All the kids from the program [at The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York] had helped me get my luggage in the bag, and fly first class to Canada. Which was crazy because I left on the 17th of January, 1993 to head to Canada to go do this movie. And, the plane got grounded in Dallas [Texas] on the 17th. And, I arrived in Canada on the 18th, which was ten years to the day that I got shot. So, when I talk about manifesting things through intention, getting shot and then doing this movie on the same day was kind of crazy. And, I arrive in Calgary [Canada] and I have this huge one bedroom suite. And, I've never been in a hotel room that big. And, I called my father and I said I, I said, "I get it." He said, "What are you talking about?" I was like, "I don't know how you took care of all of us on the money you made." As I was making more in twelve weeks, like I said, than he made in a year. And, that continued with our reconciliation. Even though he died a few years later. He actually died after 'Cool Runnings' came out and after 'New York Undercover' came out. So, even though there was all this, you can't ever do this, I was happy to know that, like, when he was being taking care of in the hospital, all the nurses were fans of mine. And, so, at that point, "Yeah, that's my boy, that's my boy." He, he turned into that guy. Story_ID: 661109 Speaker 1: But, yeah, doing that movie was crazy because, you know, like I said, I got a song ["Jamaican Bobsledding Chant"] on the soundtrack. And, so, I end up getting a record deal with Columbia [Columbia Records]. So, I was able to do my music that way. Built lifelong relationships that I have with the other actors in the film as well as the musicians on the soundtrack, and my connection to Jamaica, to this day, is really strong because of that. And, I'm really, really proud of being part of that. And, and you know, for the first eight years of my career, launched really was 'Cool Runnings.' The film I did in '89 [1989] kind of happened and did a couple of small films. But, those were just little independents. But, 'Cool Runnings' was the one that sort of really turned my life around. And, then, you know, it was just like I was on this rollercoaster ride. You know, films, TV shows, and I sort of got pulled into this, this vortex. And, it was, it was hard because there was so many people that were trying so hard to get to where I'd gotten to, and it happened for me truly just because I was of service to other people. And, so my entire career that's what I always say, you know. We did a premiere, a screening for 'Empire' last night. And, I was being interviewed and at least three of the people asked the same question, like, you're still here. Like, what is the secret? And, I, to this day, I just really believe that you have to be of service to something bigger than yourself. And, that's hard because that's an anomaly in our business. I mean, our business is really designed to, you know, you have to be about you and you have to do everything you can do to make you a star. And, have the right publicist, and go to the right events, and schmooze the right people, and get in the right room and--but, that's been the hardest part for me to reconcile in my career. Because, it's never, it's very hard for me to have a vision of where I wanna be. Which is odd, given that I'm someone who really believes in vision and knowing and intending, it's been something that I've struggled with--to--because I feel so selfish, you know. Like, yes, I wanna work with the best directors in the world. And, I think it's important to do that, but perhaps if in my heart of heart of hearts acting was the most important thing than maybe I would feel that way. But, I don't. I feel like acting is one of the things that I do. That I'm good at. That I'm grateful I have the opportunity for. But, it's very hard to, to have such a singular focus as I see some of my peers in the business and it works for them. But, that just never felt like the thing for me. Story_ID: 661110 Speaker 1: So, you described this whole scene. Oh. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You described this whole scene. And, and the, you know, being at the premiere. But, you also started to say that Bruce Willis said, "Don't give your all," (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A hundred percent, yeah. Speaker 1: And, you, you never fi- why? Speaker 2: So, Bruce when he said, "Give it a hun- don't give it, don't--whatever you do, don't give them a hundred percent." I never knew what that meant. And, so he said that to me in 1993 on my way out the door to go do 'Cool Runnings.' So, I'd seen him, you know, over the years and we'd chat. And, couple years ago, like maybe 2012, I ran into him at the U.S. Open [U.S. Open Tennis Championships] in tennis, in New York [New York]. And, I said, "Hey, man. You remember what you said (cough), do you remember when you said, 'Whatever you do, don't give them 100 percent'?" And he searched and said, "I said that to you?" I'm like, "Yeah, you said that, right before I went to go do 'Cool Runnings.' What did you mean?" He was like, "I don't even know what I meant." So, all these years later, I'm thinking there was some profound wisdom in this. But, I gave it my own meaning. And, I think that for me it means, if you put all your eggs in that basket of just being an actor and you commit your entire life over to waiting for someone else to say, "You come, now, for our vision," I think you'll get lost. I think you have to--when you are in the moment absolutely give a hundred percent. When you're at work, yeah, know your lines, show up on time, you know, be a professional, you know, stay humble. Support the vision of whoever the director or the writer is and make sure you're of service to that. But, make sure you develop the other aspects of, of the business as well. 'Cause otherwise, you're sitting around waiting on a job, so maybe that's what he meant, I don't know. But, that's what it means to me. Story_ID: 661111 Speaker 1: Let me state that you have a very natural quality on film, to, you know, you have a very natural quality about yourself. That doesn't always come. People who transition from theater to film. That is not always a natural thing. And, I'm wondering is that something you learned or it came--I'm asking did it come naturally, or how did that come to be? Because even films, they're not done chrono- you know, in the order which theater, you know, usually are (laughter). So, I'm just asking about that. Speaker 2: The, I'm sure it's--I don't know when, you know, I never felt like I was one of those theater actors that had to learn to pull it back and be smaller for film. Like, there are actors that I worked with that've traditionally done theater and a lot of times, big, big shows that--or shows that require, you know, large characterizations and physicality and you can see them. You know, oh, okay, pull 'em back. This is a much more settled medium. I'm sure I just learned through work. I'm sure people have been in my ear, over the years, and said, "Yes, more of that. Pull this," you know, you continuously still working and figuring out how to be better. But, yeah, do, just as a performer though, it's important for it always to feel natural. Like, you know, sometimes you do things that don't feel natural because it's not close to who you are. So, it might be some physical or voice thing, or whatever. But, just learn to trust, like, your director, and--or your camera man, or your sound man, or whatever, because they can be much more objective than you can be. And, but, I think it's just experience, I don't know. Story_ID: 661112 Speaker 1: So, with, so, talk about 'New York Undercover,' you know, and how-- Speaker 2: (Cough). Speaker 1: --how that, how that came, came to be. Speaker 2: 'New York Undercover' happened, I was doing 'Law and Order,' and-- Speaker 1: Which was a very popular series. Speaker 2: Which was a very popular series back in '93 [1993], or '4 [1994], '94 [1994]; beginning of '94 [1994] I was doing 'Law and Order.' And, I got an audition for Cool--'New York Undercover.' And it was the same producers and I literally, was shooting an episode of 'Law and Order,' we broke for lunch and they brought me into-- Speaker 1: No, no. You've got the time--you've got the dates wrong. Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-four [1984]? Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994]. Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994]. Okay. Sorry, sorry. I'm sorry. I thought you said '84 [1994]. Speaker 2: No. Thank you for being so thorough with your, with your research there. Yeah, in 1994. So, we were doing the episode of 'Law and Order' and I broke for lunch. And, they pulled me into a room and auditioned me for Cool Run- for 'New York Undercover.' And, it was the same producers, Dick Wolf and his team. And, it was the also the same casting director that had worked on 'Cool Runnings,' Jaki Brown [Jaki Brown-Karman], who was casting 'New York Undercover.' So, she says, the minute she read, 'New York Undercover,' she had me in mind. And, so, it was pretty simple, you know, working on one project, literally broke for lunch and did 'New York Undercover,' and it went my way, and. Speaker 1: Now you said that, you said that, you knew that it was special from the beginning. Now, Dick Wolf was looking at what he was sort of missing in the genre of, of, 'cause he had, as you, there was-- Speaker 2: He only had the one 'Law and Order,' at the time. Speaker 1: Yeah. The "Law and Order,' but, I thought, okay. He had the 'Law and Order.' But, also, this was on, was it on UPN [United Paramount Network]? Speaker 2: It was on FOX. Speaker 1: FOX, okay. Back in FOX. Okay. But, let's see, but FOX at this point also has 'Martin' and-- Speaker 2: 'Living Single.' Speaker 1: 'Living Single.' Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, so, and this was in, in the community, in the black community. We think, oh, this is fabulous, 'cause it's all this programming of about black people. You know, we're in our element at that point. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, talk about why you felt that this was special to begin with. 'Cause you felt that way about 'Cool Runnings,' too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, yeah. So, 'Cool Runnings,' sometimes you work on a project and the crew doesn't always read the scripts. Like, every member of the crew. Maybe, the key departments do. Like the key cameraman or the key sound, or whatever. But, a lot of the time, the entire crew doesn't read everything. And, you can get a gauge by just how people react to what you're doing on the set in the moment. And, so, 'Cool Runnings' was one of those films where literally I remember shooting some scenes and the camera shaking 'cause the camera guys are laughing so much at whatever's going on. And, you just feel like, wow, this is gonna work. Or, this feels goods, and then it actually works. So, you get a sense of, okay. If it translates here, there's a good probability that it could translate there. That's no always the case. When I did the movie, 'Cop Land,' you know, I thought Stallone [Sylvester Stallone] did an amazing job. And, you know, you're in the sense with him and De Niro [Robert De Niro] whatever, and the critics didn't feel that way. And, the film--I think people respect that film much, you know, years later. But, when it came out, with the cast that they had, there was an expectation it would do a lot bigger business, and it didn't. Story_ID: 661113 Speaker 1: 'New York Undercover,' it had elements that you knew were special. Like, for me as a kid growing up in New York [New York], one of the things that I always felt when I'd see film that's depicting New York, there was, you know, if there was something inauthentic about the portrayal, it would just like, grate at me. And, so, there were times when I remember saying to myself, I can't wait 'til, like, have the opportunity to, like, represent New York, and--or that street dude in a way that I knew was authentic. And, so, we had that. And, we had the music and, you know, just felt good and, and you can see from very early--from the very first episodes airing just how people responded to it. If felt like it was special. I don't think we knew how special it was until it came out and ran for a couple of years and you saw how it changed people's lives. I mean, there are people who became cops because of that show. Or, the relationship that men had with their sons, or with their kids--their exes, and their baby mamas or whatever. How we gave a platform for musicians. That, you know, at that time, maybe people had Arsenio ['The Arsenio Hall Show'] as a way to be seen, you know, maybe if you can get on BET [Black Entertainment Television] or MTV [Music Television; MTV] at the time. But, we were a platform for people to be seen. For talent in the city, if you were an actor of color, even if you weren't an actor of color, you know, New York City, a lot of actors got a chance to work. And, a lot of actors that came through that show. Like, I'm doing 'Empire' now with Terrence Howard. Terrence Howard was a guest on that show. Where peop- you know, so many people, Mekhi Phifer, and you know, Taye Diggs, and I mean, even Naomi Campbell. Naomi Campbell's on 'Empire' now, you know doing a bit on 'Empire.' And, here we are twenty years later working together again. So, it was, it was a special time. And, personally, you know, I wasn't prepared for what came with that, in terms of the exposure and the adulations and all that stuff. I mean, that definitely took me for a loop, you know. It's very unnatural to be, you know, put out front and center like that and be expected to behave normally. Speaker 2: Well, you're--first of all, you're in your hometown too. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, and, and can you, and you are at this point, you are in your earl- your twenties (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm twenty-six. Speaker 2: That's, that's very, that's young. Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm a baby. Speaker 2: A baby. And-- Story_ID: 661114 Speaker 1: And, so, can you talk about--I want you to talk about the relationships with the, you know, the other actors [on 'New York Undercover'] and, and how that relationship was on the set and off the set. And, then I wanna talk about this, you know, being thrust into the limelight. I wanna talk about both. Speaker 2: Yeah, Michael DeLorenzo and I, to this day, still have a pretty good relationship. We don't talk as much as we used to. But, we still have a very, you know, have a lot of regard and affection for each other. Might text, mostly through text, or speak mostly through text, which is kind of the case for a lot of people these days. But, we, we created a brotherhood. I mean, it was, you know, the--as we used to say, nigga and Puerto Rican, watermelon, frying chicken, arroz con pollo, anything goes, it's the little ghetto show. That was our little song that we made up because, you know, we had each other to lean on. You know, we knew we were doing something special but wasn't always regarded that way. We were kind of treated like second class citizens to a degree, you know. Yes, we were starring in a TV show. Yes, we were making more money than the average person makes. But, we weren't getting paid at the same rate as other actors in that exact same position. We didn't have things like the hot food truck on that show. There was a guy that quit wardrobe to get a hot food truck so the crew could be fed. And, we would hear things like, you know, we'd stand up for the crew, like, "Listen, we're shooting in the middle of Harlem [New York, New York], in the middle of the winter," this was before gentrification, "where are these people gonna eat?" And, we were told things like, "You guys can order from wherever you want." But, what about everybody else. And, so, there was definitely a sense of we can do as little as possible as we need to do from a production standpoint, you know, as long as we turn in a good show. We don't have to worry about all the creature comforts. I had no security on that show. And, at a time when security was needed, you know, we had (laughter). You have, like, people would try to attack me, you know. Just because they were crazy fans. And, I remember once, Anthony Mason, who played for the Knicks [New York Knicks] at the time and I think Oakley [Charles Oakley], they were guest stars on the show and they hired security guys for these guys. And, the fans weren't going after them. They were going after us, and the security guards comes over to me as says, "Listen, we're supposed to be here for these guys, but obviously you guys need the help. And, so, we're gonna--we were told to act like we're here for you too, because they said you guys are sensitive." And, I remember calling my agent and saying, "If I don't have security on this show then I can't come to work because I'm fearful of my life." And, it was true, you know. New York [New York] in the '90s [1990s] in Harlem. You had crackheads running around acting up. And, so, there was a lot of basic rights that we had to fight for just to be respected at the time. And, we didn't know, I didn't know any better. It was my first show and, you know. I remember when we did the pilot, I did a driving stunt and I didn't know, oh, I can actually get someone else to drive for me right now--I didn't know that. So, but it was a great education. It was the best film school ever, you know. Learned a lot. Story_ID: 661115 Speaker 1: What did you learn? Speaker 2: Oh, so much. You asked earlier, you know, about being natural on screen. You know, I remember an early episode [of 'New York Undercover'] just looking at the work and, you know, seeing little tendencies I might have. You know, you learn about directing. You learn about camera lenses. I spent a lot of time over the years, whenever I work, on both film and television. But, television even more so because you're doing it for longer amounts of time and you have the opportunity to develop that relationship with your camera department. It's a different director every week. But, I've always look at it as film school. I, you know, that's how I learned to direct because I, you know, pay attention to what lens you're on, how--what's the coverage? Why are you on that lens? Like, you know, just understanding story, you know. How--and the things you do as an actor lend to your work as a director as well, you know. Breaking down a story, breaking down a, you know, a character arc and story arc and, you know, understanding pacing and you know, which I love, you know. It's one of those things that I've do it so much, been on set and have worked with camera that when I direct, it's amazing. It's like when you learn another language and you don't use it all the time, when you're put in that situation, how it just comes out and you could, you know, start spurring out things you don't even remember that you knew. But, you're around it all the time, you know. So, yeah, that's where I learned--and I encourage young actors coming up to pay attention. Just don't get on set and hit your mark. But, understand why we're on a 100mm lens, or a 50 [50mm lens], or a 25 [25mm lens], or a 14 [14mm lens], or whatever, you know. Why are we using this Steadicam versus handheld, or dolly, or crane, you know? So, that it can also help you from a performance perspective so you know how to gauge what you're doing if you know what's in that camera. But, also it empowers you because now you can develop another skillset. Story_ID: 661116 Speaker 1: Now, how did, how did Natalie's, how did that, the music segment develop? Was that, was that from conception? See-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe the music was, yeah. I mean, 'New York Undercover' developed with Andre Harrell, who at the time was, you know, Uptown music [Uptown Records]. So, music was always a big part of the show. Speaker 1: Do you know how he got involved with that? Do you know how he, the diff- (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't all--well, I do know that, you know, there was a group called The Slick Boys from Chicago [Illinois], who were actually cops here. And, so, it was originally based on some guys out of Chicago who were young, you know, black. I think they were all black. They were black and Latino. But, they were cool, you know, they were cool hip cops, you know, looked like they could've been thugs but they were on the right side of the law. And, so, the show was originally based on those guys. And, then they didn't wanna go both black, and they didn't wanna do black and white because 'Miami Vice' had just happened, you know, in the '80s [1980s] and so they went black and Latino, yeah. Speaker 1: So, what are some of your favorite episodes that you did? Do you have one at all? Speaker 2: It's too long ago, girl-- Speaker 1: Oh, it's too-- Speaker 2: --to remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, we did eighty-nine episodes. It was just a good time doing that show. I mean, the last season, I don't really count the last thirteen episodes 'cause they killed Michael [DeLorenzo's character, Eddie Torres] off and-- Speaker 1: It fell apart. Speaker 2: Yeah. It fell apart. But, the first seventy-five episodes were amazing. You know, it, it was, you know, it was something that at the time, I won't say I took it for granted, because I didn't. But, thirteen series later, I recognize how special that was. I mean, I recognized that years ago. But, I continue to recognize how special that was, you know, my first show to have it do what it did for me, for the community, for the history of television, to be a part of that was special. The show we're doing now, 'Empire,' I feel similarly about even though I'm not carrying the show in the way I did that. I mean, this is ensemble. Right now, Terrence [Terrence Howard] and Taraji [Taraji P. Henson] and the three kids [Trai Byers, Jussie Smollett, and Bryshere Y. Gray] that play their children are really what the show focuses on, at least in the first season. But, there's a lot of the same DNA of this show that we had in 'New York Undercover.' So, just intuitively it feels like it will resonate with people in a very, very honest and significant way. Story_ID: 661117 Speaker 1: --Talk about what your life was like; and who, you know, you're twenty-six so it's like twenty-six to age? Speaker 2: Thirty. Speaker 1: To thirty. And, that your life became there? Where are you living? You know, 'cause people, you know, how are you handling the, you know. Speaker 2: Go on. Speaker 1: How are you handling life? I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's-- Speaker 1: You're a single man. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's a pretty extreme transformation for me, you know. I literally moved from where I was--I used to live like two, three blocks from where we shot. And, then people found out and they used to come by and ring my doorbell. That got kind of weird. And, then I moved into a doorman building and, you know, you start making more money, you start, you know, upgrading some things, your home, where you live, you know, that kind of thing. But, it was a lot, it was a lot of, you know, for me it wasn't a gradual kind of thing. It wasn't like I appeared in like a bunch of guest spots for a while and got a little bit of notoriety and then you land a big gig. It's like I, you know, pretty early on within the first year of my working, I landed a pretty significant gig. And, so, so, yeah, everything, everything changed. I mean, you know, people-- Speaker 1: So, who's advising you? That's one thing. Your agent is who at this point? Speaker 2: The agents, you know, advise you a bit. You know, accountants and, you know, my accountant's been like a surrogate father for me for a long time. Speaker 1: So, you had good advice at that point? Speaker 2: I think I had pretty good advice in terms of, like, how to handle things financially from an investment perspective. And, you know, diversifying your portfolio and all those kind of basic. I mean, you have money now and this is how you, you invest it, from that perspective. I thought I had pretty strong advice. I think on a more personal note, like, how to really play the game, the Hollywood game. To a degree, I mean, I've looked back over the years and thought about, you know, how certain things couldn't've been better, with better advice, better management in terms of how to leverage certain things, you know. Because I, it was so quick for me, I didn't perhaps build the relationships with managers that--I didn't even have a manager at that time, I just had an agent; that could really help shape a career. So, we made some mistakes. Story_ID: 661118 Speaker 1: So, what mistakes do you think you made? Speaker 2: I just think that--like, one I remember going to have a meeting with like the head of Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California]. And, they ask, so, what, you know, what are you into? What do you wanna do? And, I'm talking about all the things other than film. I go, "I work with these kids [at The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York] and I got this restaurant I'm trying to do." So, all this other business stuff and I remember leaving that meeting and my, a--my, at that point I actually did have a manager. And, she was like, "Never do that again. When you go into these meetings, when they ask you what do you wanna do, or what are you working on, you have to talk about, like, this director and that type of film," and--but, I didn't know. Those kinds of things. I think, just leveraging also celebrity outside of the work. Like, I used to throw a lot of parties, right. And, there was period where I did really well with that, you know, like-- Speaker 1: Wasn't your brother [A. Rahman Yoba] also involved in-- Speaker 2: My brother was working with me, yeah. So-- Speaker 1: Your older brother, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. So, we would, you know, if there was like an Essence Music Fest [Essence Music Festival], or Super Bowl or whatever you'd, you know, it's very common now, everyone does it. Things like that, I might've kept going in terms of just a public profile outside of what you're known for. Like, if you look at someone like Puff, Puffy, Diddy [P. Diddy; Sean Combs], whatever you wanna call him, he's always been amazing at doing that. He's never stop throwing a party. And, that's led all the way to Ciroc. That's how Ciroc makes sense for someone like him to do it. Because obviously, it started with the music, but, you know, continued, the party never stops. And, so, things like that. How to leverage celebrity and no one was talking about branding at the time. So, things like that, I mean, I still did a pretty job. I had a restaurant [Soul Cafe, New York, New York] for nine years in the city, we benefited from that. Like I said, I've dabbled in some other businesses, fashion, a little music; some other things, some real estate. But, just learning how to play the game. How to manage, you know, the game itself, you know. I didn't have mentors to say, okay, this is how you really build a career. Even around managing personal relationships, you know. You know, you start making money, you have access. You have fame. Speaker 1: You have girls? Speaker 2: You have girls, women, and you have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Women, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: You have access to, to a lot. And, I think most men that I've encountered in that space encouraged bad behavior; encouraged excess. And, when you look around and everyone is kind of doing the same thing, you start, questioning, you know, well what am I supposed to do, you know? Even when you feel like you have a solid spiritual, you know, base, so, that, that could've been helpful having, you know, mentors around. Story_ID: 661119 Speaker 1: But, I think this '90s [1990s] period too--I mean, there's a lot of excitement going on around, in the black space, just even that there- this is post-Cosby ['The Cosby Show'] so, there's these black shows and UPN [United Paramount Network] looks like it's happening and-- Speaker 2: Hip hop is growing up. Speaker 1: Hip hop is growing up-- Speaker 2: And, becoming the pop music. Speaker 1: And, a lot of that is centered in New York [New York] too-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, so, what--and, it's a lot of people who are trying to find their way at that time. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, your age group. I've been interviewing a lot of you in your--know it's, there's the publishing. I mean, you have Vibe, isn't Vibe magazine also-- Speaker 2: At that time. Yeah. Speaker 1: At that time. Okay. So, all that is happening. Speaker 2: Which is interesting. I remember, you know, you know, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones was a publisher of that. And, I remember trying to fight to get on the cover of that magazine, you know. [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales was running it at the time. And, I remember, like, you know, it's interesting like, what people didn't realize, like, we never got a cover of that magazine, but we should have. Because we were that, and there was that period where people weren't sure what we were. But, when you look back at the history of television, 'New York Undercover' is one of the most significant pieces of television ever in the history of, of television. Because of what it represented on so many levels. Even something like Jet magazine for whatever crazy reason, Jet, we were on the cover, I think twice. But, they never listed us in the back of shows to watch. You know how they would list in the back of the magazine, we never got that listing. So, we weren't really respected at the level that I think people still feel it today. I mean, I--there's not a, probably not a day that goes by where there's not some reference to 'New York Undercover' that either someone's making online, to me in the street, wherever I, airpla- wherever I go. Which on one level you're grateful to be part of something. But, on another level, there's some people that think, believe it or not, that I have not worked since 'New York Undercover,' which is always unfortunate for them, because clearly they've missed a lot of good stuff (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 661120 Speaker 1: But, how, so, so, when you, you also speak openly about seeing a therapist, is that--when is your therapy? When is, is it during this period or is it after the period? Speaker 2: Well, I started--so, there's a woman that I met back--she actually saw us on Donahue ['The Phil Donahue Show'] when I was running the youth program [at The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York], and her name is Jeanne Schneider [ph.]. And, she loved the work that we were doing with young people on television, and she had an idea to do something similar to help young people. And, so, she moved from Dallas [Texas] to New York [New York] to work with us. And, she became a colleague and a mentor in some ways and a therapist. And, you know, so, she would do work with me and so once my life began to change, I definitely said, I need a little bit of help to, 'cause you've known me for a while, you know, just to process a lot of things. And, actually, my one man show is set in a therapist office. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Speaker 2: Because I think it's important that we do, do that inner work. I mean, I'm still doing that work. And, it's painful, and it's hard. And, you know, if you are conscious than you have to, you have to work on the inner self. Yes, you could meditate, you could pray, you could read scripture, you can, you can do a lot of, you know, you can do a lot of different things. But, I think that having someone who's qualified who understands human behavior. 'Cause a lot of times, people go through things, they think they're the only one. And, then you sit and talk to someone and you share your story, and you realize ten other people in the room of twenty have all gone through the same thing, so. So, for me, that's one of the reasons why I set the show in a therapist office because I represent in that both the person that wants nothing to do with a therapist but the person who also willing to do it, as I play multiple characters in the show. Speaker 1: That's 'From Harlem to Hollywood' [sic.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Harlem to Hollywood,' yeah. Story_ID: 661121 Speaker 1: But, now, the, the other question I have for you is, you get to the point and you were talking about this, you know, that you felt that you weren't being given--there was disparity between treatment from your show and other shows. Like, you know, you didn't get the craft services, you mentioned. So, what--so, you decide to stage a, well, I don't know who decides to stage a-- Speaker 2: We didn't, it wasn't even that we decided to stage a walkout, it was--there were certain things that are basic, right? Whether it's a bump in pay, or catering, or security, or just basic things. And, so, we were tired of feeling like there was very much an attitude of just be happy you have a job, which everyone should be happy when they have a job. But, we just felt like there were certain things that was promised, whether there was, you know, Michael DeLorenzo having an opportunity to direct an episode. Or, you know, just basic, fair, decent treatment of people of who do what we do. And, we didn't get that. And, so, we didn't know that it would become like a big news story, and it was at the time. We just felt like, we had a photo shoot on a Sunday for the third season of 'New York Undercover,' and we were supposed to show up for work on that Monday. And, we decided that we weren't gonna--'cause we had given, it wasn't even a list of demands, it was more like requests. It was like, look, you feel like, hey, I'm working with you, you're working with me, look, this is what we need. Can we just--hot food truck; how about my stand in who's, at the time I don't know how Ches- old Chester [Chester A. Sims II] was. It was at least, probably in his forties. So, Michael had another guy, who's his stand in who was in his forties at least. And, they were good guys, and they were actors and they were really, really diligent in taking notes, you know, when the di- when the director's setting up a shot, the stand in stands there in place of you so they can get the lighting right and all that. And, I'd come on set, he'd go, "Okay. So, you're gonna do this," and I was always very appreciative. And, so, we even lobbied for those guys. Instead of hiring some people that we don't know for these little bit parts, why not give Chester and Joe [ph.] a chance to, you know, get a shot. It was really basic stuff. The probably was, it was at the same time that 'Friends' was demanding seventy-five thousand dollars an episode. And, so, what happened is 'Friends' made their demands and 'Friends' was obviously a very popular show on NBC, all white cast. And, people looked at it like, well, who do these guys think they are, you know. We were on FOX. FOX wasn't getting the same numbers in the ratings. But, people looked at it like, you know, you should just be appreciative of what you have. Don't try to, you know, be too big for your britches, and you know, that kind of thing. So, yeah, we, so we got caught up, you know, and we didn't know to, like, get a publicist and make them release a statement because it wasn't--we were just like, hey, we're working with you. This is what we want. Why are you guys not, you know, giving us the respect? So, rookie mistake. Now, had that show 'E! True Hollywood Story' come out before we did that, we would've known not to do that. Because in the history of television, everyone who's ever tried to do that, pretty much loses that battle. And, it's not worth it. But, for me at the time, because I had spent so much time working with young people, teaching them to stand up for their rights and let your voice be heard. It just felt like an intention of the work that I was doing. It wasn't like we were trying to start something and fight the man. It was just like, can we get our just due? And, that's what happened. Story_ID: 661122 Speaker 1: I was asking how you ended up being the only one-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Yeah. I think Lauren [Velez's character, Nina Moreno-Torres] still survived too. She might--I don't remember. Speaker 1: She might, right. I don't know. I read something that you were the only one, you were the only one left. Speaker 2: It might have been. Speaker 1: Left standing. They killed people off. They-- Speaker 2: Well, they killed Michael [DeLorenzo's character, Eddie Torres] off, for sure. And, then, Patti [Patti D'Arbanville] didn't return; that played the lieutenant. And, I think Lauren [Lauren Velez] was around for that last one, too. Lauren and they brought in Tommy Ford and Josh Hopkins and this other woman, Marisa [Marisa Ryan], yeah. Speaker 1: So, so that real--I mean, essentially that killed the show ['New York Undercover']. The dynam- you know, the chemistry between all of you. Speaker 2: Well, there was two things. I mean, at the time, I think they needed eighty-eight episodes to go to syndication. And, so, we had seventy-five [sic. seventy-six] by the first [sic. third] season, and they just added another thirteen and then we got the eighty-eight. And, the show went syndication and it felt like, you know what, we can get rid of it. But, the reality is, that show could've lasted for many, many, many years. But, again, it wasn't given the same regard. Fast forward, doing a show like 'Empire,' I can see just from, you know, fifty something screenings around the country, premier in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know, the ads they're running on FOX, the posters, they're definitely putting a lot more, you know, behind the show. And, I think that people recognize that, you know, urban culture obviously now is pop culture as well. So, it's no longer like this marginalized thing over in the corner somewhere. But, that, you know, people are just as interested in universal stories being told by people that look like us than, than they're not. So, you can't, you know, sort of use the argument, well, it only skews to a certain demographic. That may be true, but I think that from what I read on the page and what I see, I know that these are stories that anybody can relate to. Speaker 1: But, this is like twenty years in between. Speaker 2: Twenty years later, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just saying. Speaker 2: A generations later. Speaker 1: That's almost--just saying--so, but, this, the other thing though is that you developed a reputation. And, you didn't know, I don't even, did--you weren't aware of it at the time, right? I mean, so, here you are on this popular show, you stay 'til the end, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 661123 Speaker 1: And, then what happens, what, what is happening after that? Are you ready to leave the show at the end? You (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, funny enough, talk about intention, when I started the show at twenty-six, what the hell did I know. It was my first series. I like, I wanna do this for about four years, 'til I'm thirty, right. And, that's exactly how long it lasted. So, there was a bit of a reputation. What happens is, you know, you walk off on a show, you're in a little silo in New York [New York], where at the time most shows are actually being shot in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and elsewhere. And, so, you don't realize how executives in California are looking at who's this little darky over here, you know, standing up and thinking, you know, who does he think he is? It was that kind of thing. I remember Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] saying to me, and it's just, it's crazy how life works, you know, I was supposed to play Shaft [John Shaft II], and you know-- Speaker 1: Which was a big deal at the time-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was the remake ['Shaft']? Speaker 2: It was a big deal. Speaker 1: The remake, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, you know, funny enough Singleton, John Singleton, who directed it, he just directed an episode of 'Empire,' and we were talking about that. He was like, "Yeah, I really wanted you for that, and the studio was saying that wanted a name." And, Sam had just gotten nominated for an Oscar [Academy Award] for 'Pulp Fiction' a couple years earlier. And, so, he was on a roll and, you know, he wanted a young guy, they wanted an old guy--older guy. And, so, the role went to Sam. And, it's just crazy how if you stay in the business long enough, it all comes back around. But, I remember hanging out in Sam's trailer that day. I was walking by Lower Manhattan [New York, New York] and they were shooting the scene with Christian Bale on the steps of the supreme court [New York State Supreme Courthouse, New York, New York]. And, Jeffrey Wright and I hung out with Sam a while. I was like, "Have you heard anything about me?" He was like, "Yeah, man. That you're too big for your britches. That, you know, you haven't earned it." And, people will pass that rumor around like a good joint. And, that's what happens, like, people will latch on to a morsel of an untruth and turn it into a big cake of truth. And, everyone eats from it. And, that's the problem, is that it doesn't matter if things actually happen or not. The reality is perception is greater than reality. Speaker 1: So, let's talk about that. This twenty year period that existed in between. Because it's not like it was totally empty, you know, there. But, you, it's hard when you hit so high, so easy, you know, so easily at the beginning. And, then, you, you know, it's like, that's how life is going to be from that point on. So, what, what happens after 'New York Undercover'? That's that I'm, you know, what are the other things that you're doing? Are things happen in New York? Are they more in L.A.? Are you, you know, were you even bicoastal during that period of time in terms of (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I mean, I never stop working. So, but it's--that's the things, you know, when you do start off with, you know, two hits; 'Cool Runnings' and then 'New York Undercover,' you do say, oh, well, I've always wanted to do this. I'm doing it. I'm doing it at a certain level. You're getting magazine cover--you know, all this stuff that comes with being popular. But, you know, that no one stays at number one forever. And, so, I remember feeling like I wanted to quit the business, and-- Speaker 1: After, at-- Speaker 2: After, right after 'New York Undercover.' That was one of my fi- because I just felt like, they killed Michael [DeLorenzo's character, Eddie Torres] off. You just start seeing the ugly side of things. I saw a lot of things that I wish I could un-see. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Just stuff that, you know, just the way people behave, you know. Just things that are unsavory. Just, you know, just saw a lot from the business, how people handle personal things. You just go, you know what, I'm kind of cool. Story_ID: 661124 Speaker 1: And, I remember going to the movies seeing Will Smith in 'Enemy of the State.' And, the interesting things about Will's career is, you know, when he first got 'Fresh Prince' ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'], he was such a bad actor. He was so bad that he used to mouth the words of the other actors in the scene, so he could remember his words. And, they filmed it, or taped it, and would air it like that. And, I remember first seeing him in 'Independence Day.' He had done that, the film 'Six Degrees of Separation,' which an indie floating around New York [New York]. And, I think I might have even auditioned for it, or heard about, and he does it, he gets some, you know, props from doing a cool little indie. And, he's still Fresh Prince at that point. And, then 'Independence Day' comes out. I was like, "Oh, okay." He doing a little blockbuster. But, then when he did 'Enemy of the State,' it occurred to me that could've been Mel Gibson. And, Mel Gibson was a big star at the time. And, I was like, wow, man they gave Will the chance to be that guy. And, I remember being in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I had a meeting at Universal [Universal Pictures, Universal City, California], and I stopped by the office and he and I talked. And, I was like, "Man, I'm thinking about quitting this and just--" 'cause I started playing golf. And, I was like, "I just wanna play golf and relax for a little bit." And, 'cause that was an intense four years of my life and he was like, "Man, you can't quit. You got work to do. Like, you got, you gotta do more. You can't, this ain't the time to quit." And, I just remember thinking--and, the other thing about Will, when we did walk off on the show, while they had reached out to a lot of actors to replace us. And, some actors who were my friends, who they wanna work, so they had auditioned and try to get the role, but, we had established something that was very special. You couldn't just bring other people in and try to replace us. Will was the only one to call. And, how we actually, initially connected was, I think we had seen each other at the Million Man March. That was like '96 [sic. 1995]. I think in '97 [1997] is when tried to walk off from the show ['New York Undercover'] or something. And, he would leave messages for me. And, I get these notes saying, Will Smith. I'm like, Will Smith, who? Oh, Will Smith's calling me to basically say, "Listen man, keep your head up. I remember going through something on my show," and it was like, I've been there. He was very encouraging and I'd always established, you know, a great rapport with us. And, but, I remember when he did 'Enemy of the State,' I realized, wow, he's become like, Mel Gibson. Like he's doing mainstream blockbuster films now. Story_ID: 661125 Speaker 1: And, so, for me, there was a period where I had to like, wash off that reputation of being difficult. 'Cause what they'll do is even though the truth was, was just wanted to be treated properly. We weren't trying to be divas or anything. People don't know that. And, so, I remember auditioning for--I mean, right after 'New York Undercover' ended, the paint didn't even dry on the, you know, repainting the studio to this show called 'Trinity' that was shooting the same space with John Wells, who did 'ER.' I ended up on 'Trinity.' There was thirteen episode of that, then that got cancelled. Then right after that, I did a pilot with Nia Long, which is basically like that show 'Alias.' She was playing a secret agent. It's like school teacher by day, and agent by night. Forest Whitaker had directed that. So, I did the pilot for that. That didn't work. And, then like, right after that I did the pilot for a show called 'Bull.' And, then 'Bull' is the thing that moved me to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in 2000. So, 'New York Undercover' ended in '98 [1998]. I did, you know, a couple of things in between there and some little independent films or something. And, then so, when I got-- Speaker 2: Well, 'Cop Land' was one of them. Speaker 1: Well, 'Cop Land' happened while I was still doing 'New York Undercover.' Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, 'cause pretty much, every hiatus, I would do a film. And, you do think, okay, that's how your life's gonna go. And, you're doing movies with De Niro [Robert De Niro] and this person, that person, you feel like okay, things are gonna go in this way. And, then, there was a weird period of having, having to shed this misperception about you, and people decide they don't wanna hire you. And, I didn't really even know that that was happening until Sam [Samuel L. Jackson] told me that. And, then I-- Speaker 2: But, something made you ask him, though. 'Cause you said, you know, you, so you must've had some in--'cause you ask--you said, "Have people been--have you heard anything" (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it was probably the fact that I'm in his trailer and he's playing Shaft [John Shaft II], and I was supposed to play Shaft [in 'Shaft']. And, I was like, "What's going on?" You know what I mean? I don't remember exactly why I asked him. But, I remember asking him that. But-- Story_ID: 661126 Speaker 1: When I auditioned for 'Bull,' Eric Laneuville, who's a great friend and was one of the producers on that show. I finished the audition, he pulls me in the back and he goes, "Look, man, I've always wanted to work with you, but I hear you have a bad reputation." Now, that was really painful at the time because I came to this business with so much earnest, you know, earnestness and openness, to just so happy to be living out my childhood dream. And, you know, again, it was never about, just try to be famous, and all this stuff. And, then people are saying negative things about you. And, I'm like, why? Why are they doing that? Like, what are you talking about? He goes, "Well, I hear you are, you know, that you're militant." And, he goes, "What do you have to say for yourself?" And, in that moment, I realized how many people were probably having these conversations about me and, no one, thought to ask me, what do you have to say for yourself? And, in that moment, I had like the utmost respect for Eric. And, I looked at him, and I said, "Rosa Parks." He said, "What do you mean?" I said, "We just got tired of, like, sitting in the back of the bus, and treated like second class citizen. We were just fighting for basic things, like a hot food truck, which is basic on every production." 'Law and Order' was shooting right across the street, they had catering. Why? And, we weren't even thinking about it for ourselves, 'cause we could order food, like I said, from anywhere. It was really about the rest of the crew that's shooting and they're not being fed. And, why is it that a guy who's in wardrobe, quits his job in wardrobe and finds some bootleg food truck and refurbishes it and starts a new career for himself. That should have just been basic. But, it wasn't. And, we didn't know. I mean, Michael DeLorenzo knew a little bit more because he had been in the business longer than I. But, what did I know? I was just like, stand up for your rights, just like Rosa Parks. And, it's because Eric, you know, took a shot on me, and you know, on--at that time. And, he said, "You know, there were people at Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Television] that didn't wanna hire you. They heard you were difficult." And, I was like, "Aw man." And, he said, "But, I, you know, I like you, I wanna work with you." And, he goes, "The thing that made it even worse," he goes, "I saw you at Malibu Country Club [Malibu, California]. And, there aren't too many black folks out there and you drove by on your golf cart and I go to wave at you, and you ignored me." And, I was like, "When?" And, he told me when it was. And, it just so happened that I'd just been stung by a bee and I was like rushing to the clubhouse to get some, whatever they put on it. I didn't even see him say, hello. So, back to the Hollywood thing, you know, if you hear these rumors that you are this person and then here I am riding right by 'em and he ignore--and I ignore him. But, even that he didn't let stop him from asking me the questions, "What do I have to say for myself?" So, from then, I always just loved and respected that guy. And, we did a year of that show 'Bull.' And, it went away. But, pretty much every year since I did 'New York Undercover,' I did a TV series. Now, whether they lasted or not is another story. And, I ended up doing a bunch of independents and, you know, there was a point when I had, Harvey Weinstein at Mer- Miramax, when it was still Miramax before it became The Weinstein Company, on speed dial. And, I had relationships with studio head and those things began to dissipate. And, the next crop of young new--here comes a Taye Diggs, or here comes a Mekhi [Mekhi Phifer], or whoever. And, all of a sudden, you know, the landscape changes and I'm no longer the young, new, who's this new guy with the funny name who's a pretty good actor, and you know, other things are starting to happen. Story_ID: 661127 Speaker 1: And, it's during that period that I mentioned, you know, had I learned to leverage and work the business differently, it would've been very, very different because I always felt more comfortable in the community. I felt like my roots were about working with young people in schools, in prisons, and I'd go to Africa. And, I helped build a school in Ethiopia, and I'm doing stuff in South Africa, and I'm doing stuff in the community. I'm starting to tour with plays around the country and these plays are making millions of dollars. And, I'm like, you know what, if I never acted on TV again, I mean, we just did $5 million in twelve weeks doing a play, with nothing but black people. Three million [dollars] is profit, like, so, from a business prospective-- Speaker 2: Well, that was--what's, what's his-- Speaker 1: Dave Talbert [David E. Talbert]. Speaker 2: Da- yeah. He was doing--what do we call those plays? What are they called? Speaker 1: Well, people call them-- Speaker 2: Chitlin' Circuit (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Chitlin' Circuit. Yeah. So, I had a chance to, you know, learn that game and start a theater company [Malik Yoba National Theatre Company] and really focus on building out the urban theater market. And, everything that Tyler Perry ultimately ended up doing was everything that I saw the writing on the wall. Because, I saw the numbers that we were doing. I saw the need. I was great for me because it put me back in the community and let me do theater, which I always wanted to do and, you know. But-- Speaker 2: And, Talbert, Talbert's located in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]? Was he was lo-- Speaker 1: I think Dave's in L.A. now. At the time, he was living in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: So, I always had one foot in, one foot out. So, I was doing--like, I did a play with Dave, and then I went to go do that show 'Bull.' And, then, I would always try to do at least a play like that or even a regional theater or something, even off Broadway in New York [New York], and just try to do both. And, you know, you're just going along. You just, you know, doing what you've always done. And, you know, relying on, you know, the agent call you and telling you, you have an appointment and you know. There was a period where, it felt like, pretty much if I go in a room and audition, I pretty much got it, you know. And, then there was a period where you might go on, on twenty things and get one. And, but, that's just, you know, it sort of settled down into the average experience, you know. My first eight years of my career were pretty extraordinary. And, then, you know, the last twelve have been, I'd say above average. 'Cause if it's average, then you're gonna be like most actors, which means, you're not working. Speaker 2: Okay. I was gonna say-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: 'Cause most--I mean, we should talk about this and I was even talking to the staff earlier. I mean, it's very hard for black actors. Speaker 1: It's hard for actors. Speaker 2: Actors to work. Speaker 1: Yeah, I wouldn't even, I've never looked it like, black--it's hard for every actor, you know, no matter how you are. It's just a hard business, you know. And, it continues to be hard. And, so, but, here I am. Twenty years later I'm still doing it. And, you know, and people questioning you. I'm telling you, just go on IMDb [Internet Movie Database], and you'll see. It's pages and pages of work. And, so, it's not I've been-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. I know you've been working-- Speaker 1: No. I'm not saying you are. I'm just saying, that's true for anybody. You know, they--like, people wonder, well, whatever happened to So and So, whatever. The reality is that you can't see everything. Films are released every day in all kinds of formats. Television is everywhere, so, you can't--just because you don't see somebody on the most popular show, doesn't mean they're not working. Or, the popular, most popular films. Story_ID: 661128 Speaker 1: So, what, what--was the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] experience different from the New York [New York] experience? I mean, you became part of the L.A. commu- you had to go to L.A., right? At that-- Speaker 2: Well, I've been going to L.A. since the '80s [1980s], late '80s [1980s]. So, I started in L.A. doing the work with CityKids [The CityKids Foundation, Inc., New York, New York]. So, L.A. for me then was very romantic and the film business was over there and I was in the community and I knew celebrities. But, but, then once you get in it then it's a lit- slightly different experience. And, my thing with L.A. is I was supposed to go for five months to do that show 'Bull,' and it ended up being a year and then ended up being two years. Then, I met a woman; I ended up getting married. Then, next thing I you know, ten years later I'm still in L.A. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that Cat [Cat Wilson]? Cat? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Story_ID: 661129 Speaker 1: So, I wanna talk about the other things that you've been involved with. 'Cause you were saying at the beginning, "I've, you know, I've had this di- ," you were talking about diversification that, "I, you know, I act. I direct. I have my community things, and I do music." And, I'd like to talk about that, you know, when things have taken certain priority or have they've always been integrated and, and, how you even going about choosing what you wanna do? Speaker 2: It's a combination. I mean, I wish I could say, that I could always choose. I suppose I have some choice in the matter. But, a lot of times, I feel I get chosen, you know. It's like, you come now, go. I'm like all right, I got no choice. I have to go do that. Sometimes, it's a, you know, literally, it's sometimes it's an offer that will come. Hey, you got an offer to play Janet Jackson's husband in a movie ['Why Did I Get Married?']; go. Or, you got an offer, you know, to do this new TV series; go. Okay, I'm in Vancouver [Canada] for six months, shooting something. Or, sometimes you can choose. With the thing that I've done on my own, like music or other entrepreneurial things, opening a restaurant [Soul Cafe, New York, New York], dabbling in fash- I say dabbling in fashion because I've never really gave it a real run. Even though the company I've, I've co-founded about a year ago, we're doing some fashion products now. It's been about collaborating with people, with the right people. Making mistakes. Sometimes it's the wrong people. When I was a kid, my father [Abdullah Yoba] used to always say, "You have to focus on one thing, like you're all over the place." And, I used to say to him, "I'm focused on what I'm doing, when I'm doing it." When I'm not going it, I'm focused on something else. And, I've carried that attitude into adulthood. And, I feel the same way. Sometime it could feel a bit schizophrenic or overwhelming. But, if I was directing this right now, if we were shooting and this was a scene or a film, I could be just as passionate about directing as I am about teacher, as performing, as about acting, as about sitting with other entrepreneurs or investors talking about a new concept. Or, working on real estate development of--or apprentice with a developer, 'cause I'm really fascinated by buildings and real estate and architecture and interior design. And, so, I have all these interests; all kind of support one another. So, about a year and, a year ago my partner Sergio Morales, he was a creative director in the marketing and advertising world. And, he quit, and we met at a holiday party and I'd been doing digital content for brands. I was doing some stuff for AARP [AARP Inc.], and American Cancer Society, and United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and, you know, doing video packages for them and BET [Black Entertainment Television], their web series. So, I started getting into branded entertainment stuff. Which was great because it got me writing, it got me directing, it got me producing and doing things I love. And, we've put Iconic32, which is the name of the company, together as a, as a company that does branding and strategy work around social good, on a consulting side. And, then, we're also building out an ecommerce platform with socially relevant and, with products and service--mainly, product right now, that have a--some sort of social impact component. And, that initiative allows me to sort of bring everything that I do under one sort of focus. Even as I write my solo show ['Harlem to Hollywood'], my company in some ways will do the marketing and strategy around it or brand integration stuff. And, it's something that gives me a lot of pleasure. We're a year old. We've made a couple dollars. And, but it's, it's exciting to build something from nothing that's not, you know, it's--the film products I've been trying to get done forever. I've sort of put the theater company [Malik Yoba National Theatre Company] on pause for a bit because that whole market has changed. I still have my eye and ear and finger, a little bit, in the real estate stuff and that's like, long term stuff. At some point, I'd love to do hotels and I tried to do one in Brooklyn [New York] a couple years ago. In my heart, I'm an entrepreneur. I've always been that way. I've always been, you know, one thing we didn't talk about growing up, I had a paper route from eight years old to sixteen. So, I've always made my own money in some way, shape, or form. So, even while I'm doing 'Empire,' you know, I'm still doing the work of Iconic32 and, you know, I'll run off and go host something or speak somewhere or do a workshop somewhere. And, you know, I'm still--I've always been that way. I've always had a lot going on at the same time. Story_ID: 661130 Speaker 1: So, let me, Malik [HistoryMaker Malik Yoba], I want to, because I, I'm--we were going chronological, but I want to go back and ask about a few things. One, you, and you mentioned Janet Jackson, but that's a Tyler Perry, you were in--I think two of his films? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, can you talk about that experience? 'Cause you, you were--you came into his films, you know, I look at him as sort of different, maybe three different periods, you know. You know, the first launch of his film Madea. And, then you were sort of in this another period of time in his films and then he went, he's gone in another direction, too. I don't know if you see it that way. But, in any event, can you talk about the making of those film and working with him and was that any different? Speaker 2: The, you know, art often imitates life, and so, there's a period in '07 [2007], when I was, '06 [2006] and '07 [2007], when I was going through separation and divorce where everything I did was about relationships and breakups. I went from 'Girlfriend' [sic. 'Girlfriends'] to a play I did off Broadway in New York [New York] called 'Everything's Turning Into Beautiful' [Seth Zvi Rosenfeld], to literally, you know, planning on trying to have a session at a church in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] with my ex-wife [Cat Wilson], to work on our marriage. Even though we were separated and literally getting a call saying, "Hey, you got an offer to play Janet Jackson's husband in a movie." "Well, what's the movie?" "'Why Did I Get Married?'" And, I knew of the play, and I was just like, "God, you know what? Here you go again." Like, "Okay. Let me go do this movie." So, in some ways it was like a family reunion because most of the cast, we all knew each other. But, it was an opportunity to work out some stuff that I was going through personally. And, it was good. I mean, you know, Tyler makes it easy in that sense, you know, with a phone call, "Hey, you wanna come do a movie?" And, he was still growing as a filmmaker, you know. He had--was learning to make movies on his own movies. And, so, there were things that you would see that you'd question and go, "Well, I mean I know that there's people around here that know we could do this a little differently." But, you know, he was, you know, in charge of his own ship. Which I was very happy to support because I knew him from the plays. And, knew that that's also where I wanted to go. And, some of the people working with him, one of the producers had seen one of my plays and was like, "Let's turn this into a film," maybe three years before he started working with Tyler. And, we never got a chance to do my film. And, part of the reason I did the movies was, okay, well let me get in the business and maybe we can have an opportunity to do my stuff, which obviously--did you see my film? Exactly. It didn't happen. Speaker 1: I didn't see it. Speaker 2: No. It didn't happen. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: It didn't happen with them. But, that's part of the reason why I did those movies just to be in the company of some good folks and try to get it done, and you know. But, people have their own ideas on what they'd like to see happen for their lives, and so, didn't always include what I want, which is fine. Story_ID: 661131 Speaker 1: But, you know, in the black community, and I know you--we really love films like that in a lot of respects. Even though, you know, 'cause it was about relationships, you know, there're four couples--tell the story line. Speaker 2: Yeah. Four couples, but, it's not just the black community. Speaker 1: No. It wasn't. Right. Speaker 2: A lot of people like those movies. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. A lot of people do. They, you know. And, that's the thing, see the thing is-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) you know. Okay, go on. Speaker 2: The thing is when you are the subject, and you are an actor in something, you know better than anybody, who's watching, 'cause they tell you. And, so, you're always fighting this things, like, people will say--people look at me now and be like, "My son don't know who you are. He's too young." So, what you're saying that, there's nothing that I've done in the last twenty years that your seventeen years old will know. Which isn't the case. But, people will feel--and that person saying that is like "Oh, I just know you from 'New York Undercover,' so, he wouldn't possibly know." But, I know I have fourteen year olds, and fifteen year old, and seventeen year old, and nineteen year olds, who watch the repeats, who do know. I know you from the Tyler Perry movies ['Why Did I Get Married?' and 'Why Did I Get Married Too?']. Or, so, you never know what people have seen. But, people will make all kinds of assumptions about who it appeals to. So, that's just one of the things that has always been a bit frustrating. Because, if the wrong person has that perception and they're the person that makes decisions around things, they will miss the boat every single time. Because they think these people over here aren't paying attention, but they really are. Speaker 1: But, you're saying, you also worked through marriage issues on that? I mean, because of the life-- Speaker 2: Art imitates life. Yeah, yeah, so you know, you, you can experience that a lot. Where you can be going through something in your life, it doesn't have to be marriage issues, but it shows up in your work. And, I've always felt very grateful as an actor that we have a place to take the stuff that doesn't always feel so good. That we can work through it through our work. I wonder, like, if I was in my most painful place and I'm an airline pilot or surgeon, you know, and you need to be focused. And, maybe that's how it works for them. Maybe they can focus through their work and put everything else aside. But, I know for me, it was very, very hard. Story_ID: 661132 Speaker 1: So, what about 'Alphas'? The, the series 'Alphas.' What about that series? It was sci-fi [science fiction]? On the--no? Speaker 2: Yeah. 'Alphas' was a sci-fi show that started off as a really good concept. Six people with, or five people with some special abilities. And, we did two seasons and the first season was better than the second. And, that was a case of the people who created the show butting heads with the studio a little bit. And, it could've been really cool. And, I don't think that show necessarily should have been on, like, a sci-fi channel. 'Cause I think the show actually had broader appeal. But, it came and went. Yeah. Story_ID: 661133 Speaker 1: We're doing 'Empire' here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: And, how it came about? Speaker 1: 'Empire' is Danny Strong and Lee Daniels created it. They did 'The Butler' together and obviously Lee did 'Precious' and 'Paperboy' ['The Paperboy'] and a bunch of, well, not a bunch of other films, but a few other significant films. And, Taraji Henson [Taraji P. Henson], Terrence Howard, Gabby Sidibe [Gabourey Sidibe] is in it. Tasha Smith plays a role, a bunch of folks are in it. I mean, Naomi Campbell's doing a part. Courtney Love is doing a part. They aren't all regulars but, they appear in the show. It's a film about a family in the music industry. Got a bit of 'King Lear' [William Shakespeare] elements, three sons are essentially vying for control of the empire. And, I play like the consigliere to Terrence's character, Lucious Lyon. And, we help build this company and try and take it public. And, the show just centers around all the drama, all the drama that the family goes through as they fight for identity, for individuality, for power, money, and all the stuff that goes with it. So, that's it in a nutshell. Speaker 2: That, that's (laughter) okay. Could I ask this question? Is, is that, would you say that that, the subject matter is similar to a subject matter that, you know, of another series that you worked with? Or, is this new? Speaker 1: No. Definitely nothing like I've ever worked on before. This show is definitely not like anything that's been on television before. Yeah, we had 'Dynasty,' we had, you know, I don't know, 'Entourage,' you had 'Sopranos' ['The Sopranos']. It's a bit of all of those kind of elements. I mean, family drama. We haven't seen a black family drama-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Like this. Ever. You know, ever. So, set in the music world. We've seen some shows with some of that. But, not like contemporary music now. Timbaland is doing the music for it. So, it's relevant to now. It's exciting. It's exciting. Again, it has the DNA. It has that feeling that this is something that people will really love and appreciate. Speaker 2: So, what do you feel your--so, and you also said earlier that you feel the same type of feeling as you felt with 'New York Undercover.' You know, the same type of possibility. You did say that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 661134 Speaker 1: But, I wanna ask you where you are in your life right now? And, I mean, you're forty-seven, it's ver- you're still-- Speaker 2: I'm still a baby. Speaker 1: You're still a baby. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm a baby. I'm a baby, y'all. I'm a baby. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter). No. But, you're still, you're still very young. Speaker 2: Well, thank you. I'm in a very interesting place, you know. As I mentioned earlier, you know, I woke up this morning and the sentiment was, you know, never forget that your voice is unique unto you and no one can do what you do. And, it's important to remind ourselves of that because one of the things about working in this business is that so many other people try to qualify and quantify your value based on their ideas of what's important. And, so, if you've got the hottest things, if you have the most Instagram followers, or Twitter followers, if you are an (air quotes) influencer, you know--I learned years ago, you're only as good as your last five minutes. And, now it's like, you're only as good as your last tweet, kind of, you know what I mean. If you are riding on the, the wave of what's now and what's popular and what's important in a world where people have short term memory, very short term memories, you can do a lot of damage to yourself. Because you could continue to look at other people to validate you. And, I'm guilty of that as well. Like, you know, it's a very--'cause I know what it's like to be celebrated. I know what it's like to be fawned over. I know what it's like when everyone tells you, your shit don't stink and you, you know. And, I know what it's like when people go that dude used to be such and such. But, the reality is that I've never gone anywhere. The reality--that's why I say if you really question someone's work, as an actor, specifically on film and television, you can always go on IMDb [Internet Movie Database] and you will see tons of credit. Now, is it always the big blockbuster, or the big--no, it's not. Do I want that? Why not? If I'm gonna be in this game, I might as well work with the best and the brightest and most talented. But, as long as other people are deciding whether or not they want me for their project, I have to continue to honor the voice that I have and the unique prospective on the world that I have, and I have to share that. And, that's all I ever wanted to do, since I was a kid. Hence why, I woke up this morning, thought in head, poem, sit down and write. And, I can tell you there is a tremendous sense of satisfaction that you get from doing anything that's yours, regardless of what it is, you know what I mean. Whether, you know, it doesn't matter what field you work in, there's something incredibly cathartic about having a thought, an idea, honoring it, massaging it, bring it to life. And, ultimately you wanna put it into the world, or keep it for yourself. Sometimes you have to do as well. Just express it to get it out. 'Cause otherwise, you sit around and wonder, like, well, when is the phone gonna ring? Or, this person gonna give me this opportunity for that? And, it's like, no. I'm happiest when I'm employing people. That's honestly when I'm happiest. I'm happiest when there's an idea, people gather around to bring it to life, and you see thirty, forty, fifty people running around getting paid because of something you came with. That is the most satisfying ever. I get just as much if not more satisfaction of seeing other people succeed and win than I do watching my own success. And, that's, that's just real for me. Nothing feels greater than seeing other people succeed as well. Story_ID: 661135 Speaker 1: So, what does that say then about what you wanna do going forward? I mean, what does that say about that? Because, you know, in the telling of your story, you had to fight from a little one to pursue your dream, given your father's [Abdullah Yoba] influence. And, you know, and you got, you know, you are, you're, I mean, and in the telling of your story, you were very diligent about it like it was predestined in that way. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, there's something really, really interesting about us doing this interview on this day. Because, when I woke up this morning, I didn't know I was gonna write the stuff that I was writing today. And, what's interesting and edifying about the questions you asked specific to me growing up and telling my story as part of my history, it's like an affirmation. Like, I wouldn't be here in Chicago [Illinois] unless it was from acting right now, filming 'Empire.' While I'm doing 'Empire,' we met when I was doing the pilot and here we are again, now we're doing the series. So, it's all part of the story. It's all part of the continuum and the fact that you're asking these specific questions that I was writing about. It's interesting to hear me reiterate some of the things I was writing. But, how I write them and how I present them in their artistic form. This isn't the most artistic form to do that. It sort of underscores the need, you know. And, I can leave here tonight and go back home and write and nothing feels better than that. Yes, I have to get up tomorrow and go do a read through and start shooting the next episode on Thursday. But, it's just a reminder that I have to do, what I have to do. Which is continue to tell stories in all the ways that I tell them. At forty-seven, I spend a lot of time, especially since I've been shooting and one of the joys about being away on location, especially if you don't have your family, you miss your family and loved ones. But, having the time to myself to read, to mediate, been reading a lot around--I'm really passionate about men and the journey of men. And, what does it mean to be a man and, you know, and read all kinds of books from 'Fire in the Belly' ['Fire in the Belly: On Being a Man'] by Sam Keen to David Deida books, superior--'The Way of the Superior Man' to, you know, I mean, there's so many. I mean, Tim Brown that played for the Oakland Raiders, I got a book by him about manhood ['The Making of a Man: How Men and Boys Honor God and Live with Integrity']. Timothy Keller there's a great book called 'The Meaning of Marriage' ['The Meaning of Marriage: Facing the Complexities of Commitment with the Wisdom of God'], I've been reading. And, I'm not married. I was dating someone and we were reading that together, and I've just been, you know, really passionate about wanting to just be a better human being, a better man. A film I've been trying to do forever called, 'What's on the Hearts of Men' [Malik Yoba and A. Rahman Yoba] started as a play. And, that's the film that the producer I was working with, Tyler [Tyler Perry] wanted to do as a film. And, I've had every studio tell me, no. And, then I look at Ferguson [Missouri]. I look at Eric Garner. I look at Mike Brown [Michael Brown]. I look at all these young men out here that are trying to define manhood. Even the people who are choosing to protest now, trying to figure out, where do I belong? Who am I? Does my life matter? Like, what's my expression? What's my contribution? Because clearly, people don't think I matter, if they can choke me out or shoot me in the middle of the street and on and on and on. And, that's the place that I sit in. I sit in that place that wants to give form to those emotions that I have, that I know are reflecting other people. And, one of the joys of being an actor is being able to bring stories to life, travel through the world and see the impact they have. And, so, when someone tells you, well, that's a cool story, I don't I think that's commercial. Well, yes, we are in the business of being commercially successful. But, sometimes you have to address the emotions of where people are, honestly. And, if you do that, that in and of itself becomes commercial. Story_ID: 661136 Speaker 1: That's why I feel 'Empire' will be successful because there are elements of it that tap into the raw emotions, the frustrations, the challenges, the love, the betrayal, all those things that--about being human. We don't need a highest concept kind of story of, you know, sci-fi [science fiction] and aliens. Humans are dealing with very, very real emotions and me--myself included. I've been in pain. I've been, I've been depressed. You know, not the clinically depressed, but I have moments of deep melancholy where you're just like, who am I? Where am I going now? I've achieved these dreams. What are my new dreams, you know? Some of the people that were on the journey with me are no longer here. I still have to believe. I still have to tap into, you know, what my purpose is. As I've grown spiritually, as I've gone from being born Muslim to practicing Buddhism, to Christianity to, you know, getting deeper in the word as I get older, you know. And, what does that mean? And, that's been and interesting journey, you know, believing different things at different points in our life. But, at the end of the day, it's always been love. At the core of it, it's always been goodness and love and righteousness and wanting to make a positive difference. Really simple. As corny as that is, but it really is like, I'm not trying to get over on anybody. I'm not trying to take advantage. I don't need to oppress you. I don't need to take what you have and tell you I didn't take it, and being--I don't need that. I just need to know that when I wake up in the morning that I can contribute something positive to myself, to my family, to the planet, and wake up the next day and keep doing it. And, then one day I expire and it's all over, and that's the end of my history. Story_ID: 661137 Speaker 1: So, is that, is that what you wanna be remembered for? Speaker 2: Pretty much. It's pretty basic. It's not--doesn't--not too fancy. It's that he lived and it mattered. He lived and it mattered. And, you know, I can tell you, I mean, just that I was at Art Basel in Miami [Florida] a couple nights ago. And, a young man comes up to me and says, "Man, we met a couple years ago back uptown in Harlem [New York, New York] where we're from." He goes, "You were talking with Cam'ron," Cam'ron the rapper, "and, you know, like, I always thought you were cool. But, when I found out that you're from the hood, where I'm from, like, that was everything. That like, that changed the game like, in my stomach I just felt completely different." And, he goes, you know, "It's so important to know that, like, you come from where I come from, and that inspired me to like wanna do better." And, he end up going to prep school and ended up playing basketball in China. And, then he started a company working with artist--athletes who are artists. And, it's very synergistic with what I'm doing with Iconic, what we're doing with Iconic32. And, so, we're working on a project for All-Star Weekend in New York [New York] for NBA [National Basketball Association]. He's working on something. There's the opportunity for us to work together. It's those moments in life, for me that are everything. That, you know, if you're obedient and you wake up and do what you are purposed to do, then God will place the people in your life, when you least expect it. To open up door. To close doors sometime, to support. And, it really is that simple. It's not--it's simple in its design or desire but it's not simple in the execution. It's tough. It's very hard to stay motivated and to keep doing this but, that's all I know. And, that's why I was saying it's important to go back and write this stuff to remember; why did I wanna do this in the beginning? What--okay, let me go back to that. And, sometimes it can change, you have to adjust to that. But, for me it's important that I stay rooted in why I wanted to do it. Because, especially now, in a world where, you know, you can get a million followers on Instagram just by taking your shirt off, whether you're a girl or a guy. And, just because you're putting out an image that's sexy or, you know, that's selling, you know, look how fabulous I am, look at my amazing life. And, people buy into that. But, what does that really mean? How are you improving the life of someone else? And, maybe sometimes it's just by the inspiration and that's fine. But, that's their lane, I need to stay true to why I'm here. Why did I survive that gun shot? Why did I survive getting kicked out? Why have I survived in this business that still allows me to be something that people could look at around the world, and be inspired by? And, that's, you know, yeah, that's what I have to stay true to. Story_ID: 661138 Speaker 1: Okay. So, you essentially just answered also our legacy question. I wanna ask another question and that is, what are you? Are you, what are, are you generation--what are you, generation X, millennial? What--no, you're not (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Millennials are eighteen to thirty-five. So, I would be-- Speaker 1: Sixty-- Speaker 2: I'm '67 [1967], so that was--I don't even know if they gave the baby boomers--I came right after that. Speaker 1: You're after the baby boomers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. I forget. So, what, what do you think the legacy of your generation will be? Speaker 2: It's hard to tell 'cause we're still in the middle of it. But, I think, certainly when it comes to African Americans, part of our legacy without question is we've benefited greatly from all the work of those that have come before us. So, whether it's in the fields of finance, you know, you've got more people of color, more black men and women on Wall Street doing what they do. We're still a majorly underrepresented--obviously in technology and science and math in those, those areas. But, from an entertainment perspective, you know, in one generation, you know, we've got just, just if you look at hip hop alone, what that's been able to do in terms of creating an industry that's as old as I am. That section of the music industry has obviously created tons of millionaires. And, has given people access to not just get into the music but, leverage that out into sports and you know, and spirits and fashion and technology and other area. I'm concerned that there still is an emphasis on individual achievement and success and look how great I am. It's not until we have something like an Eric Garner which had to happen, like, even after a Mike Brown [Michael Brown] to at least get people talking about what they can do together. We'll see how long that lasts. But, it's encouraging to see that people were motivated to take some kind of action. I'm not sure of all of what the legacy will be. But, I know that as part of this generation, I've always championed be the give a fuck business, you know what I mean. Being a give a damn business, like, don't just be about you. And, I'm seeing some of that particularly in the millennials coming after us. There are a lot of younger folks who really--yes, there's a sense of entitlement for a lot of 'em. But, there's a lot that are out here that want their life to matter. They wanna do things that are important to them and can change the world. And, I think you have to keep believing that. Speaker 1: The other question I have is-- Speaker 2: And, then I have to eat. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: It's almost seven. Speaker 1: Well, now. Stop, stop, come on. Speaker 2: It's 6:46. Speaker 1: Okay. I know, but I said, I was gonna be finished. Come on. Just put it down. Put it down. Okay. Story_ID: 661139 Speaker 1: I, the other question I have is, how do you think the period of time that your career has, you know, where your career took root and you've been working this time? What will people say, or what do you think people will say about that period in the black entertainment industry. You know, what will, what will that body of work sort of repres- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: The '90s [1990s] are a special time. I mean, already, you know, you got parties, people have '90s [1990s] parties. You know, even just the music. I mean, we were all figuring it out, you know. Hip hop hadn't matured just. It was around '97 [1997], '98 [1998] that it became like pop music. It was a great time, you know. Even, you know, just what we did specially in terms of pop culture, music, fashion, film, even television. We had more show of people of color. Although this year, we were kind of caught up with 'Scandal' and you know, 'How to Get Away with Murder' and 'Black-ish' and there's now more shows spread out across networks now. But, there's also now fifty-three different platforms of scripted content, so. It's still, it's still under- underrepresented, but I think the '90s [1990s] will stand for a time when people were able to make their own way and rise up in a different kind of way. I think we were a little reckless, you know, when I think about just East Coast, West Coast beefs, and you know, Tupac [Tupac Shakur] being killed, and Biggie [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.] being killed and some of the other cats that lost their lives in that kind of senseless, reckless time period. But, I think we've escaped that and people have come out the other side. They've put their suits on. They put their bowties on. They're making them--people aren't trying to kill each other at the same level in terms, again, pop culture, black men, specifically as it relates to the music. But, it still remains to be seen. I think we're still writing that history. Story_ID: 661140 Speaker 1: And, one last question, and this goes back to your family. Your brother and you were, you know, have--the brother that you spoke of his name, again as? Speaker 2: Abdul Rahman [A. Rahman Yoba]. We call him Rock or Ab, yep. Speaker 1: And, he, he was the one you said he was at one point a hero for you. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, then you became the most predominate of the two, right? And, so-- Speaker 2: Depends on who you ask. Not if you ask his daughter (laughter). But, I know what you mean, from a public standpoint. Speaker 1: From a public stand- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. My brother, I mean, he was older than me. So, like any little boy, like, I wanna play baseball. I wanna play basketball with--I wanna--he played trumpet, I wanna, you know, those kinds of things. He was older. And, I remember, you know, I was thinking about this earlier today, like, when I didn't have any money and, you know, he worked at an insurance firm on 5th Avenue and I'd, you know, go down just to get ten dollars from him, or twenty dollars, which I thought about, like, I don't know how great a sacrifice that was him at the time, you know. He might have been giving me, I don't know, 20 percent of what he had in his pocket. But, he gave it to me, you know. And, I returned the favor, for sure, as we got older. But, yeah, that was, that was, that's I guess what my father [Abdullah Yoba] was trying to accomplish by making sure that we took care of each other. Speaker 1: So, when you think of the little boy that you were and that the man that you are right now, do you feel or can you access in a few words your journey? Speaker 2: I mean, again, you ask the questions about the little boy, who I was and who I am now. I'm so deep up in thinking about this every single day. I'm still figuring that out. But, I'm deep up in this, like, I--like I tell you, I will go home tonight and, I'll read and I'll write I'm sure. But, there is such a deep--it's been and like I said, I used the word painful before because, I'm really at a place where I'm redefining who I am, you know. So, you, my mother [Mahmoudah Young Lanier] will say things, or even some other friends, you're forty-seven, you're young. But, I've had a lot of life. I lived a lot of life. I've seen a lot. I've done a lot. And, I certainly in some ways thought I'd be in a different place. Richard Branson is a, for instance, has always been a hero of mine. I'd thought I'd be a billionaire by now. And, that's pretty crazy considering that if your passion is wanting to be Mother Teresa and Dalai Lama, who the hell you're gonna be Richard Branson. But, because I've been smart and creative, I always thought, oh, I can do this, I can--sort of dabble from a business standpoint a lot of areas. So, that's--I don't know the answer to that questions yet. I think I'm still figuring it out. But, it's a critical time for me because I, I literally, I won't say I agonize, yeah, I do agonize over it some days. And, that's again, why I have to write. Why I have to just remember that there's a voice here that hasn't been fully been expressed. Like, the whole purpose of writing, 'Harlem to Hollywood' as a stage presentation which ultimately should be a TV special, is to ultimately say to the world, like, whatever you thought you knew about me, you had no idea that I was capable of this. And, that's just from that artistic side, right. And, then things I wanna do in the same way with film, in the same way as a director. And, there things I wanna do with real estate. Like, I look at people like Magic [Magic Johnson] and other developers that I just go, you know what, I've always wanted to do that. That's the only reason to make a lot of money is to give it away and to build stuff. And, so, there's times when you think, well, what am I not doing that's allowing me to be closer to the visions that I see in my head. And, they're pretty grand visions. And, I recognize it, obviously. I have to go through this process and learn whatever I have to learn and get there, ultimately. But, I spend a lot of time thinking about that question...