 Story_ID: 218118 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Great, Clyde Yancy, C-L-Y-D-E, Y-A-N-C-Y, medical doctor. Speaker 1: Alright, and oh--I was gonna ask you what your occupation is and you've already told us. Speaker 2: Physician (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any nicknames or anything or? Speaker 2: My kids [Kristin Yancy and Nina Yancy] call me Daddio [ph.]. That's about as close as it gets. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 2, 1958, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Speaker 1: And, we already know your occupation. What, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October 29, 2004. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: This is the campus of UT Southwestern Medical Center, that's University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas [Texas]. And specific building is St. Paul University Hospital [Dallas, Texas]. Story_ID: 218119 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Tomatoes. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's actually this time of the year. Texas is wonderful during the early fall, late summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Absolutely, Santa Fe, New Mexico for myself. With my children it's San Antonio, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually my favorite phrase is one that was coined by [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and it goes, and I may have to paraphrase it here. But it basically says, "Intelligence plus character is the value of a real education," [sic. "Intelligence plus character - that is the goal of true education"]. And I've always thought that that made a lot of sense to me. That it's not as important to be bright or be brilliant even, but you have to do that in the context of being responsible and having some character. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can get the actual quote, I keep it in my desk--in my credenza and look at it from time to time. Story_ID: 218120 Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna explore your family history now, and I'm gonna ask you for your mother's family history, as well as your father's [Clyde Yancy, Sr.]. We'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: My mother's side is pretty interesting history. Speaker 1: But can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us first? Speaker 2: My mother's first name is Hilda, H-I-L-D-A, her middle name was Valeria, V-A-L-E-R-I-A, and her last name was Jones, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay and what's her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 22nd, 1915, St. Helena Parish, Louisiana. Long ago it was really--there were no, no incorporated towns. S-T. H-E-L-E-N-A, St. Helena Parish. Speaker 1: Okay. And what--what do you know about the ancestors on that side of the family, how far back? Speaker 2: What I know is this, my great-grandfather [Moses Sheridan], which would have been her grandfather, was a bastard child of a white property owner in eastern Louisiana. And his bequest to his son, who obviously was of mixed heritage, was about one thousand acres. And on that property, his son built Sheridan, S-H-E-R-I-D-A-N, AME Methodist Church, African Methodist Episcopal church. A church which is still on going now and it is my one sense of history that is pretty important. Speaker 1: Now was this great-grandfather a slave? Had he been a slave? Speaker 2: No, he was the bastard child of the landowner, so he was one generation removed from slavery. He would have been born in the late nineteenth century. But his mother was a slave. Story_ID: 218121 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it was the union of his [maternal great-grandfather] mother and this property owner that led to Moses Sheridan, which was his name. M-O-S-E-S, Sheridan, S-H-E-R-I-D-A-N. And he was a minister and he built Sheridan AME Church [St. Helena Parish, Louisiana]. And it has been going strong since the turn of the 20th century. So it's over 100 years old. It's actually the place where my mother [Hilda Jones Yancy] was buried. Her father--her mother and father then was Rose Sheridan and Dave Jones. Rose Sheridan died when my mother was fourteen or fifteen. My mother being the oldest female of the several children became the matriarch of the family and helped to provide for her four brothers and one sister. She has an interesting story. She went to high school during the time when the then governor of Louisiana, which was Huey Long, decreed that eleven years was all the education that was required. If you remember, he was a very socialistic kind of governor, was a Populist and thought he needed to get people to the workplace as quickly as possible. So she was one of those people who graduated from high school in the eleventh grade by decree. Didn't have the funds to go to college then, and in fact the last one or two years of high school didn't have the funds for that either. So she left the rural parishes in Louisiana and went to New Orleans [Louisiana] and lived with her godmother, who was Carrie Wilson [ph.]. And as the story goes, and I didn't see any of this but she had two sets of clothes and so she would wear one set and her godmother would wash the other set that night and she would alternate day, after day, after day, no matter what the season was, for two years, and that's how she clothed herself to get out of high school. And then when she got out of high school she worked as a shipping/stock clerk on Canal Boulevard, which obviously is a famous street in New Orleans. A lot of mercantile industry. After she worked there sufficiently long enough, she then went on to articulate at Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which at that time was a very small, under-funded, fledgling, predominately-black institution in Scotlandville [Baton Rouge], Louisiana. But did in fact get her degree. And what's most intriguing about my mother is that she got a master's degree in education from Louisiana State University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and received it actually before Brown versus Board of Education Topeka, Kansas [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. So she was able to get into their graduate school and do so successfully and complete the course work during a time when it was overtly segregated. And so it was really a pretty remarkable achievement. Speaker 2: How'd she manage that? Did she ever talk about how that happened? Speaker 1: Well I never got the full story. I mean every time I would try to press, it was apparent that it just wasn't--I was--I would never be privileged to all the details and I just respected the fact that somehow she persevered. But it was evident to me that it was a tough way for her and I have a sense of what happened, and to avoid controversy she was admitted with the intention to fail her. And they just couldn't do it because she worked hard and was very bright. Speaker 2: Often we hear this--the stories of southern state universities or the state actually offering people the money to go to some other school in the North. Just go to grad school someplace else. Speaker 1: So she was able to do that and got her degree and I think it was 1954. So she was working and had put in quite a bit of time in education. And met my father [Clyde Yancy, Sr.] and I was born in 1958. And grew up in an environment where I learned what it was like to know the true love of, of a mother, it was just unbelievable. That I really attribute so much of my success and my perspective and my philosophies of life, my personality even to lessons learned from my mother. So I think she probably is still the central figure in my life. Story_ID: 218122 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your father, can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Clyde Warren Yancy, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Born July 4th, and his year of birth was 1920 or 1922. The reason I hesitate is that my family became estranged somewhere when I was a teenager and there was some distance between my father and I. I'll keep certain personal things personal, but I think that my decision was correct to align myself with my mother [Hilda Jones Yancy] and allow my father to seek his happiness and comfort in directions that he wanted to. What I can tell you about it, is that he comes from an unbelievably great family. My grandmother was Effie Gordon [ph.] Yancy and my grandfather was Robert Yancy, Sr. Robert Yancy, Sr. probably migrated to Louisiana from someplace on the Atlantic coastal region, because there were a lot of African Americans with the surname of Yancy in that area. I mean I think that's a reasonable story and married Effie Gordon who was an educator and taught African American children back in the early 20th century in St. Helena Parish [Louisiana]. She really was a remarkable woman and with the exception of my father and one other son, all of her children became teachers. Then when the last Yancy retired from teaching, the aggregate number of years that my father's siblings had spent in education was 299, which is pretty remarkable. So you can imagine with a bunch of uncles and aunts that were in education, with my mother in education and her sister in education, it was just a part of the culture for me as I was growin' up that education was valuable, it represented livelihood, it represented a chance to live a more sophisticated life, to be more aware of your environment, to be more readily incorporated into the mainstream of American existence. So really was a very enriching environment and you know, I get excited when I talk about my father's siblings because they were--they are and were remarkable people. Because I was born so late in my parents' life, many of the people in that generation have passed on. But I've really benefited from the love of many people. My godmother is just one of whom, Miss Vivian [ph.] Yancy Smith, and I remember one story about her. When I got early entrance to medical school, I really didn't know how it was gonna be paid for. I absolutely had no clue. And I even had to struggle to figure out how to put together the initial fee that I had to send in just to hold my place. My mother was trying to figure out how she could do it and called my godmother. And she said, "Hilda, tell that boy to send his paperwork in. I'm sending money for him." So I really respect my godmother for taking that step forward to be certain that I had that opportunity. She didn't have children herself, but she took great pride in her grandnieces and nephews, really. And whenever there's an opportunity for her to help one of us, she really stepped up to make that happen. Story_ID: 218123 Speaker 1: I guess the way to resolve the issue with my dad [Clyde Yancy, Sr.] is that after about 1975 or '76 [1976], he and my mother [Hilda Jones Yancy] started living separately and he went on about his life as he wanted to, and that's, that's why. I think that the irony came at the end of life. My mother succumbed to Lou Gehrig's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is actually, it's a neurologic condition. It was really interesting that she remained neurologically intact up until about the last forty-eight hours, which I felt was a great blessing. But on the day of her funeral, she had an evening funeral. She always thought it was most appropriate to go home at sunset and never could understand why people would have a daytime funeral. And it was very special, it was really a great experience for me and just be so involved in that transition in her life and she planned so much of it out. And really ensured that it would be a beautiful experience and not a somber, heartbreaking thing. And I was obviously devastated, but she continued to teach me things just as she went through that transition, the notes that she shared with me and the instructions she left. But coincident with her funeral, my father had a heart attack which was ironic for two reasons that even though we were estranged, this forced the three of us back into the same timeframe, the same dynamic, which was interesting. And with me being a cardiologist, here he is about to succumb to an illness about which I know a fair amount. So I was navigating the funeral and the ICU [intensive care unit] at the same time. And the next morning as I was leaving to bury my mother, I had to actually stop in the ICU to see my father. And some weeks later he ended up having a high-risk surgical procedure that was complicated by a stroke and died about, oh, eight or nine months after that through the consequences of the surgery and stroke. So his death was in 1996. Speaker 2: Okay. Your parents had you like late in life as you say? Speaker 1: My mother was forty-two when I was born and I'm an only child. Speaker 2: Okay. Now--but you had a lot of interaction with your father's family, your grandmother and aunts and uncles? Speaker 1: They were great people and even now with the benefit of email, the generation which I'm from still communicates. So all of my cousins have done great. Actually it's, it's kind of a neat American story because you start with the matriarch of the Yancys which was Effie Gordon [ph.] Yancy, schoolteacher. Then you look at her progeny, 299 years of teaching. Then you look at what happened to their children, I'm a cardiologist. There's a pediatrician. There's an internist. There' an anesthesiologist. There's a Ph.D. in agricultural economics. There is Ph.D. in organic chemistry. There's a master's in biochemistry. Two more master's in secondary education. Another master's in counseling. And that's ten people with terminal degrees, that's a pretty neat story, pretty neat story. So I'm happy to be part of a family that really understands the value of education and accomplishment. Story_ID: 218124 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about growing up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well what's interesting for me are several observations. We were not destitute by any stretch particularly compared to others around us. But we had very limited means. And I was intrigued that growing up I never sensed that. My mother [Hilda Jones Yancy], in particular, was able to create an environment where I felt completely comfortable. There was a lot of self-respect. There was a lot respect for property. There was a very strong emphasis on faith. And it seemed as if, even with limited resources, she created a very rich environment. And I think I've benefited greatly from that. The second thing is that I was sensitized to the black experience because I was born in '58 [1958] and became aware in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]. But life in my part of Louisiana was, was pretty segregated, worship, education, recreation. I can even remember a separate city bus system. So that it wasn't until sometime when I was a teenager that this amalgamation occurred. And it was not nearly as contentious as it was in some places in the country. But it was interesting to me that even as I got to college, I actually had never experienced day-to-day interactive life with white Americans. And part of what I did in college was to take advantage of a program that the State of Louisiana instituted as a deflection of the decree to integrate, basically said for any university in Louisiana in which you are enrolled, you are automatically allowed or enrolled in a corresponding university within a certain proximity, i.e., there was this parallel structure of a black university, white university. So there was Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], there was Grambling [College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and Louisiana Tech [University, Ruston, Louisiana]. There was Southern University in New Orleans [Louisiana] and LSU in New Orleans [sic.], all of which was separated by just a few miles. If you went one, you could enroll in the other without any difficulty. So I did that my third year in college. It was the first time I'd ever had day-to-day contact on a regular basis with white Americans. And so that was--I was nineteen years old when that finally happened. Which was healthy, because the very next year I went to medical school at the age of twenty and I got to know exactly what a minority meant, because I was definitely in, in a small niche at that point in time. Those are my--those are the senses that were palpable. I guess the other palpable sense from that experience was something that I miss now. There was an unbelievably strong sense of family. I mean the way you recreated, the way that you worshipped, the way that you dined. Everything was within this incredibly strong fabric of the family. And I think that that kind of support, that was not overt but it was so real, it was just an incredible experience in retrospect. Story_ID: 218125 Speaker 1: Now, who all lived in your household when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Just myself and my mother [Hilda Jones Yancy]. And my father [Clyde Yancy, Sr.] was there in and out through my mid-teens, and then by the time I was in college he was basically out. And once I went to medical school [Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana] they tried to reconcile somewhat, there was just no compatibility. Speaker 1: So even when you were growin' up he wasn't there all the time? Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So but--no grandparents lived with you or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, not at all. Speaker 1: Okay. And where did you live in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: I lived in Scotlandville, which is the same community which Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] is located. At that time it was not incorporated, it is incorporated now so it has its own hierarchical government, et cetera. Always lived within a few miles of Southern University. So even when we moved, we were five miles in one direction, when we moved we were five miles in another direction (laughter), so as a kid growing up, that institution was kind of central in our culture again. Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot, a lot of time on the campus at Southern? Speaker 2: Well my mother was a school teacher at the high school--junior high and high school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that was on the campus of Southern University. So there was hardly a day in my life that I didn't go on the campus or drive across campus. Obviously I went to college there. So that's a big part of my background. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember the music--I mean the band is such a big deal at Southern--it's very public. Speaker 2: Okay so here's the deal. Just since we started our discussion, music is my biggest diversion or indulgence if you will. And I started playing saxophones when I was in elementary school. And the now band director at Southern has been there, gosh, thirty plus years, Isaac Greggs, was then the band director at the high school on the campus of Southern University and that high school actually was a K-12 school. So he is a person that was my introduction to music. Through high school I participated in all the genres, stage band, marching band, concert band, and I think as you were thumbing through my high school memorably stuff or to what not, I think every kid has those kinds of things now. But at that point in time it was pretty special. One of the neat experiences I had is that because I was a little bit larger than most, during the holiday seasons, when members of Southern University's band would go home but the band had functions, the bowl games or parades, the band director who had been at Southern High School, but was at University would come back to the high school and recruit several of us to come and basically be place holders. But as a high school kid, I got to, to perform with the Southern University's marching band in a couple Sugar Bowls [New Orleans, Louisiana] and parades, and it was a blast. I mean it was great. Yeah I had a music scholarship to go to Southern, but I'd already decided that I wanted to become a physician so I didn't accept it. But music continues to stay with me and it's kind of interesting, when I was a high school student looking at college, we didn't call it Southern University, it was the yard, that's all it was, it was the yard. Big open areas where there was a lot of people congregating. And the human juke box was just the thing. I mean the band was everything. That was--football season was great and we had some great football teams and great rivalries, but the band just gave the whole thing personality and that was just impossible--it was infectious, you couldn't help yourself. Speaker 1: That's what I've heard, that the football team, you know, sometimes are good, sometimes are bad, but the band is always good. Speaker 2: Now wait a minute, we got a good (laughter) football team. We've always had a good football team and the Southern-Grambling Bayou Classic thing, that's just--you know, I remember when that whole issue started. Because they moved the game to New Orleans [Louisiana] to have a bigger venue, it was in the old Tulane Stadium [New Orleans, Louisiana] which has since been torn down and I remember when it moved to the Super Bowl [sic. Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana]. I've had some great times in life being a part of the Bayou Classic. I never participated with the band in that, but going as a spectator, getting caught up in the moment, and it's a great feeling. And think about this, eighty thousand African Americans in one place at one time, top of their lungs enjoying football and bands. It's a great experience. I'm looking forward one day to get my kids to be a part of that just so they can see what that part of my heritage is all about. Story_ID: 218126 Speaker 1: Okay, so now when you were a little kid, what were you like, how would you describe yourself? Speaker 2: You know, there's every reason in the world why I should have been a dysfunctional adult. I've worn glasses since I was in the third grade, my mother [Hilda Jones Yancy] was a teacher, she was my teacher when I was in the seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Now, now what grade school did you attend? Speaker 2: Southern Laboratory, Southern High in different years. I think official name is still Southern University Laboratory School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but it just became Southern High. And I went there from, from [grades] one through twelve. But being an only child and having an older mother, I'm going to the same school where my mother taught wearing glasses. I mean, I was destined to be dysfunctional. And somehow or another it didn't happen. I least I don't think it happened too much (laughter). But, I was introverted, I was shy. I kind of missed the interaction that comes with having siblings. I had a lot of father surrogates; my scout master was one of them. I was heavily involved in boy scouting and my scout master was really a very principled man, a Christian man and took me under his wing. And my uncles which was extraordinary I mean, I would never get turned away if I knocked on their door or went by their house. I mean, they all embraced me as their own son and that was just a remarkable experience. Story_ID: 218127 Speaker 1: --so, you became an Eagle Scout [Boy Scouts of America]? Speaker 2: Yeah. So I got started in Cub Scouts and then got started in Boy Scouts and that was a wonderful experience. It was one of the very right things I did in life. Went through the progression of rank in a pretty straightforward fashion and then hit a roadblock. It was really tough for me to swim. I worked for two years to get my swimming merit badge. I don't know if it was fear of the water or just bad technique, but it took a lot of effort to swim and I thought, when I got this one merit badge, it was just an over-the-top experience. But to get the Eagle Scout award you had to get a lifesaving merit badge and that was fortuitous for me, because they changed the rule just as I was getting there. So you needed to get the emergency preparedness merit badge or the lifesaving merit badge. And so a buddy of mine that I was working with who also wanted to become an Eagle Scout, we both did it together and got the emergency preparedness merit badge. And getting the Eagle Scout award was really a pretty big deal. It was, it was very rewarding. In retrospect, I understand more about that experience then I did at the time. At the time, like any other kid, it was short term, I just wanted to get to this next level. But I realize that it was those kind of experiences that enriched the whole concept of being goal directed and making sacrifice to get to the next level and understand the important, importance of accomplishment. And there's still some lessons I've learned that stay with me from that scouting experience. You know, you always leave a camp site better than you found it. Well imagine what kind of lesson that is for your workplace, your home, your vehicle, even your relationships and your friendships. Always leave things better than you found it. So that kinda sticks with me and, you know, scout motto and all those things are really great life lessons in helping us learn how to live. Four of the last three years of my scouting experience, I spent my summers as a staff person at the camp staff, it was called Camp Avondale [East Feliciana Parish, Louisiana], which was located in central Louisiana. So, that was a good experience. I guess it was kind of a forbearer for what I would become professionally, because I ended up first of all being on the staff of the nature area, which is as close to science as you can get. And then I eventually directed that group my last year as a member of the camp staff. But again, it was just another life experience. It was all about living independently, being responsible and having a totally different direction again. I just think that that was a very healthy experience for me. It worked out pretty well. I was always interested in science and I always had to step lightly because anything that was academic I did pretty well at, standardized tests, regular tests, et cetera. And so it was a little bit of ostracization [ph.] if you will, a little bit of isolation from my peer group because of what I represented from an academic standpoint. But in retrospect, that was a price that I'm willing--it's a price I'm glad I paid and I'm glad that I didn't do what others did. Because there were other kids, in fact there were kids that I went to school with who probably had the same aptitude and the same ability to achieve, but were so overwhelmed by peer pressure that they probably underperformed deliberately, and that was not me, and that was not accepted in my house. Story_ID: 218128 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One of the things people often want to know is how did you go from being a little kid at a high school some place to medicine, because there's always that friction point in your life where you have to decide what are you gonna do. And in my situation, I think it relates to what we were just talking about, that is what kind of kid I was growing up. A lot of my teachers identified potential and I respect a lot of them for that. Some of them are still alive, which is always a great connection whenever I can run across one of them. But early on, they kinda started introducing the concept that you have what it takes or the aptitude to at least attempt to be a doctor. So there was this vague concept of being a doctor. It was fortuitous that I liked science in part because my mother [Hilda Jones Yancy] was a science teacher. But at each grade level, that message was reinforced. And then my indoctrination into healthcare was probably something that should've convinced me to do anything but medicine. There was one physician for a community of thirty thousand people and he had to do everything: pregnancies, heart attacks, blood pressure, diabetes. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Robert Hall [ph.]. And I actually had the occasion a few years ago to reconnect with him. I think he is retired now but he was still in practice. And he attended a lecture that I gave and I recognized him and I thanked him for having the courage to be that primary care provider in a sea of all that humanity and try to do all things for all people. And that's really what he did. Speaker 1: Did you know him very well when you were coming up? Speaker 2: He was just the family doctor. I've never had a chance to spend any separate time with him. He was like any other physician in community practice, extremely busy, very involved in his practice. But I just remember vividly going to his office, it was always packed solid. And every once in a while I'd count heads and at that point in time it was five bucks a visit no matter what you did. I'd said wow that's a hundred bucks in this room (laughter) that's pretty good. But that was the, I wouldn't say judgment, that was just the observation of a little kid. But as time went on, it became something that I embraced with much more passion. And by the time I got to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], it was pretty much definite that I wanted to do it. But even then, I still was fairly naive. And I think at many steps in my life I have been benefited by people that I never would have suspected who provided insight, opportunity, leverage, wisdom that's kinda helped me move along. It's almost as if at every point in time where somebody needed to step up to help me get to the next level, someone emerged. And you can call it serendipity; you can call it divine intervention; I'm not sure. Story_ID: 218129 Speaker 1: But I remember in my freshman year of college having this angst about, how do I become a physician? And not having a whole lot of direction within the structured educational environment, but I declared myself as a chemistry major. And Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] invited a professor from Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] to come and provide a lecture to the faculty and I attended. I don't even remember the physician/professor's name. But at the end of the lecture I went up to him and said, "You know, I want to be a doctor, and I'm not sure what to do." And he said, "You need to come and spend the summer at Meharry." And he gave me a name and a phone number and I called up and they sent me this application form for a summer program at Meharry Medical College. And it was another one of those very enriching experiences in my life because I was fortunate enough to be picked. Went up there, the first year I lived on the campus of Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee and took course work in Meharry. What Meharry did, they brought in maybe about 100 African American kids in an effort to enrich the success to get into professional schools, whether it was for terminal science degrees, Ph.D. or M.D. degrees. And the first two days, we all took standardized tests and they'd identify your strengths and weaknesses. And where you were weak, you would take course work to bring that up. Where you were strong, you would take accelerated course work so that when you returned to college you would have a perspective that would help you be successful for the next year. And the neat thing about it was that faculty was not the regular medical school faculty entirely, about 30 percent of it was, but about 70 percent were a group of nuns from the Middle Atlantic States from parochial undergraduates that viewed this as a part of their mission. And there was a woman to this day I still maintain a rapport with, Helen Christenson [ph.], who was the nun that taught math. And just was as an inspiring woman as I have ever met. And I can't thank that whole experience enough for what it provided for me, because it gave me that opportunity to really accelerate my line, my tests into very good categories. So everything I did was preparatory for the next year allowing me to get another advantage when I came back, went back to Southern. So the first year was just extraordinary. But I remember being challenged that first year. The biochemistry instructor was a fellow named Joe Gallo, G-A-L-L-O. He's an unbelievably bright man. And I remember going by his office and I spent time with him and so, what do you wanna do. I wanna go to med school. Where do you wanna go? I told him my dream was to go to Tulane [University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana]. So no way you get to Tulane. And, and just made me bristle. I just--I mean just clinched fists, grinding teeth, and again it has been great to have these deja vu experiences, because a few years ago we reconnected and it was evident then that his intent was motivation. I mean he could see some fire, some passion, and he read something that I published in medical literature and tracked me down and we had a really nice exchange based on that which, which was really a good experience. From that experience, I went back to Southern the second year and met an organic chemistry instructor named Andrew Smoling [ph.]. And he taught me the six "Ps," proper, prior, preparation prevents poor performance. And that has just stuck with me for all time. And again, as a role model he really enriched my experience. He and another chemistry instructor, Jack Jefferson, just a great guy, a pipe--smoking African American guy, unbelievably bright. But there were these people again that have just been on my path the whole way that have helped me get from point A to point B. Now the neat thing about my second year at Meharry, this is just a little digression, that second summer I didn't know if I was gonna go back to Meharry. I was trying to earn some money. And there was a new radio station in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], it was called the AM alternative. It played African music on the AM dial. I could into that. So I called them, I said what do I need to do if, if I wanna get a summer job there as a disk jockey. We need you go get an FCC [Federal Communications Commission] license. Fine. So I actually took the test. Went to New Orleans [Louisiana], took the test, got the FCC license and I was ready to be a disk jockey the summer of 1977. And Meharry called back and said I got in for the second year, so I didn't do that, instead I went to Meharry for the second year. And the coolest thing about that was that I met my future wife [Annelle Ahmed Yancy] at Meharry. Because she was there was well. We couldn't stand each other, absolutely couldn't stand each other. She was from New Orleans, I was from Baton Rouge and she was a strikingly beautiful woman. Every guy was just standing in line to meet her and I'd just--would have no part of it, in part because I was unbelievably shy. So I basically studied and played basketball all summer. And we just carried on this hate campaign. And it wasn't until she showed up at Tulane after I'd already been there two years that we reconnected. It was don't I know you, don't I know you, and it was just like this unbelievable romance, I truly mean to say that, that just kind of blossomed and that was a great part of my world. Story_ID: 218130 Speaker 1: But anyway, I went back home [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. In that third year in college, the year that I went to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], was the year that there was an unbelievable amount of tension between my parents [Hilda Jones Yancy and Clyde Yancy, Sr.] and it was clear that I needed to get out of this situation. So I took the medical college admission test in the fall of '77 [1977], nineteen years old and did well enough that I got, I got interviews, actually I did, I did well. And went to about six schools to interview and at each place I was told I was too young, I was twenty, you know, why are you in such a hurry and what not. Speaker 2: So you were twenty when you were tryin' to get into medical school? Speaker 1: Right. And I went to Tulane [University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And I remember my mother actually came with me. She sat in the lobby area while I was being interviewed, but she actually came with me. And I just spoke very plainly that this is what I want to do. And I got early admission. They brought me in and so in the fall of '78 [1978] basically I was a twenty-year-old freshman medical student. Speaker 2: Now had you been skipped in grade school or did you-- Speaker 1: I started off at the age of five instead of six. Speaker 2: So that accounts for one of the years. Speaker 1: That counts for one. And I blitzed through college in less than three years. I just kept taking course work. So what's funny about that, you'll like this story, Larry [Crowe]. My mother was kind of shocked when she saw what happened. I mean, I did great on this MCAT [Medical College Admission Test] test and then I go to the school I'd been dreaming of, Tulane, and I get accepted. I mean she basically came with me so she could support me when I got devastated when someone told me you're too young, go grow up and come back in four years. And all of a sudden you're saying you're in and we want you to start in the fall. And she was just like beyond emotional about all this because she said you don't even have a college degree, you're only twenty years old how can you leave home now? I said well, okay, I'm gonna do this, I wanna leave home, I wanna get my career started and it's gonna take a long time. But I promise you that I'll get my undergraduate degree. And so Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] agreed to accept my first year medical school, provided I passed, as credits toward my degree, but I was still short about nine or so hours because I had not done a whole lot of things outside of science and math. I almost had enough hours to have a minor in math. So I said I'll do this for you. So what I did was, the summer after my third year at LSU/Southern, I took a job as a chemist working for Merck Sharp and Dohme Research Laboratories in Rahway, New Jersey, R-A-H-W-A-Y, Rahway, New Jersey. So by day I was a bench chemist, and by night I was a student at Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and I took my foreign language requirement. So that got part of that out of the way. Then I went to med school for my freshman year. Did really well, but the summer between my freshman year and sophomore year I went back to Southern as an undergraduate even though I already had a year of medical school behind me and took the other nine hours I needed so that August of '79 [1979] I was able to get my [undergraduate] degree. But that was--I made this deal with my mother, I wasn't gonna break the deal and it was important for me to do that. And I think she chuckled about it because she never thought I would follow through with it. But I think at that point in time she started to get a different perspective of what kind of drive I had about what it is I was doing. And one of the thoughts she left with me was, you know, you don't need to put all 180 pounds into everything you do. It's almost as if, you can reign some of your energy back. I haven't found a way to do that just yet. Maybe I need to start doing that at this phase in my life. But, you know, that gets me through getting that undergraduate degree which in retrospect was a good and healthy thing to do, and I'm glad I did that. Story_ID: 218131 Speaker 1: And that gets me back to Tulane [University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And at that point in time, it was actually in my third year at Tulane, the summer between my second and third year when Annelle [Ahmed Yancy] re-emerged in my life. So this would have been 1980. And I still remember our first date, was October 20, 1980. And we had done a little cat and mouse, as I would say, well can I. No you can't walk with me. Can I sit with you in library? No you can't. This was really difficult. So, (laughter), so finally I said look, we're going to dinner and this is how you need to dress. And she looked at me and she said, nobody has ever taken me on a date and told me how to dress. I said okay, you haven't been on a date with me yet. So it's almost as if she said you've got one chance, you have one chance. And we had this magical date. I still remember we ate, it was the Chart House when it was still in New Orleans [Louisiana] around Jackson Square [New Orleans, Louisiana], it's not there anymore. And afterwards we had coffee and beignets at Cafe Du Monde [New Orleans, Louisiana], and then we danced in a little '70s [1970s] club that was at the top of the Hilton Hotel, which was right dsown on the Mississippi River. It's called the Rainforest, now. And that started an experience that really blossomed into just a great relationship, and an unbelievable marriage and my two daughters [Kristin Yancy and Nina Yancy] that I still have now. Just a great time-- Story_ID: 218132 Speaker 1: I was two years ahead of her [wife Annelle Ahmed Yancy], and so when I graduated, I was hell-bent to go to the very best place I could. I received a couple awards at med [medical] school and gained entrance into the Alpha Mega Alpha Honor [Medical] Society which Tulane [University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana] has reserved for the top 10 percent of graduating seniors. So it was a pretty special thing to do that. I can still remember that's the only time in life I saw my mother [Hilda Jones Yancy] completely lose it. Because she was so emotional that my med school graduation was a pretty special moment. I kind of have that image in my mind. Came over to Texas as an intern, here at Parkland Memorial Hospital [Dallas, Texas] campus of UT Southwestern Medical Center [University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas]. And after my internship here, during the second year, Annelle and I got married, so that was September 17, 1983. And then for the next year or so we kinda had a distance marriage. She was in New Orleans finishing up med school and I was here at my second year. Then in my third year, which is my last year of my internal medicine training, she came over and did a year of pathology so we could kind of be in the same place at the same time. Kinda necessary when you're married, it helps it all work a little bit better. So that was great. And then that year after my residency was done, she wanted to get back into her discipline, which was working towards becoming an obstetrician/gynecologist, and she secured a position in family practice back at, at LSU [Louisiana State University, New Orleans, Louisiana] actually in New Orleans. So we went back home and she got started with that. And I took a job at Tulane on their faculty and worked as an instructor at the VA [Veterans Affairs] medical center [Southeast Louisiana Veterans Health Care System, New Orleans, Louisiana] during the day. And then on weekends and evenings, I started learning something about cardiovascular surgery and worked with [Dr.] Thomas [D.] Giles, who was a professor on the faculty at Tulane and worked at the VA. That was a great year because that experience tripled my income from being an intern and resident. We didn't have children. We moved into an uptown townhouse in New Orleans that had not been previously occupied, it was brand new. So for a year, my wife and I had this idyllic lifestyle. We had resources; we had a great place to live. She was involved in exactly what she wanted to do. And I remember that it was so good that it created friction because I was intent to come back to Texas and get my cardiology training started. And all of her family and friends didn't understand how I could disrupt this idyllic lifestyle that we had established so quickly to go back and do the training-- Story_ID: 218133 Speaker 1: And it was all about a message that had been impressed upon me by my pathology professor when I was a med [medical] student at Tulane [University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And his assertion, what became another one of these mantras that worked for me, was that to be successful in medicine you have to embrace the concept of delayed gratification. There is no return you'll receive in this business without fairly significant sacrifice. So this delayed gratification thing stayed with me and I could have stayed in that idyllic 1985 to '86 [1986] lifestyle and I would never have gotten out of it. Because once you had children and made long-term financial commitments, you'd have to continue. But instead I honored my commitment to come back to Texas, get my training in cardiology, which was a right thing to do, then back here [Dallas, Texas]. Again I benefited from just incredible mentorship. [Dr.] James [M.] Wilson was my professor that guided my cardiology training and he was a taskmaster and I'm happy about that. He insisted on excellence, so nothing else was acceptable. But he had character and it gets back to that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] quote, "Intelligence plus character is the mark of a true education." And that's what I learned from him. So it was an intense three, three-and-a-half years of training and research and reading and studying and learning about cardiovascular medicine. Annelle [Ahmed Yancy] came to join me that second year and started her training in OB/GYN [obstetrics/gynecology]. It was so funny when she finally got over here, she looked at me and said, we will never ever again be separated for longer than twenty-four hours, you got that right? And you just said, yes ma'am, absolutely. And so that, you know, started a really sweet spot in my life where she was here and my first daughter was born in August of 1989, her name is Kristin Teresa [(ph.) Yancy] and she is just an amazing child. She's fifteen now, but she's blossomed and she's got her mother's looks and mannerisms, and she has her mother's grace and when she walks in the room, she enters the room just like her mother did. But she was just a real awakening experience for me, kind of disruptive too when you have a kid. I never had a need for coffee through all of my college education, through all of my med school, residency, even my fellowship training. All of my training, never had any--I could walk by a coffee pot, it would not even phase me. Soon as my daughter showed up and night after night after night of being sleepless, coffee just became this necessity in my world and I haven't gotten away from it since. My second daughter was born in January of 1991. Her name is Nina Magdalene [Yancy (ph.)] and she is also an amazing child. She is my mirror image. She looks like me, she has my personality. She has my mannerisms. She's just an extraordinary child. She's gifted and she's bright and she's articulate, and just a real joy. Both my daughters are just absolute blessings and I love them both dearly. Kristin is bright and does great in school. Nina's beautiful. So they have a lot of commonality, but they have these unique dimensions of their world. I call Kristin my right brain child because she's abstract and creative, and dances and has this just imaginative mind, and Nina is my left brain child. She's concrete; she's focused. She understands concepts and likes to move forward, but she too dances, has a good sense of her femininity, but I need to shut up because I'll talk about my kids forever. Story_ID: 218134 Speaker 1: But then life changed, August 12, 1991. Annelle [Ahmed Yancy] told me that morning that we needed to go see the doctor together. And we went to see a surgeon, because Annelle had discovered a lump in her breast. And he did the needle biopsy in the office that day, got the diagnosis back that day, it was breast cancer. And August 15, 1991, she got operated on here at this institution [University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas]. She did great. She was tough as nails. She was an unbelievably tough woman who waited for another two days to find out the results of her lymph nodes. They took thirty two lymph nodes and one was positive with breast cancer. If you had any evidence of spread outside of the breast then your prognosis is radically different. If you have no nodes positive, you took the (unclear) for breast cancer, get through the treatment and your life goes on. If you have positive nodes, it can be a challenge. So we went through the chemotherapy, she lost all of her hair, and when it came back it was just very fine, beautiful texture, and she was even prettier than she had been before. The surgery, she did well with the radiation, it destroyed, disfigured her chest and her skin, damaged her lungs, and she never really got over the insult from the radiation. But she toughed it out. The radiation was over with in 1992 and up until the time of her death, she just refused to let it get the best of her. It meant everything to her to be a mom and take care of her daughters [Kristin Yancy and Nina Yancy], and she did that in the most extraordinary fashion, exemplary fashion. But we thought we'd hit another sweet spot, we had it behind us, and we were even thinking about haven' more kids. She's a good Catholic girl, comes from a big Catholic family in Louisiana. There were nine of them and only two daughters, so she was ready to have a bunch more. And as we were getting opinions on how healthy it would be to do that, we took a family vacation and went skiing. Neither one of us had gone skiing before. And just at the point where I was about to tell my best friend that this skiing vacation doesn't make any sense, I'm doing an awful lot of work, this is not fun, I had my first taste of the downhill run and I was totally infected with it, and to this day we still ski once a year. But she enjoyed it as well, but she fell over and over and over again. Every time she fell got up giggling. But for weeks afterwards, her back was bothering her. So as we were about to make this decision that we could continue to try to have a bigger family, she went to just go have her back checked and the x--rays were fine. But her surgeon said, let's just get a bone scan. June 2, '95 [1995] bone scan came back cancer. So then it was the reality of recognizing that we were no longer talking about survival which is (unclear). We talked about quality. And we--(unclear), we called all the major centers and got opinions from as many people as possible. Went to Duke [University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina], got an evaluation done there. Went to University of Alabama, Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama] got an evaluation done there. It was really one of these spare no expense, cash every chip you got, whatever you have to do, try to hold on. Great physicians took care of her here at Dallas [Texas], but still indebted to this day. And each day we lost a little bit and it continued until April 5, '97 [1997] when she finally slipped away with me holding her hand. It was tough. I remember the last twenty-four hours, she was basically in a coma and three days before that was the last time she had seen the girls and she was going in and out of consciousness. And they were so young they really couldn't understand what was going on. But the last thing she said, it's almost as if she woke out of her coma, it was a Saturday. And she looked at me and she said, everything will be alright. And that was the last thing that she said that was intelligent. By about seven p.m. that evening, she just slipped away. But what was so eerie, was that my oldest daughter was undergoing her Catholic Confirmation that same evening and it was scheduled to occur at 6:30. And to this day I'm convinced that she stayed alive long enough so that she could be alive while Kristin got her Confirmation. So Kristin got confirmed at 6:30 and Annelle died at seven. So that's probably the most life altering experience I could have had. I was thirty-nine, we were only six days apart in age. There are still parts right now that are rough spots, but I had to reinvent life; it's just that simple. I had to learn how to be a single parent. Story_ID: 218135 Speaker 1: --I'd always been really focused on my work and had been a long range planner and I had to become kind of a short term problem-oriented guy. The girls [Yancy's daughters, Kristin Yancy and Nina Yancy] and their needs were on top of my agenda, so I had to deal with that. I got a lot of latitude from work here, so I was able to take some time to reinvent my own world, had to hire nannies and babysitters. Was interesting was a woman who came into our life. Again a series of individuals that have been there when they needed to be there. In December 1995 when Annelle [Ahmed Yancy] was still alive, up until that time, every time we talked about a childcare provider, someone to help us with our kids, it was did you call and check the background, did you check on this, just the highest level of scrutiny. Thelma Green [ph.] showed up as this older, traditional, African American woman that had been caring for kids all her life. She lost her daughter to breast cancer, and Annelle and Mrs. Green connected that Saturday morning immediately. And unlike any other recruitment of a childcare provider we had ever gone through, Mrs. Green hadn't left our driveway and Annelle looked at me and said hire her. When she gets home I want you to have a message waiting for her that she's hired. And she has been with me since December of '95 [1995]. She was with me just this morning (laughter). And that's--I view her as Annelle's influence on the girls, it's there every day because that's who she handpicked to be there to kinda help with the orientation and the support for the kids. So, that kinda gets through that rough spot and you know, a lot of people say well how did losing your wife affect you professionally? Did it change the way you practice medicine. I think the answer is no it didn't, because my approach to medicine always been to communicate, to be thoughtful, to be caring. I don't think that that's what it did for me. I think what it did for me though was that it really taught me how frail life is, that in an instant one piece of information can change everything there is about life. We were living an unbelievable dream. But we when got married between us we had 100 dollars in the bank, but we had our dreams, we had our education and our parents that sacrificed, and we just had hope. And we were moving ahead, making life happen, raising a family and then boom, this biopsy comes back, and the treatments are tough, and then the cancer, itself, comes back. So it ended up being a tough time. Story_ID: 218136 Speaker 1: So probably the most important thing, kind of fast forward to where we are now, is that I basically had to start my career over. Because I had to decide what kind of physician, what kind of work I would do. And with a lot of blessings, serendipity, hard work, support from others, we have been able to kind of reinvent ourselves. And so what I do right now is have a little bit of dichotomized life. Part of my life is all about supporting my two daughters [Kristin Yancy and Nina Yancy] and providing every possible opportunity I can for them, and giving them that same sense of connectiveness [ph.] and family that I had growing up, but doing it as an end of one, instead of as an end of many in the kind of extended family networks that that lifestyle and that timeframe provided. So that's part of my life, but the dichotomy in my life is that as a professional, I have been really focused. I'm trying to do as much as I can to make a difference. And the area that I have the greatest interest in is just not cardiology or heart disease, but is heart disease that affects patients at the advanced stages. So the specific illness that I focus on is congestive heart failure and heart transplantation. That has been my professional label since 1990. Since 1993, I've directed the heart transplant program here at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas [Texas]. From 1996 through the year 2002, I overlapped with that appointment with the same responsibility of Baylor University Medical Center [at Dallas] here in Dallas. So I ran two heart transplant programs concurrently. I immersed myself into clinical research and started working with others across the country to help identify new treatment strategies that would improve the outcomes for all patients. But somewhere in the mid-1990s I had identified that there seemed to be something a little bit different about the African American patient who showed up that had more advanced disease. They were typically younger. They usually had a previous history of high blood pressure and they were pretty sick when they showed up. And it was such a consistent observation that I began to try to look at my own experience to see if we could make a statement to sensitize the rest of the physician community that maybe there's something else going on here. And I vividly remember my first efforts at trying to bring this information to the community's attention. Got completely shot it down and I was almost castigated from my circle of peers because it was such a contentious thing to suggest that as a function of race a certain disease process could be so uniquely different. But we stuck with it. Speaker 2: That's right, 'cause you're talkin' about years of--we're lookin'--we're talkin' about years of people speculating on the--what the differences are between black folks and white folks? Speaker 1: Well are there real physiologic-- Speaker 2: In the 19th century people wrote about it over and over again, mostly white people sayin' that black folks were not--the differences all made us inferior. Speaker 1: Right. And so there was a lot of sensitivity about bringing an issue like this up and there was a strong effort to put that aside. But working through the scientific process and again looking at data, somewhere around 1996 where we were able to obtain data from one of the bigger initiatives I'd been involved in and I'm actually still involved with it, that was very encouraging. Because not only could I use it to show that there is something different about the African American that has advanced heart disease, but in the same breath I could say, oh by the way when exposed to the right therapies they do just as well. So it was a great message to say you need to be sensitized to the patients that are African American because they may have a more aggressive disease presentation, but with this treatment strategy, they do equally as well. Since that timeframe, that has continued to evolve until we were able to get definitive statements in the medical literature at the highest tier in 2001, and really establish this as a concept. And again, I pay deference and respect to others in my professional discipline that provided opportunities for me. So for example, I was a keynote speaker for the national meeting of heart failure experts [Heart Failure Society of America] in the year 2000 and that was the first opportunity that someone had to bring these issues to our population of physicians in general. And I was invited to write editorials and to share the research that we were doing that all culminated into a definitive statement in the New England Journal of Medicine, which said yes there is a difference, but we can treat these differences and patients do reasonably well. Shortly after that, we got involved in yet another initiative that was even more provocative, which was to specifically start testing the treatment approach exclusively in African Americans. This too was contentious, because it had not been done before for this kind of heart disease. Well, we said, "We are no longer going to be handicapped by the way clinical research is done in this country." Story_ID: 218137 Speaker 1: Typically what happens is that academic centers, like the one we are in now, identify a cache, C-A-C-H-E, of patients that were referred to them which implies some referral bias, so it's not a representative sample. And all those patients are pooled together in what we call a multicenter randomized control trial. And that is our highest tier of information in medical science. The dilemma with all of those experiences though is that they've been terribly under representative of women and minorities. And so this effort that started in mid-to-late '01 [2001] was to exclusively recruit African American patients and test whether or not a novel treatment approach would work. And that experience went on from the summer of '01 [2001]. I got fairly heavily involved in it during the summer of '02 [2002] and been a part of the leadership of that effort along with many other people to the point that in the summer of '04 [2004] we culminated the project because we found striking advantages in favor of this treatment approach in a group that is exclusively African American. Speaker 2: Okay, now what we have to do is go back and define what the difference is. 'Cause people listening to this say well what is the difference, well what is it? Speaker 1: So, next month we will actually discuss all of those findings in a national meeting and will follow it through with a national publication, which I helped to co-author that hopefully will be another definitive statement. But let's back up and talk about what it is that is the recurring theme in this whole dynamic. African Americans for a variety of reasons some known, many unknown have a remarkable incidence of high blood pressure, hypertension. And it's just not the blood pressure problem, because the downstream consequences of having high blood pressure are strokes, kidney disease and heart disease. African Americans have a twentyfold greater likelihood of having end-stage renal disease which means going on dialysis. What twentyfold means is two thousand percent higher likelihood of going on dialysis in the setting of having high blood pressure. That's remarkable. If you have high blood pressure and your cameraman has high blood pressure, your risk of going on dialysis because of the damage that high blood pressure does to your kidneys is twenty times greater. We're talking about stroke, again you have a much higher risk of having a stroke and dying from that stroke, and if it is heart disease your risk is at least two or three times higher of having overt heart disease as a consequence of the high blood pressure. So what we've learned is that the people that have heart failure, weakened heart muscles and are African American overwhelmingly have high blood pressure as a preliminary or preceding illness that got them to that point. We've also learned that consistent with our early observations that typically are younger when this happens and when they present for care, they have a much more compelling disease. They are more symptomatic, they are sicker. Where we have gone since then, is a start to understand a few genetic signals that may be associated with the inclination to have this disease. Some environmental signals, for example obesity, that may go along with this disease. Then there are issues of despaired healthcare that is a new dynamic that we've uncovered. And I say we collectively, not just myself. It demonstrates that when individuals present for care, same set of symptoms, no reason to treat them any differently, they are treated differently. Some of that is because of what you prefer to have done to you as a patient. Some of that also is because of system issues that limit access and because of issues of bias. So the important statement to make is that there is a context that has to be appreciated that is responsible for the burden of heart disease we see in African Americans. That context is despaired healthcare. That context is socioeconomic stress or psychosocial stress. That context or environmental factors like dietary choices, obesity, and that context is genetic profiles all taken together and interacting together predisposes African Americans to having a high rate of cardiovascular disease. Did you know that African Americans die from cardiovascular disease or heart disease at the highest rate in the world? Not in the country, in the world. So it really tells you there's something unique there. Story_ID: 218138 Speaker 1: Is there a parallel with or has anybody studied African people living in European countries, for instance, Africans living in London [England] or Paris [France] or-- Speaker 2: What's interesting is that the work that has been done demonstrates that Africans that still live in West Africa, presumably the forbearers of the African American race, don't have nearly the same instances of high blood pressure, even though they may have a very high salt intake by the way, but have nearly the same instance of heart disease unless they've been westernized. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: Which implies a western diet, a culture, et cetera. Speaker 1: I noticed (simultaneous) (unclear). Can you address this, now this is something I wondered a long time. When I was in high school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I was in the band. I was in a all-black band in the beginning, and we had an intense band camp, stand on asphalt in the hot sun. You know, for hours at a time, makin--doing formations and so forth. I never heard of anybody passing out or any of that. When--at a white high school the next year at a band camp, it was a lot more lush (laughter), and with a lot more breaks and good food to eat and everything, and you know, actually at a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] camp where we had recreation and everything good to go with it, stand out in the sun, why people would pass out. And they were announced, they would pass around a plate of salt peels, you know, for the white students so they would not--and somehow these salt peels were related to them not passing out from sun stroke and so forth, water retention I guess. And I didn't, I didn't feel the need to take 'em, you know. I'm not the blackest African American either racially, but I mean there's a--I just wondered do we--do black people, physiologically, retain salt better, is that what it is? Speaker 2: Let me, let me help you with that. Now I will tell you that there's no proof to this, but there's a theory that goes as such, the progenitors of the African American race were people who tolerated the voyage from western Africa to this country. And if you think about a concept in science called Mendelian characteristics or Darwinian theory, what it says is the strongest survive and whatever the genetic profile is of those that survive by Mendelian inheritance patterns that genetic profile is propagated through the progeny of that parent. Now this is tough to prove in their meaning and take great exception to the theory, so I'm not suggesting this view as a statement of fact. But there is a theory that says that those people who were the forbearers of the African American race were especially adept at conserving salt to water because of the conditions involved in the emigration from western Africa to this country. So it could be that there are tendencies that go along the lines of being tolerance of dehydration that define the African American race. But it's a very simplistic theory because there are probably a lot of other physiologic factors that go with that, not just in with salt. And it could be that in the same global context, that people who are self-described as African American still have these tendencies that in a westernized environment are no longer protective and promoting survival, but now a destructor. Because in a westernized environment, whatever those traits were that they brought with them lead to more aggressive blood vessel disease and more aggressive heart disease, but it's all theoretical Larry [Crowe], it's not anything that has been proven. But there are many others that would say that that's really a nonsensical approach because for a genetic marker to be prone in a population, the process of evolution moves so slowly that even after three hundred years of this, it still isn't sufficient time for there to be a high enough penetration of these genetic markers. With the one exception to that, is the high fatality rate associated with people coming over from Africa. So there really could've been an acceleration of that whole evolutionary process, but that is such a theoretical thing that I wouldn't even dare try to publically suggest that one theory is more cogent (simultaneous) than the other. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand what you're saying-- Story_ID: 218139 Speaker 1: --I would think though that Africans on the continent of Africa probably have a different way that they deal with salt (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Provided they haven't been westernized, provided they haven't been westernized. If they've been exposed to a western diet, all bets are off. And one of the crude, but consistent observations is that if you look at the incidence of obesity that parallels the incidence of cardiovascular disease. And so in large measure, it takes more than just your genetic background, it's your diet, your activity profile, and obesity. For example, people in western Africa that still have an African lifestyle and culture, take in a lot of plant matter, a lot of potassium and that seems to keep their blood pressure lower and buffets the salt intake that's a necessary ingredient in their diet because it's the only way they can preserve foods. So there are environmental issues again and it gets back to that statement that one of the messages that we've had to really work on as we've been dealing with heart disease in special populations, is that there is no one thing that's responsible for the differences. The differences do exist, Larry [Crowe]. But it's not just because of despaired healthcare, it's not just because of genetic differences, it's not just because of stress, socioeconomics, psychosocial factors. It's not just because of weight, obesity, physical inactivity. Speaker 1: Or the way their treated when they come in-- Speaker 2: Any of those things, it is the entirety of that context and how it all comes together for a single individual. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, you've just completed a study, an intense study of how that--this-- Speaker 2: Over a thousand African Americans with advanced heart disease and we've demonstrated that this novel approach to treatment substantially improves their likelihood of staying alive, and staying alive and living well. It's--I think that this will be a new dynamic that will penetrate American medicine and it won't just be for heart failure, but it will be for heart disease generically. Because here is a key statement, I've put this in writing and I've said it publically. Race is neither physiologic nor scientific. And so we cannot allow race to be the descriptor of whom it is that responds to these new therapies, rather race provides a convenient cluster of individuals that have a greater responsiveness to this therapy than others. But it is our responsibility as investigators and scientists to understand what it is within the African American race that allows certain individuals to respond so robustly to these new treatment strategies and then take whatever that is, whatever we discover it happens to be and apply it across the population. Because if we truly have uncovered a very effective way of treating heart failure over and above that of which has already been explored and discovered, then we have every reason, every responsible reason, every necessity to take that discovery and apply it to as many people as possible, black or not. Speaker 1: Can--so you're sayin' that in some ways that if we took a random sample of people from this hospital and raised them in an environment, say we could go back and send 'em back to infancy and raise 'em (laughter) in an environment where they had the lowest level of education, people smoke and drank more, ate more salty foods, and did all the things that African Americans do, the poorest African Americans do, and they would possibly have a high incidence of congestive heart disease? Speaker 2: Well, what we can say is this, that if we accept the argument that there is a certain soup that has to be brewed for heart disease to be so prevalent in African Americans, we could assert that if we knew all the right ingredients in that soup that we could expose virtually anyone to that soup and they would have disease. The dilemma we have, Larry, is that we don't know all the right ingredients nor do we know the right proportions. We don't know how much of this is genetic. We don't know how much of this is environmental, we don't know how much of this is disparity, we don't know how much of this is environmental, psychosocial stressors, et cetera. We have a sense that all of those participate to some extent in this veritable soup I'm talking about, but we can't reconstruct the soup just yet. We still need more--or more research to say this is the eureka moment, we've discovered what it is about certain people who are self-described as African American that puts them at risk. Because interestingly, not all African Americans have this high risk of heart disease. So whatever it is about being an African American is a vague concept right now, and that's why again, when--as we've been developing these things, we go out of our way to say it is unacceptable to make treatment decisions just based on how someone looks when they come in the door. You have to look at the context, who is that patient, how do they present themselves, what are the contributing illnesses and contributing factors. Because the approaches that we have been talking about and prorogating through the literature may or may not be appropriate for that patient once you look at that patient as an individual. But what we are saying is that it turns out if you look at the behavior for a group of people, we can begin to describe for you ways that you can treat persons who happen to be African American, self-described and realize better outcomes for those individuals. But we weren't stopping here, we're trying to discover what it is about those people that make them respond and take that to another level. Story_ID: 218140 Speaker 1: Okay. Now the cure side of this, how to cure congestive heart failure-- Speaker 2: You know what, Larry [Crowe], there is no cure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The only cure is prevention. And that gets you into a totally different dynamic. That if we are so convinced that high blood pressure is so important in the development of heart disease in African Americans, then that gives us all the leverage we could ever hope to have. To look at this patient population that has high blood pressure, this silent, innocent, epidemic killer in the African American race. So you know what guys, you have to get your blood pressure checked and if you have high blood pressure, you have to treat it and you have to stay on that treatment consistently and change your lifestyle. Because if you don't, then you will have a reduced longevity. You will have decreased productivity, less time with your family. You will not be able to realize all the benefits of life. I mean, I will be very candid and very personal and tell you that I know what's like to lose a spouse prematurely. I don't think our situation could have been avoided. But for those people that are alive and are at risk and are not taking the steps to avoid premature death, it is just unacceptable, they have to take a different approach. Speaker 1: Okay. And this different approach would consist of? Speaker 2: Awareness, knowing that you're at risk, getting yourself screened for high blood pressure. Paying attention to your diet, having a weight that is appropriate for your height. Working with a healthcare provider to know what your ideal weight should be and doing something about it to get to the point, exercising a little bit, staying away from tobacco, using alcohol in moderation. These are things that work for preventing heart disease, preventing stroke, preventing cancer, preventing depression. These are important lifestyle lessons that go beyond just congestive heart failure, but have to do with being functioning, contributing, awake and alert citizens in our community. So I think that's where you start, prevention with these very generic, straightforward lifestyle adjustments, heightened awareness, getting disease identified early and doing something about it. Speaker 1: It seems to me that, that prevention would have to--you'd have to have like a massive education campaign for prevention to really work. Because people are not gonna. Speaker 2: But why not, Larry? Why not? Think about what I'm responsible for causing in terms of expenditures in the healthcare budget as a physician who takes care of advanced heart disease. I run a heart transplant program. Every time we do a successful heart transplant, we spend no less than $300,000 the first year, probably $100,000 over the next two or three years after that. A half million dollars spent over three years to save one life. That's if everything goes well. Now imagine what happens if those resources are redistributed on the front side of the disease process so that more people are aware they have high blood pressure and more people are treated for that high blood pressure. So I don't back away from the challenge. Does it need a massive public education campaign, you bet. Does it need a lot of resources to be successful, you bet. But what's the alternative, a workforce that is cannibalized because people die early. That whole social network, that whole family network that was so instrumental in my success is at risk when people die prematurely and you don't have the parents, you don't have the uncles and the aunts there to pick up the pieces. You don't have the role models there to show you how to love one another, how to behave, how to respect each other. There is a fundamental price we pay and I want to be very clear about this, there is a fundamental price we pay because of the poor health in the African American community. It is realized in work productivity; it is realized in economic productivity; and it is important to realize in our social fabric. Our social fabric is at risk because of the poor health in the African American community. Story_ID: 218141 Speaker 1: So that just compounds a lot of other problems that people have already with economic problems-- Speaker 2: I tell people all the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) drug issues, you got educational crises in the black community (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Listen, I tell people all the time that, yes I've been successful, and I am blessed and humble that I have resources, and I can clothe and feed and educate my children [Kristin Yancy and Nina Yancy] and do it well. But the real luxury in life, the real wealth in life is health. And we need to be about business, about being rich in health early on in our lives. Because if we are, then a lot of the downstream things that you just mentioned, crime, being destitute, drug issues, all of those things are altered because with health you have opportunity, you have the chance to be educated, you have a chance to contribute and be a contributor and not someone who takes from. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a struggle going on now in communities. Some people see this and have seen it for a long time and really I have a hard time trying to make a dent in it. There's a park in Chicago [Illinois], right next to Northeastern Illinois University [Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies, named after a fellow named "Mandrake" [Henry McNeil Brown, Jr.]. And what "Mandrake" did was go around and paint out liquor signs and cigarette ads in the black community with a paint brush, and he used a pseudonym "Mandrake," you know. But when--he was killed mysteriously and the named the park after him because people loved what he did. But there's more advertising, more of a pressure on black kids to indulge then to prevent. So we really do have education challenge. Speaker 2: But where I take a bit of a different type when I hear about those things is that part of what was good about the '60s [1960s] was that there was an awakening of a big segment of the population at risk for lots of less than favorable things. But part of what was problematic about the '60s [1960s] was it planted the seed of a victim mentality. And what concerns me is that there's not an outside force always that's responsible for what does and doesn't happen in the African American community and I don't speak as an expert on these kinds of social things. So I have an opinion of one, just like you and anybody else who have an opinion of one. But I am impressed by information I've seen repeatedly that when young kids, irrespective of their race get a chance at education, their success rate on standardized tests in high school to go into college goes up astronomically. And I really believe that these very simple issues that have to do with education, health and housing that have been early age forget about what the billboard says, forget about what's on the TV program, forget about who doesn't have what. But these core necessities when they are met, that's all you have to do. That's the leverage that those young children need to move on and do well. And so I take a little bit of variance from the victim philosophy and look more at the personal responsibility approach and say our charge is to do for the current generation what was done for me. Parents that saw to it that you were in a safe environment, that got you to school, that took you to Sunday school and gave you a code to live by. I mean look at church for what it means from a secular perspective, from a spiritual perspective that's each individual person's own deductive reasoning or belief. But from a secular perspective, what does church do for you? It gives you a template for life. It says you do these things, you don't do those things, and it reinforces that template. So you look at that very basic fabric and look at how successful it was in helping people move on through life. There wasn't any victim issue there, that was about people doing what needed to be done for themselves to prepare better opportunities. So it's a philosophy, it's an opinion, and I don't mean to be argumentative, but I mean to say that I think that part of moving forward is to accept the fact that there have been some negative influences in the culture, but to do whatever it takes to go back to that fundamental statement I made that I think restoring and acquiring health is the real focus that needs to be enriched in our community. Story_ID: 218142 Speaker 1: Tell us, now, what would you prescribe that African Americans do to, you know, cut down their risks for these specific challenges and threats, you know, to their health? Speaker 2: So here's the prescription for healthy life for African Americans. Weight, virtually across the board, all African Americans need to focus on losing weight to give you the best angle. If you are male, your waist circumference needs to be less than 40 inches. If you are female, it needs to be less than 35 inches. Unless you're a very tall person weighing more than 200 pounds, it's probably not healthy. Number two, get your blood pressure checked. By the age, the average African American--by the age of thirty-five for the average African American woman, one-third of them already have high blood pressure in their thirties. Get your blood pressure checked. If it's high, see someone and get it treated. The drugs, they can effectively treat it, are not expensive at the outset so you shouldn't be intimidated by the cost of medicines. Look at your lifestyle. Do you do any regular physical activity? Do you exercise? If you smoke, don't. If you drink, drink less. Look at your diet, are you making wise choices, simple things, fruits and vegetables, whole grain products, staying away from high fat dietary choices. You can follow any sort of dietary scheme you want, I don't endorse or denigrate any of the popularized styles. But the consistent message in all of them is a reduction of caloric flow and a focus on fruits and vegetables, whole grains. Keep those things in mind. Doesn't mean you can't eat traditional foods that we all grew up and enjoy, but they have to be prepared differently. I think that if we put all that together along with what I'd like to say is some control of the unique issues that we deal with, the issues of homicide and sexual responsibility, then I think that's a prescription for better African American health. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you've been quoted widely over the Internet, we were discussing off camera, concerning the Atkins Diet. When Dr. Robert Atkins had his heart attack in 2002, people were saying, well see there, your diet doesn't change your, you know, your chances of having a heart attack. Could you explain the difference and what happened? Speaker 2: Yeah, my understanding of Dr. Atkins' dilemma was in fact it wasn't a heart attack in the classic sense, but it was an episode of heart failure. It was discovered that he had a cardiomyopathy as a cause. Cardiomyopathies, for the most part, are not due to any environmental or dietary food choices. They occur at a certain instance throughout the population of black and white, male and female. So the only statement I made was to kind of put some tenor on this urge to say, the diet didn't work because look who had a heart attack. Rather to say, to the best of the information source that we were provided, he had a cardiomyopathy and there's nothing about environment or behavior that either predisposed or protects someone from having a heart attack. Speaker 1: I think in his case it was an infection that he acquired in Europe he says. Speaker 2: Infection and a number of other things, but what it means is the heart muscle per se, not the blood vessels, but the heart muscle per se was weakened. The issues related to heart attacks have to do with disease in the heart blood vessels, and when the blood vessel narrows to the point that there's almost a full occlusion or full blockage, all it takes then is a small blood clot to develop on top of that and a heart attack will follow, which is the damage or destruction of heart muscle. It is very different from a primary heart muscle disease where the muscle just gets weak. Story_ID: 218143 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community in general? Speaker 2: Well, I think that from my perspective, my hope, is that the African American community will embrace the importance of good health and will recognize that a lot of what we call good health can be done relatively easily if it's incorporated in a lifestyle at an early age. And so this issue of blood pressure and weight management, dietary choices, physical activity, avoiding tobacco, reducing alcohol, having healthy sexual behavior, all of those things taken together really makes a difference down the road, but I think is very, very important for the African American community. So, that that's my hope. My concern is that as there is an increasing amount of amalgamation of all segments of our society that we'll gravitate to the mean. Now what does that mean? The mean and the American lifestyle, the average American lifestyle unfortunately is to be somewhat sedentary, to be overweight, to have a diet that is predisposed towards fast foods, high fat, high salt intake. And what concerns me about that, is that that is exactly the profile which in the context of whatever it is that defines African Americans as a physiologic group is going to continue to predispose to heart disease. Speaker 1: So what if that lifestyle--I mean that mean lifestyle is really killing us faster than it's killing other people? Speaker 2: I believe that's a fair statement-- Story_ID: 218144 Speaker 1: Tell me this, when you look back on all that you've done, and you're fairly young, you've done a lot (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you (laughter). Speaker 1: --and you--but you've done a lot. We interview people in their eighties and nineties a lot of times. But you--you've done quite a bit in this, you know, short life so far. Is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: It's a very personal thing to say, but in medicine you sacrifice a lot of time away from your family. It's the only way you can be successful. And I often think what I wouldn't do to just have one more night where I could have had dinner with Annelle [Ahmed Yancy], that, that's probably the one thing to--I mean that in the figurative sense, not in the literal sense. And what that really means is that in losing Annelle, I think what I learned most was how important life is and what's most important in life are your relationships, your parenting and your life as a spouse, as a partner. And I think that no matter what we do that defines success, we have to remember that what's most important is our family structure. So what I would do differently, if there was a way I could do it over again, would be to find a way to give more time to family. Story_ID: 218145 Speaker 1: In that same regard, something you said earlier, just seemed like just a tremendous challenge for, not just you, but all of us in the year 2004 as we pursue anything. But you said that when you grew up there were so many people around you, an extended family to take up, you know, a lot of different aspects of nurturing that you needed when you were comin' along, and now you're tryin' to do, you know, for your two children [Kristin Yancy and Nina Yancy] basically by yourself with the help of a good helper [Thelma Green (ph.)], you know, that you hired. But still, you're doin' a lot of it by yourself and you're extremely busy with no big extended family around you. Are we--are you concerned about the lifestyles that we're leading now as we approach? Speaker 2: Well I think all of us should be concerned about our lifestyles because our lifestyles are inclined to be even busier, more involved, more virtual and so you don't have that interpersonal connection that was so important to me at least when I grew up. But I like to tell people that I think life is a series of interactions with angels. And what I mean by that, is that in my own life people became my angels and facades and personalities that you never would have thought were angelic, but they were there to help me get from one step to the next, and I didn't realize then and they probably didn't realize it either. And I think in my own life as a parent with two precocious children with, I think, great potential, I try to create circumstances where they too realize the support of angels in their lives, whether it's friends or mothers of friends, or teachers, the people in the church community, it's just a different fabric. You still need the fabric Larry [Crowe], but I think it's a different fabric. The fabric was easily identifiable when I was younger. It was this amazing network of uncles and aunts, and my mother [Hilda Jones Yancy] and father's [Clyde Yancy, Sr.] side. Now that fabric is different. We live in a more mobile society. It's a society that interfaces with the educational system differently. The recreational community is different with the religious communities in a different way. But nevertheless, the fabric can still be created and sewn. That's hopefully what's happening. Does it mean we have to work harder at that whole dynamic in our life, absolutely, because there are so many distractions, but the payoff is enormous, so we have to do it. Story_ID: 218146 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too. When you look back on everything you've done so far, I know you getting ready to unleash a big--drop a big one on us (laughter) soon with this research, but what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My children [Kristin Yancy and Nina Yancy]. I've learned again that there are a lot of people that could step up and do what I do professionally. I don't make any pretense at having a unique skill set. I think, again, serendipity, blessings, hard work have allowed me to be in the center of a lot of important statements in American medicine, cardiovascular medicine and medicine that affects special populations. But my legacy is my children and I would say that to the entire African American community. That's really a statement that defines who we are. Who are the people we have raised and brought into this world. Speaker 1: Okay. You spoke earlier about how proud your mother [Hilda Jones Yancy] was of you becoming a doctor (laughter), did your father [Clyde Yancy, Sr.] live to see that? Speaker 2: He lived to see that. He couldn't participate in it the same, same way and it didn't mean the same thing to him, enough said. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. The last question-- Speaker 2: --I, I need to give you a more serious answer though, because I guess my legacy is my children, but professionally I think--I would like to think that the legacy we're creating, not that we've left because I'm not dead yet (laughter), but I think the legacy we're creating is the sense that success can be experienced by anyone and the success comes from identifying an issue and working very diligently to address the issue in all aspects to represent it as fairly as you can. I think people continue in this country to appreciate evidence of hard work and commitment, and if I represent nothing else, I represent what hard work, commitment and passion would yield. So there are some tangible things about what I've done that or statements and I'm happy and pleased and humbled by that. But I think the intangible is just this sense of what can happen with a bit of drive, a commitment of time and energy. Story_ID: 218147 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as somebody who is still alive and well and doin' a lot of stuff (laughter). But, you know, it's a recurring thing. I'd like to be remembered as a good parent, a good person. Somebody who left this place better then they found it, going back to my days as a Boy Scout. Story_ID: 218148 Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight, '69 [1969]. I was ten years old. God, looking at that signature, I haven't written like that in forever (laughter). But that would have been probably about the fifth grade. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And this would have been right when she stopped teaching. She taught for thirty-two years. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What's her name? Speaker 1: Hilda. And she taught at the same school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] where I attended. Hilda Yancy. Hilda Jones Yancy. Speaker 2: This is a picture probably from when I was about fifteen or sixteen, on a campin' trip. And this is my best buddy when I was growin' up, and we ultimately ended up reciprocating as each other's best man in their weddings. But that was one of many, many camping trips. Get outta school on Friday and pack up and head to central Louisiana and camp out 'til Sunday. Speaker 1: This was receiving the Eagle Scout award. And this was given to me 1975. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And this is graduation photo, 1975 and my goodness that afro. Oh my, I can't remember having that much hair (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: It's a few months before my wife's [Annelle Ahmed Yancy] death. I was honored by a local civic organization in Dallas [Texas]. I was recipient of proceeds that endowed a research chair. And my wife and I were going as guests. This was October that year. She died four months--six months later. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So this is October '96 (1996). And that was a great night. Speaker 2: And this was-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is September of '96 (1996), and it was a photo shoot that we did in anticipation of a formal event. And it's me and Annelle, and Nina [Yancy] is clutching my left arm and Kristin [Yancy] is embraced around Annelle's neck on my right side. Speaker 1: Fast forward to two or three years ago, and we decided to maintain the tradition of once a year doing a portfolio. So that's the three of us in our backyard. Nina is next to my right shoulder and Kristin has her head against my cheek. Speaker 2: And then the flanking picture is the two of them together. There, that's them. Speaker 1: The upper picture is when we're on our honeymoon and the silhouette is an image that I still remember. It kinda shows her kind of natural beauty. Speaker 2: This is her just kinda lookin' dead on and I can see my hair is already thinning back there in 1983 (laughter). There's a little reflection there. That was from our honeymoon. Speaker 1: And I suppose to be honest with you, I'm not sure there's a whole lot more that I want to trouble you with. Everything else is just memories from times gone back. Yeah, and this is, I think, the only picture I have of Annelle and my mom together. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So that's from just last year actually, when I was featured in the D Magazine in their best doctor segment, which by the way is out again and I'm in the magazine once more next month in the Texas Monthly magazine, it's state recognition and so that's kind of a good run. Speaker 2: And this is an initiative that we've done with the heart association, kept a very high profile with the American Heart Association. I've been spearheading an Internet-based patient education piece and we were working on promotional issues and came up with that photo...