OWHF_Ross_Cindy.txt - 1950
Reference 1 - 2.21% Coverage

 Again, I was raised in a traditional family. I was not raised with an awareness of issues related to women, but as I worked in a variety of environments, I could see inequities. I could see salary inequities. I could see workplace and environmental issues that impacted women in a negative way. In many ways I was fortunate to grow up in a time when those issues were coming to surface and I had the opportunity to work on those issues. Now mind you, not everyone was receptive to hearing about those issues. Not everyone was receptive to addressing those issues, but the inequities were real and sometimes are still real. It was important to try and raise the awareness and to surface those issues and to address them. Sexual harassment was one of them. Quality childcare 8 Nykolaiszyn Ross Nykolaiszyn Ross Nykolaiszyn Ross Nykolaiszyn Ross is another and quality childcare is still a struggle.

UNCTWMS_Cravey_Altha.txt - 1950
Reference 1 - 7.36% Coverage

So the two things at once have really been important to me this year, about the kinds of issues that especially young women are facing&#8211;young people, but especially young women are facing&#8211;on college campuses. I just thought that was old history. [Laughs] SCB: To give the listeners some context, this spring, and last fall as well, several students have filed complaints against the university and now the university is in the process of revising its sexual assault policies to comply with Title IX and the Clery Act and other nondiscrimination policies, which leads me to another question. You&#8217;ve spent your adult life in a time when Title IX has been implemented, and you spoke just now about how it&#8217;s interesting to see how we&#8217;re still struggling with things that should have been over and done. Was Title IX a big event for you, having that in place? AC: Yeah, I was aware of it, but it didn&#8217;t seem like such a big event. It seemed like part of a larger flow of things, a larger, huge change that I felt was so obvious. So clearly I was aware of that but less aware of the kind of backlash that was happening, less aware of the way things were sliding in a different direction, because in particular I felt like we had won these battles. That is, women had won these battles in the &#8217;60s about not re-victimizing survivors of sexual assault. It seemed like we had taught judges and lawyers not to re-victimize survivors in the courtroom and we&#8217;d taught even newspapers and mass media these important lessons, and all of a sudden&#8211;. That&#8217;s why I was so shocked last spring to realize all around me, on a public college campus, these things that I thought were history were very current in terms of re-victimization, and re-victimization by the people I least expected, the university staff. So back to this question, Title IX&#8217;s forty years old, right, and the Clery Act is twenty years old, so it seemed like those broader kinds of shifts and broader kinds of education that had happened around sexual violence and about re-victimization, it seemed so sad and shocking to me that&#8211;. And apparently on lots and lots of public campuses and private campuses this is happening, this epidemic of rape culture is happening, and being permitted by administrators who&#8217;d rather sell their brand and keep things quiet rather than actually protect all students. I don&#8217;t know, it just kind of&#8211;. [Laughs] I&#8217;m still shocked about it. I still don&#8217;t have a way to make sense of all that, other than that I need to be more historical. [Laughs] I need to develop a better sense of how history changes and how&#8211;. I mean I know it&#8217;s this dialectical process and you have to keep pushing, I know that, but in another way I obviously don&#8217;t know that. I obviously can lose sight of that sometimes. 

UNCTWMS_Fuchs_Laurie.txt - 1950
Reference 2 - 3.42% Coverage

 And so— WH: Miss Barbara was telling me a funny story about, I think she said something like the guy from Habitat for Humanity or something was like trying to make passes or something. I can’t remember. LF: Oh you can’t even put this in there. WH: Yes, I’ll take it out. I’ll take it out. LF: Yeah, take that one out. WH: I’ll take that definitely out. Okay. I apologize. LF: Was it in hers? WH: Uh no. LF: Okay. Well, actually you can leave it in there. WH: Okay. Are you sure? We can definitely do away with it. LF: You can leave it in there. I mean that was another thing, another thing in the culture is that we didn’t talk about that. We got there, and we were, women, things were happening to us. This was like part of the beginning of that women’s movement and feminism and how many, how many men were getting away with the kinds of sexual harassment and nobody talked about it. And we were, we didn’t even have a word for it. We didn’t share it even among us our, but sometimes we did, but we didn’t even, we were sort of, we had a little bit of outrage but not even that much. My younger sister came down there. She was sixteen, and she got manhandled by someone in a position of authority there. And this is like, this is like child molesting as far as 25 I’m concerned. We didn’t call it that. So yeah, you can leave that in. And it wasn’t by that person that you mentioned. But and Ihad a few of those experiences. WH: Yes, ma’am. I apologize for opening that can of worms.

UNCTWMS_Henderson_Margaret.txt - 1950
Reference 1 - 2.66% Coverage

These women twenty years ago did some incredible work. And if they hadn't yelled and screamed as loud as they did then, we would not have an agency now that is as involved in all corners of the community as it is. Um, I think rape crisis centers are evolving into being fairly mainstream and that's where they need to he. Everybody needs to have info about when they need to call a rape crisis center person. And I think the ultimate goal would he to have 8 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. (7-— t 95 a person in EVE}? law enforcement agency, every DA‘s ofﬁce, every school, who knew all this stuff and essentially did the work that the center's doing today in house. It should be part of the culture. And we're moving that way. We're still a couple of generations away. But that‘s where we're headed. Lynne: Yeah, a lot like sexual harassment boards? Margaret: Mml-Im. Our goal isn‘t to make sure the agency always exists. I hope it doesn‘t. I don't expect it to. I don‘t. 

WOL_Coleman_Carolyn.txt - 1950
Reference 1 - 9.69% Coverage

I finally did. I started out with skirts and blazers and that type of thing. I think about the ladies and they d dress all over the board sometimes. There are a few ladies who never wore anything but suits, and some are a little bit more casual. I won t tell you her name, but there was a representative who was elected, and she came up there and would wear a blazer, but she would wear these horribly, horribly derogatory t-shirts. They were derogatory against men. They were horrible, and she would come over to us and give us these cartoons that she had copied off 18 Finchum Coleman somewhere. They were horrible, and she would give those to us and say, These are just for us girls. And I m just thinking, Oh my gosh, and I m so dumb I never shared it with any of the guys. After the first year or the first legislative session, she learned because after that she started dressing very professionally. There are a few other people that noticed that, but it was very, very inappropriate. She finally started dressing very professionally and I realized, I need some suits. I ve been told the chamber is always cold. Oh, it s freezing and I would gripe like crazy about those fans and everything, trying to get them to turn the fans down, turn the heat up. In fact, I can even remember I don t know why I keep remembering Kevin Cox, but he went out to his car one time and got a blanket. It was horribly cold, and I guess it s to keep you awake some of the time. One thing I would like to say, just for posterity I guess it was difficult being a woman. It s difficult being a republican woman in the minority. One thing people need to understand is there were some guys out there that were horrible male chauvinists. I knew not to ever get near them and there was one guy I should have filed a sexual harassment suit against once because of his off-color teasing. I knew who I could tease with and who I couldn t, you know. I knew who I could come up and pat on the back and who I couldn t. But women are no different. I m not going to say names, but there was one legislator, she was young and to get what she wanted, she would go to the back of the chamber and hop up on the desk. She wore these real cute little short skirts and she knew what she was doing. She used her sexuality, you know. The men go about it a different way, but the women use their sexuality. I saw this particular representative several times embraced with men. I called it bear hugged, and she knew what she was doing. I thought, You don t need to do that. Then this other representative, she would file all these bills and we d kill them. Then she d come over to the guys and start rubbing her hands all over their backs and saying, If you d just let me bring the bill up for reconsideration if you ll just vote if you ll just give in to my let me bring it back up, and I ll take it back to committee, and she d just rub all over them, and of course they did it. She never did come up with decent bills, I didn t think. I d sit there and watch this going on, and I d go over and I d say, You are so pathetic you are so pathetic that you let her come over here and do this. She managed to get her stuff through. Most of the other women I don t think really did that. There s always a little bit of that feminine thing because we re women and we deal with things differently, but I remember those two. 19 Finchum Coleman Finchum Coleman Finchum Coleman Finchum Coleman And then there are always rumors but it was difficult being a woman out there because you weren t in the in-group. Like I said at the beginning, I had to go and search out information because they weren t going to give it to me voluntarily. I think that s probably true of most of the women. We had to really fight. But for all those guys that were just horrible, there were some really good guys. I just thought the world of them and they understood that we were all equal out there. Since this is about women I think people need to know, that it goes both ways.

UNCTWMS_Cravey_Altha.txt - 1950
Reference 1 - 7.36% Coverage

So the two things at once have really been important to me this year, about the kinds of issues that especially young women are facing&#8211;young people, but especially young women are facing&#8211;on college campuses. I just thought that was old history. [Laughs] SCB: To give the listeners some context, this spring, and last fall as well, several students have filed complaints against the university and now the university is in the process of revising its sexual assault policies to comply with Title IX and the Clery Act and other nondiscrimination policies, which leads me to another question. You&#8217;ve spent your adult life in a time when Title IX has been implemented, and you spoke just now about how it&#8217;s interesting to see how we&#8217;re still struggling with things that should have been over and done. Was Title IX a big event for you, having that in place? AC: Yeah, I was aware of it, but it didn&#8217;t seem like such a big event. It seemed like part of a larger flow of things, a larger, huge change that I felt was so obvious. So clearly I was aware of that but less aware of the kind of backlash that was happening, less aware of the way things were sliding in a different direction, because in particular I felt like we had won these battles. That is, women had won these battles in the &#8217;60s about not re-victimizing survivors of sexual assault. It seemed like we had taught judges and lawyers not to re-victimize survivors in the courtroom and we&#8217;d taught even newspapers and mass media these important lessons, and all of a sudden&#8211;. That&#8217;s why I was so shocked last spring to realize all around me, on a public college campus, these things that I thought were history were very current in terms of re-victimization, and re-victimization by the people I least expected, the university staff. So back to this question, Title IX&#8217;s forty years old, right, and the Clery Act is twenty years old, so it seemed like those broader kinds of shifts and broader kinds of education that had happened around sexual violence and about re-victimization, it seemed so sad and shocking to me that&#8211;. And apparently on lots and lots of public campuses and private campuses this is happening, this epidemic of rape culture is happening, and being permitted by administrators who&#8217;d rather sell their brand and keep things quiet rather than actually protect all students. I don&#8217;t know, it just kind of&#8211;. [Laughs] I&#8217;m still shocked about it. I still don&#8217;t have a way to make sense of all that, other than that I need to be more historical. [Laughs] I need to develop a better sense of how history changes and how&#8211;. I mean I know it&#8217;s this dialectical process and you have to keep pushing, I know that, but in another way I obviously don&#8217;t know that. I obviously can lose sight of that sometimes. 

