 Lynne: Maybe you could start with a history of your work and activism experience, from as far back as you like. Margaret: [012] Well my career path is like, there’s this quote out of Kurt Vonnegut that says life is a series of accidents, well it really applies to me. it’s partty becauae I Was raised to ﬁt in my needs and my career around everyone else rather than making a decision for myselﬂ 1 got other people: settled first and then I found my niche. Um, I got a bachelors in business adnﬁnistraﬁon because I didn't know whatl wanted to when I grew up. And. um, I didn’t work while I was in college, wasn‘t really that attractive a job candidate when I got out of college. Um, had a couple of sort of piddling little jobs, in jewelry stores and stuff like that. And, urn, went to the Employment Commission 01' Texas and somebody said, they need some help with cascworkera down at the welfare department. Do you think you might be interested? And, I said gas, becaus: it sounded pretty interesting to me and also the pay was. pretty good for m].r hometown, so I took the test and the interviews and ﬁnally was hired as an incoming caseworker for AFDC and food stamps. And, found out immediately that I like my clients pretty wall but I didn’t like the bureaucracy very well at all. I didn't like the fact that um I didn‘t think my co—warkera were often doing as much for clients as they Should. T1163.r get hung tip on things that got them good evaluations that weren’t domg right by the people, I thought, I was just there for a little less than four years, but even in that time it was time for me to see cute little kids beaume teenage parents. So I became vex]; aware of that. I wanted to do something a little more Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. G4 (95 proactive. I thought AFDC and food stamps is needed, but it’s not a problem solver, or a long-term problem solver anyhow. So, a job came up in the local Planned Parenthood afﬁliate. And I interviewed for it and I ended up taking it. I joked and said that whether or not I took it depended on the kind of day I was having at the welfare department beeauae I took about a one fourth out in pay to go there. But I did and never regretted it. I tt'trel'll'uall}.Y became director of education over there, doing all the hookkeePing and the education stuﬁ together for awhile and then ﬁnally we got the funding for the education position. (040} This was in west Texas. It’s a thirteen county region with ﬁfteen thousand square miles. It's either three or ﬁve times the size of Cormeetieut. I can never remember. So I traveled all over this region to these tiny little rural tome doing education and just loved it. I used to got questions about bestiality. If your boyfriend had sex with a sheep then how long did you have to wait before it was safe to have sex with him. All kinds of crazy, 1 just never knew what a class was going to throw at me Pretty fun, actually. And then, along about that time I started thinking about getting a graduate degree, started working on 3 MFA», Maatera of Public Administration at the local university, took a course at a time. And our agency went through a whole lot of trouble, because of poor management. And we ended up merging with another Planned Pamuthood afﬁliate, which was a good choice for the agency, but the new afﬁliate came from a much more conservative area than we did and because of very real threat had to be a lot more suspicious of people. Whereas in our home town people were supportive of our work. And anyhow they had a culture which I didn’t feel like I wanted to stay in, which would have required me to be suspicious and rnistmstful of people. including of people whom I had already established a warm relationship with. And I just didn’t want to make that switch. So I stayed long enough to work through the transition of merging the two afﬁliates and then left. At that point I was just doing part—time contract work. I didn’t really try to ﬁnd a full—time job at that time pattlj.r because then I was married and my husband was plarming to get to graduate school and move, so I didn’t think it would be much fair to the employer to not be honest about that. And that obviously did not make me the most attractive candidate for a position. And also at the same time We were going through lots of infertility treatment and that sort of thing and that was taking a whole lot of psychic: energy. So I had a fairly eats),r paIt-time year. [072} And men we moved out here and lived in 2 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Cr—IGS Durham. I found out when I moved that I couldn’t do the kind of work that I did in Texas. because MEWS are required out here. I also learned the hard way that it’s hard to move into this area without having connections. I couldn’t even get an interview. I ended up doing temporary work at Duke and ended up in the administrative building in the Provost’s Ofﬁce and then in Perkins Library. And the whole time I was there I just couldn’t believe how upset people would get over issues that just were not important in the grand scheme of things. Lynne: Things Within the ofﬁces? Margaret: Yeah. there were eelf—imposed deadlines and all kinds of internal bickering and struggling for position and that sort of thing. And that just didn’t rank up there with teenage pregnancy or suicidal pregnant women or you know all those other issues. So I just toughed that year out. It Was real hard. I was real bored. Although I liked some of the people I worked with, I was pretty disgusted with the system. When I moved out here I had lots of friends and farm'l},r encouraging me to get out of the public eeotor, partieulariy non~ proﬁt work. They viewed it as being overly stressful and low paid, and why don’t you do something eaa},r for a change. And I did go to a few private seotor interviewa Never could get interested. GeeJ I’d loved to he an accountant at this corporation in R'I‘P. So anyhow I was here at Duke and thinking I've got to get a degme if I’m going to litre here and do anything. So I applied to the MFA program at [INC and got in. That required me to he on campus for a full year. I was real lucky to get an internship with the county and United Way. That was the ﬁrst year the},r were able to fund an internship in human services. It was looking at the whole network, theoretically the}? were interested in doing a strategic planning proeees, hut realistically, they were going through the motions, but no one was really interested in changing the status quo. That was something I learned in the prooeas. Anyhow, it gave me an opportunity to get to know everybody in human services 1'11 this real real useful way. [100} Lynne: There were people you would potentially work with or for? Margaret: Yeah, I was going around interviewing the different directors, like I intenﬁewed the previous director here. And get to get a picture of the whole network and how it works. What fenders think of providers .. 3 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. C:- “25'. and what providers think of funders and where there’s a natural tension and where there’s tension that doesn’t need to be there because they just don’t understand where the other one’s coming from. That kind of stuﬁ. I reallyg,r enjoyed it. The project overall. during the course of the project I learned. thanks to a conﬂict with my supervisor, that I really don’t do confrontations very well. Which may seem ironic considering my current position (interviewer laughs). It was useful that I learn that then. It was a painful lesson, but I also found out how that had heal aﬂeeﬁng my private Life, as well. In fact, it had been a pattern of behavior that led up beautifully to passive aggressive horrible stuff {laughs}. Because I couldn‘t handle conﬂicts directly. So that was a personal outcome of that year. Hard to learn, but very beneﬁcial to learn. [120} And when the year was up I had been applying to various human service kinds of positions. And sent in an application for this job and was interviewed. I think it was sort of scary for the board and the volunteers to consider someone who hadn't worked that directly with this issue. I had worked with survivors before, particularly when doing the contract Work, but it was in sexuality education, birth control education. doing it for a group of adolescent survivors. Seeing the impact on them. I always tell people that sumer. the director of the Habitat for Humanity job was open. They got well over 120 applications for that pesition. There were 3 for this position. Winch gives a clear indication of how scary this issue is to people, even job hunting. That Was a tough year economically. People were looking hard‘ 30 I was offered this job and I took it, thinking that the previous director had been here thirteen years, was a very strong personality and presence. and I really didn’t think that I would last that long in this position. Simply because when someone has been in a position that long, generally the next person doesn’t make it. the second person down the road does. But there’s that position of adjustment that’s hard for everyone involved. So I was surprised to make it past the ﬁrst year. And this is ajob that’s given me lots of Opportunity to work on confrontation [laughs and interviewer laughs}. Uhhuh. I never dreamed I would enjoy this position as much as I do. It’s partly because of the people I work with. I really have it easy here in that the people who are here ate here because they really want to be. So I never deal with issues that some managers deal with, people who won't get to work on time or won’t do their work. It's more like reminding people to take their vacation time or go home. That in a nutshell is how I got here. I 4 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Cr-‘LGS don’t know Where I’ll go from here. 1 know very few people who have stayed in this kind of work for very long. (160) They get weary. And I don’t want that to happen to me. Lynne: Yeah. Margaret: This is such important work, I think that it needs full attention. Lynne: Have you encountered some people who've seemed to survive well, thrive doing this work? Margaret: Not too many! [laughs and mterviewer laughs} Lynne: What do they do that’s diﬁ‘erent’? Margaret: I see people who maybe are realty on ﬁre for the issue which is good, because it’s high motivation, but it means they may not be separating personal issues from professional issues, which at some level needs to happen. and I see people who really gave all of themself. That’s not healthy. And other people who become numb, just because you can’t feel it anymore, and that’s not good. And other people who have been very competent and coped well outwardly, but have taken it out on someone eise, whether it’s their immediate workers or their family. So, I’m still looking for effective coping mechanisms. [laughs and utterviewer laughs}. I hope I ﬁnd some someday, It’s hard. It is. £180] Lynne: How does burn—out become a part of this kind of work? Margaret: Wei]. you know this whole movement was founded on a whole lot of anger. Which was quite justiﬁable, there was a point to get angry. But at some point, you know, if I want, for example, white men to get it. And you couid peg that to white men over the age of forty with power. And if you want them to support our issue and want them to understand our issue, then I've got to learn how to work with them. And if I'm mad at them, I can't work with them. 01' you know, 1 could pretend to. It doesn't, again, I don't think it's healthy to continually swallow anger and not get it out. Its just keeping you: balance. Lynne: What else have you learned {ram your earlier work experiences? Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Cr" \CDS Margaret: [2'00] Wail, I am by nature an introvert. I've always lived out in the country and I've always had my home which is my nest and sanctuary. Anti because I've always lived out in the country, I've had a style that wasn‘t real busy busy. You know lots of parties and that kind of stuff. So anyways one thing that's helped me is that here I've got a place in the country. It's separate from center stuff. I can go there and he very quiet and sort of gather my strength and do my healing. Urn, this jot: really takes a whole lot of inner views of all kinds. It also requires me at times to he very exWVeﬁed. and that just really sucks up the tertergyur for me [laughs] anyhow. So I need the more quiet time. And the negative impact of that is that I am less social and again it's hard to keep a balance. I‘ve always been pretty careful about who I let in close to me and it’s not because I'm deli‘tx-Jatelj/r excluding lots of folks, it's just that if it comes between going to a party and chit-chatting and going home and reading a good book, I'd really rather stay home and read a good book. And that's helped me cope, actually. Lynne: Yeah, go ahead. Margaret: No, I was just going to sayr I was raised in a farming community, raised among very poor people. I didn't mean].r understand that at the time that the}.r were poor. I've had the opportunity to meet all kinds of different people. All levels of 105, Income levels, that sort of thing. Having that variety in my background helps, too, I'm comfortable with all different kinds of people. I can understand a little bit of where folks come from. And that makes it easier for me to work with a variety of people. Although I am developing a very strong [laughs] prejudice against a few defense attorneys. [laughs] I probany could not let a defense attorney into my life in a wen: eiose way (laughs). I mink that's a reﬂection of my general frustration with the judicial system. There are some side effects like that. (240] Lynne: [paraphrase] The way you describe the work to be done shares a lot of echoes with Miriam Sliikin's descriptions. Margaret: She's something else. Lynne: Yeah [laughs]. Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. G- \95 Margaret: Now that's a woman who put in some time. I really feel like I've just skipped along ITI the aftermath and have had it pretty easy in comparison. Lynne: How would you respond to being called a leader or an activist? Margaret: It makes me uncomfortable when people call me a leader. Urn. I‘ve always been fairly content to follow and at some point in the last few years I reaIized that I've acquired a set of skills that were useful and it ldnd of forced me to he a leader. Urn, and that was eveiything from organizational skills to motivation. Stand up and say whatever it is you need to say and if it doesn't make everybody happy, well that's too had. It had to be said. Urn, where 1 come from, there's a strong legacy of independence and cantankerousness. And I really didn't understand that until I moved out East that it's deIerent in the West. The people who settled Texas were there because they were run out of the East. And they really value eccentticity and doing things because you want to do them and to hell with what your neighbors thought and that kind of stuff. And. um, I can see that in myself because I resist labels. It was just a few years ago that I really didn't cringe when somebody called me a feminist. I didn't like being labeled. I'm not that simple. My mother's a feminist although she'd never call herself that. There weren’t too many members of NOW in the town that I came from. So other labels like activist I'd. still kind of resist, but can 1 organize a community to do something? Well, as it happens I can. It's partly this position and partly it's a set of skills that I've acquired along the way. So, yeah, those labels ﬁt although I don't like them.[270) Lynne: Are there better terms for how you describe yourselt? Margaret: No [laughs], I just don't like labels! Lynne: Yeah, I was going to ask you that too, forI didn't know if you would call yourself a feminist. Margaret: MmHm. Lynne: What kind of reactions do you have to center being called feminist? Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. GAGE Margaret: Well, I think every label carries a stereotype with it, even defense attorneys, bless their little heart. And I think the stereotype of feminist is some of the more strident people who spoke out in the late sixties and early seventies. And certainly those were very tmeomfortable times all the way around. And. probably was most uncomfortable on the home front, on the domestic front. The change in roles between men and women I can't temember what the point I was trying to make. Lynne: Labeling things feminist? Margaret: Yeah. right now our center is doing some signiﬁcant outreach to established white males in this community and we're having to deal with that image from twenty years ago. Which may or may fit“: have been aoeurate at the time, but it's still here today. And I really enjoy confusing peeple. In that they may think that, they're expecting someone to come in and yell at them and tell them how Wrong they are, and I show up in a dress. And I've got a feminine look some clays. And it confuses them. And I think it's not that it's a goal of mine to he pleasing or attractive, and I‘m not just talking physical stuff here urn. to other people, but I'd like to be able to get them to hear what I've got to say. If there's something about my appearance or a stereotype that I'm feeding into, I think that works with most of our volunteers as well. We send out people who are intelligent, they all look good and healthy and you know they're neat people: They’re not yelling and screaming and telling folks how wrong they are. They wait until they come back here [laughs]. Then we yell and scream about how wrong people are [laughs]. Urn, but anyhow, ours is a very ugly issue, a very scary issue and we need to retrieve any obstacles We can that prevent peooie from hearing what we need to say; And it involves playing some games. But.__[3lﬂ) Lynne: It's part of the history of the center. Margaret: Mml—lm. These women twenty years ago did some incredible work. And if they hadn't yelled and screamed as loud as they did then, we would not have an agency now that is as involved in all corners of the community as it is. Um, I think rape crisis centers are evolving into being fairly mainstream and that's where they need to he. Everybody needs to have info about when they need to call a rape crisis center person. And I think the ultimate goal would he to have 8 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. (7-— t 95 a person in EVE}? law enforcement agency, every DA‘s ofﬁce, every school, who knew all this stuff and essentially did the work that the center's doing today in house. It should be part of the culture. And we're moving that way. We're still a couple of generations away. But that‘s where we're headed. Lynne: Yeah, a lot like sexual harassment boards? Margaret: Mml-Im. Our goal isn‘t to make sure the agency always exists. I hope it doesn‘t. I don't expect it to. I don‘t. Lynne: Uhhuh. This kinds of leads to thinking more generally about labels. One dilemma for women’s history in part is putting labels on things through interpretation. It’s interesting too. because as you described yourself growing up you said you weren’t looking to decide what to do. It wasn‘t what you were brought up to do. I guess, what did you encounter. what ways did women do things, or accomplish things, that you saw growing up? [380] Margaret: Um. Lynne: Like you said your mom was a feminist, but not in name. Margaret: Yeah. I found some incredible passive-aggressive behavior. My mother was the ﬁrst woman elected to the school board in this farming community. And of course she was made secretaIy. Women would do incredibly dewous stuff in order to attain their objective. and it was because at least, in most families, men had all the power and men made all the decisions. But it didn’t mean that women couldn’t get want they wanted. But they couldn’t do it openly. It was pretty interesting to watch in families in that area, who inherited the ranches. SIDEB Margaret: There Were lots of sheep and goat ranchers. Most of the mohair in the world comes out of that area and there was one woman in that huge group. I used to hear stories all the time, that women had secret bank accounts and stuff like that. Ah, all the leadership positions were male unless it was secretary of some organizations. 1 was raised that I needed to get a college degree so that I would be able to talk more intelligently but that I would be a teacher or a 9 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. G492?) nurse. Because I needed something ﬂexible so that when I got married I could work anywhere. I could work paIt—time, to be home with the kids. Well. lo and behold yeah I did get married and yes I did sort of ﬁt my life amund his needs and that was aggravated on my part because the guy I married was just super intelligent and. everybody was sure he was going to win the Nobel prize before he turned thirty. And so what was 1 except a lowly human services worker. So I really subjugatecl my needs and I didn‘t allow myself to itlei'ttil‘}P my own interest. And then you know 10 and behold, he had to move out here, we ended up getting divorced, and I’m infertile, [ can’t have kids; So1 life isn’t as I had planned. And there's still lots of repercussions for that both for me and for my mother and her expectations. It didn't work. Whose fault Is that? Um. I think I’m rambling. I can’t think of my original point. Lynne: [laughs] It's sort of interesting to look at how decisions are made in families. At who makes the decisions. And at secretarial work and. decisions. Margaret: That’s the way it happens. Uh yeah, in my family all the women on my mother’s side of the family lived on ranches and were ranching in Texas Um before 1860 it was still pretty wild out here. It was not an easy life. There wasn‘t much water. All kinds of problems. It has always been I've felt just a genetic need to live out in the country. Except for two very brief periods in my life, I‘ve managed that. Now I own, bought a house with sixteen acres out in Hillsborough, which is a very small piece of property by Texas standards {laughs}. I wish it were bigger but it’s all I can afford now. But I'm bringing that up in that’s a need in me that is more urpieally attributed to men than women.(040) Lynne: Uhhuh. Margaret: And going about achieving that, buying that as a single person, being discounted by the people who were selling it who just couldn’t believe that a woman working in human services would want to buy such a place or keep up such a plaoe. It was really frustrating. I think almost think a lot of swallowed anger from this job almost came out during the real estate deal on a couple of ditTerent unsuspecting men, Obviously battling stereotypes all through that process 10 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. G-IGS Lynne: Yeah. Margaret: And I think it's real subtle. And I’m sure none of the men realized what they were doing. Lynne: Yeah. Margaret: And luckily I’ve worked in human services, human services is a primarily female dominated. So I haven’t had quite the same problem professionally. But I haven’t pushed it. I mean I haven’t worked in local government where there are more men than women. and I’m not in a ﬁeld that’s male dominated. So I haven't had to face the challenge. Lynne: How would descnbe work in a male dominated setting as compared to work in settings that you‘ve experienced? Margaret: Ummm. Well, it’s a bit of an aberration in that Orange County is so different from other counties and that local ﬁgures are willing to consider human services. Also they are very used to seeing white women about my age in these positions. And sometimes I think we tend to get all lumped together. It’s just another human service person wanting to nurture somebody. And expect the government to pay for it. I get really ticked off that our society doesn't really value caregiving. Whether you’re a teacher, daycare worker or what. It really doesn’t value those traditional woman things. So part of the battle in our work here is trying to convince folks why there’s a need for our Services and using some arguments that will attract other people, even if we don’t like the arguments. [080] Like at Planned Parenthood we used to talk about how much money you save by providing contraception rather than providing maternity care, paying for abortions or any of those other things. See you have to use stereotypical male arguments for what should be a universal issue. I think in this county, it’s such a politically correct county. So because it’s women it doesn't have to be quite so seriptieious here. I heard that the director of the department of social services in the next county over did a dress code and they were taking things down a. notch or two because air conditioning was too expensive and they were basically saying men don't have to wear ties and all that. But they wrote in that women have to wear slips And something like 11 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. G-l65 that isn’t going to happen in Orange County {Iaughs}. Singling out women, making sure they stay proper. Lynne: How are you responding to current debates, issues, like the question of repealing the Violence Against Woman Act? Margaret: Yeah, Uh, this year I'm chair of the North Carolina Coalition Against Sexual Assault, so that’s pretty much fallen in my lap. Uh, and certainly the Violence Againat Women Act is one of the issues we’re addressing. And it's incredibly challenging in that the people suggesting that we do all this crazy stuff come from such a different place that I don’t really know how to talk to them. [150] For example, there’s a set of conservative Republicans, mostly out of Catawba County, who want raise the age of eensent under statutory rape to sixteen, it’s thirteen now. Well, that's something that rape crisis centers are willing to support. However, the reason they want to do it is that they think they can end teenage pregnancy that way. Because they have the idea that ﬂiere’s these guys aged Monty on up who have been getting all these teen—age girls pregnant and are not supporting them. And, it’s so far out there. It's so illogical that I don’t really lmow how to talk to them [laughs]. This is not based on fact. it is based on a couple of singular incidents and you know they’re not looking at the other stuff, and I just don’t know how you edueate somebody who clearly doesn’t want to be educated, doesn’t want to hear the truth. So, my general outlook toward state and federal legislation is just getting grimtner and griouner. I stopped listening to NPR the day after the election. Ijust couldn’t stand it. I keep telling myself that the Republicans, bless their souls, just can’t help it. Being the way they are They sure do eome damage. And I think a lot of what we see is a reﬂection of that; They don’t value women and they don’t value children. And unfortunately, that discomling is such a part of their culture that they can’t see that they’re doing it. They really can’t understand the negative impact of their suggestions. Ah. it's like they really don’t understand that violence against women is an issue because it’s such an iristihiﬁonalized issue, I mean, it‘s so widespread They don’t see it as being anything differem from the moon or the stars, you know. (180') Lynne: 1t’eah, the current talk on weifare mothers really picks up on this; 12 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Gr- lGS Margaret: Yeah. I got to ﬁgure out how to deal with it. Lynne: Yeah, you said that with Planned Parenthood you used corporate stories or different stories that you tell for why our work is good. Are there some you think of for Rape Crisis, in a sense, translations that you use a lot? Margaret Yeah, weil I haven’t sortie tip with anything real concrete, because I think it's impossible to quantify Lynne: Yeah. Margaret; the amount of damage that sexual violenee does. But what I keep saying is that when violence occurs, semis} violence in particular, you spend a lot of energy healing from it, dealing with it and ﬁguring it out and asking yourself questions. And all the energy you spend on that you have to divert away from achieving your potential. whatever that is. So we end up with, it’s not that folks are completely crippled or anything like that. it’s just that they ma},r not be everything that they could be in a perfect world, because they’re having to divert a lot oir attention, or may have to at some point in their life, anyhow. Anti um relearnjng issues or just dealing with their own pain. Um, of course that varies widely from individual to individual. You can’t even stereotypically say that a person who is raped is likely to lose oh at least two weeks of work, you know, while she gets over it. You just can’t make stupid remarks like that. It’s not true. It’s not true. But you can he sure it’s going to take some energy. Yeah, they may be better, stronger people in the end, but someh0w using that to enhance their personal development, they would have done it anyhow It shouldn’t happen in the ﬁrst place. {2201 Lynne: In some ways it's part of teaching, too, using a language that makes sense to lots of different people. Margaret: Uhhuh. I think a merchant can understand that he’s losing business because women don‘t feel safe going out there. Well that’s true, he probably is. But that also perpetuates the myth that tape is stranger rape. You have to he careﬁil. 13 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. G465 Lynne: Yeah. We might shift now to another area. The center is really dealing overtly now with projects to enhance diversity in clients, participation, programs. How would you describe how the center is dealing with “rape crisis is for white women only”. it’s for Chapet Hill, not Orange County, Hillsborough {laughs} Margaret: Uhhuh. Lynne: And so forth- What seems to have gone well and what seems to need more work? Margaret: Well, what’s going well is that um different categories of people are liking the fact that we’re asking for them. Um we're still predominantly white, predominately educatedI you know, we could ﬁll every Waining eiass with undergraduates from UNC. And they all make fine companions and educators. But they don’t reﬂect the diversity of the whole county . So, for the ﬁrst time in our history we in the position of having to turn away interested voiunteers which is not comfortable, but I like what that reﬂects and that eventbocly’s wanting to work on our issue. We had several people call us, you lmow in our last public service announoements for volunteer training we asked for speciﬁcally for members of ﬁve diﬁ'erent groups. And we had some people call us who I think just liked seeing their group mentioned. And probably didn’t want to make the time commitment with training or didn’t have a strong strong interest, but they liked the fact that we noticed them. So we had very good response. Now our board is remarkably diverse. Both professionally. ethnically, background, really a diverse bunch of people, a neat hunch of people. It’s not there in the volunteer corps yet. I think that's partly a cultural issue in that it’s been the culture of white women to volunteer in their communities. And that’s pretty much across the country. And, not (250] Lynne: Kind of the secretary or the church volunteer phenomenon? Margaret: Yeah, well, they’re loolsng out and expecting to spend a signiﬁcant amount of their personal time doing something for someone else. For someone else. When I think of couple of my African—American friends, women who have families, they're volunteers, tend to be in church or in thair kids’ schools. And they’re family oriented, too. Um very much in the community, rather than out there, um 14 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. G—lGB Lynne: With strangers? Margaret: Yeah, going to meet a room full of total strangers, that sort of thing. You know, that's fme. it’s a great place to be. So, I want us to he more diverse, but 1 also recognize the fact that this is the population of people that I get a gut sense is most likely to volunteer. In this kind of issue, 1.1m. so we’re not going to completely turn over the population of our voluntEET base in a couple of years. It’s going to take a lot longer than that. But, every year we get a few new populations of folks, who talk to people, and you know, this last volunteer class was pretty diverse. We noticed that they didn’t bond together immediately. in fact it was several weeks after the typical bonding point, which is generally the second or third or maybe fourth session. This was past mid-point and then some. By the end, they were a pretty tight group and they thought everybody was pretty cool, but uni there was nobody the ﬁrst day saying, “Oh you all are just so interesting I’m just really glad to be here with all these like—mintted people!” [laughs] Because they were really different from each other. So the diversity presents some diﬂ'erent dynamics that we’ll have to learn about. Figure out. Is it good, is it bad, is it just different. That’s all right, it will keep us on our toes. We’ll be a little bit stronger from it. Our client base is about as diversiﬁed as the population base is. so i lmow we’re doing something right. I also know that once you make a personal connection with someone, partimﬂarly a survivor, it just ﬂat out doesn't matter if they’re white or black. Physical appearance is just a show in issues that concern all humans, male or female. The need to be free from sexual 1violence is one of those issues. The need to get support and healing from sexual violence is another one.[295] Lynne: This culture of white women, middlewelass, being brought up, sociaiized to volunteer. And it could be argued that this is related to sexism. Margaret: Uhhuh. Because they’re supposed to have husbands that take care of them while they do all this good work. Lynne: This is sort of shift, sort of. What do you grow Up with. what ideas did you grow up with about race, ethnicity that you brought with you into your work on sexual violence, in social services? 15 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. (3:165 Margaret: Well, um, the farming community where I grew up in was ethnically diverse in that there were Czechs and Germans and Eastern European origins. This was just a generation or two back. Lats of folks still had heavy accents. And about a third of the population in that slea is Hispanic. Anti in the farming community, our farming community, there weren’t any HisIJanic landowners. There were plenty of workers there. People who had lived there forever. Worked for the same families together. But they were deﬁnitely at the lower end of the economic totem pole. Very few black people, African— Americans in that part of West Texas. Um and the biggest shifts or differences for me to ﬁgure out as a kid were not racial so much as religious and ethnic in that there were Methodists and Baptists. And Baptists didn’t dance. And then there were all these Catholics and boy they could throw a party. How come it was okay for them to have beer at weddings and the Baptists wouldn’t even let them you know have a rum cookie or something like that. And the Catholics danced late and had great fun and the Baptists didn’t let their kids do that. All they did was go roller skating periodically and you know play volleyball. But the Baptists thought eveqrbody else was going to hell.[330] Lynne: [laughs] Margaret: 1Why was that? And how come the Hispanic Cathoiies didn’t go to church with the other ones necessarily? So I was always balancing all that Lynne: Were you brought up in a religious tradition? Margaret: Yeah, we Were Memodist. Laekadaisieal Methodist. Methodists oomdn’t get it together enough to play volleyball or roller skate or any of that stuff. And the Baptists were always making people sing specials at the church, sing solos. And I was always just in awe. The preacher would point to someone and say they’d sing a special next week and they would. If you did that to any Methodist they wouldn't come to church again. Um I felt very different because my dad had a town job. He was the editor of the newspaper. So we weren’t farmers, we weren’t kin to everyone else. And then to make it worse, my brother and I Were smart. And because we were smart (laughs), always the geeks in the classes, small classes, you know, ten kids in 16 Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. {3.1435 a class or something. So I stuck with that. The worst pnejudiee I ever saw and this came out when I was working for the welfare department was between blacks and Hispanics. So I actualty get kind of pissed when penple just focus on white people being higotsi Because that’s not where it stops. And granted there have been some extraordinanr acts of violence and hate committed by white people. The subtle stuff is just as lousy and sometimes it’s not so subtle. As I became a caseworker it became obvious to see that a Hispanic girl who wanted to say screw you to her daddy went out and got a black boyfriend. And got pregnant, you know, and that’s how she got daddy’s goat and succeeded. it was sad to see it. There were a lot of illegal aliens in that area. We'd usually see them waking up from Meadeo. And break into our house to get food and stuff like that. So even as a kid I was very aware of how come I was born here but if I had been born ninety miles away I would have died early in life. I was really aware growing up that life is just random. You happen to be born here. It’s an act of fate. It’s nothing to apologize for. When I was a caseworker, without a doubt the most digniﬁed people that I saw were my clients. And people who I thought were just the shittiest [laughs] happened to be employers, a lot of people, establishment. Ah, so it's I I get impatient with people who can’t see past the outward shell of people, how someone’s dressed or how nice their manners are. Because it’s not really an indicator of who the person is. (370] Lynne: I asked you that question to explore your thoughts on dealing with race now, in North Carolina. Dealing with diversity, actively trying to change the center and to get across the work of the center to many different people. Margaret I think um you get give too much respect for a person’s intiJnate surroundings and the values that came out, the surroundings. And you can build a lot of different arguments for different kinds of behaviors being okay or not okay within different contexts. Um and I think maybe it’s a factor of my own intellectual limitations, I don’t know, that I try to keep the message really simple. Sexual violence hurts people. In whatever form it comes in. And um ask people what we can do to work on that issue wherever they see it in their lives; I don’t think it’s appropriate to walk in and tell someone else that something necessarily is wrong, unless you're talking about some blatant act you known Urn it's Certainly a delicate issue to work 17' Interview number G-0165 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. G‘ \GS through and in my mind I’m still not as good as I need to be. I’ve got a lot of baggage with this stuff. And I think in America anyhow almost every culture does recognize what semal violence does and that it's something that is a preventable hijmy. It’s not necessary. We can do {laughs} without this just ﬁne. We can do without the pain and the power struggles that a lot of it represents. It sure has moved slow. Change. That’s why I admire people like Miriam Sliﬂtin who eon keep it up for merit}: or thirty years. It’s amazing to me. [3901 Lynne: For a lot of people there’s a point of feeling tired, and Miriam mentioned this too. I don’t know, tired with what happens. Margaret: Yeah. And I think that shows she’s found ways of coping...