 PICHEY: This is Mimi Pichey, Class of '72 interviewing Susan Powell, Class of '69 on December 21, 1988 in the ILGW offices in New York. Susan, why don't you tell us a little bit about your family background. Your mother and father and what their occupations were, aspirations, and so on. COWELL: Okay. My mother came from a working class background in Philadelphia. She went to the University of Pennsylvania in the late 1920s on a scholarship. At the time, they only had two scholarship studentCowell: one male and one female. So she went to the University of Pennsylvania and then she went to work for awhile in New York City and then went to Smith College. She was probably a major influence in terms of my education because she believed that education was extremely important. It was very important in her life in getting out of what was a very restrictive and conservativesocially conservative working class background. She influenced me very much to go to an Ivy League school, which I would not have done given the high school I went to and that sort thing otherwise. She also was very active. Through social work had gotten very politically active in the 30s. Was it in the 40s active in her union and so was an influence politically also although at somewhat low level. She was not terribly politically active. Growing up I was always there. My fatherPICHEY: What did she do as an occupation? COWELL: She was a social worker. She didn't work when I was very young until by the time my brother, who was a little younger than me, started school. So she was out of work from when I was born until I was in about fifth grade. But then she went back to work and in the 1950s that was very unusual. I was considered-there were only I think there was only one other mother in town who worked. So that was also, I'm sure, an influence on me. PICHEY: You were a latchkey kid. COWELL: Right. Exactly. PICHEY: What town was that? COWELL: Westwood, New Jersey. I was born in New York City where my parents lived then. Moved when I was five to the suburbs. My father came from a farming family in Pennsylvania. Went to Penn State on an athletic scholarship. Came to New York to escape from the farm, which he really hated, and ended up as an inspector of fruit and vegetables in the markets in New York. Because his degree was in agriculture and that was all he could do in the city. But it was good for him because it was night work and he was a real-loved New York City. He continued to wrestle at the West Side Y. He was active politically so that it enabled him to have the kind of urban life that he really enjoyed. So that'sPICHEY: Did he continue as an inspector? COWELL: He did that his whole life until he retired quite late. It was his own business and it did give him a lot of flexibility although it was never a very high paying job. PICHEY: And you went to high school in Westwood? COWELL: I went to high school in Westwood, New Jersey. Which was a very mediocre suburban high school where I was the only person who went to an Ivy League school in recent memory. PICHEY: Did many of the kids go on to college? COWELL: About half went to college and half didn't. PICHEY: But since both your parents had gone to collegeCOWELL: Right. It wasPICHEY: -particularly your mother I would imagine. COWELL: That's right. It was expected- certainly my mother and my father but particularly my mother- that I would go to a good school. PICHEY: And how did you come to select Pembroke? What did you first hear? COWELL: Well, I think I wanted a co-ed school. She wanted me to go to Smith and that was, I was very resistant to going to a girls school. Probably Radcliff seemed unrealistic at that point given the high school that I went to. Columbia was too close. At that point, there weren't that many co-ed Ivy League schools. So that it was- there weren't that many choices in my mind. PICHEY: So then did your family have any expectations about what you would get out of that college education? COWELL: Well, I think they'd both always had expectations that you would do something to serve humanity. My mother was a social worker and she took it for granted. [5:00] Even though they saw education as a form of upward mobility, I think they both saw undue success in the area of money as a little politically incorrect. It was assumed that I would do something like social work or teaching or maybe foreign service. I liked the idea of travel and that sort of thing. That was always an assumption. PICHEY: So today you're a vice president of the International Lady Garments Workers union. How do they feel about that? COWELL: Great. My father died several years ago before I became a vice president but I was working at the Union. They both, I think, were very pleased with that. It was the kind of thing they hoped I would do and so that seemed very nice. PICHEY: So they were very satisfied. COWELL: Yeah, no, I think they were very proud of me. PICHEY: That's great. Why don't we talk a little bit about your experience. You applied to Pembroke. You had no idea what you were getting into. COWELL: Right. PICHEY: Had you seen the campus or was it a sight unseen kind of thing? COWELL: No. No. I went up for an interview with my mother one summer. I applied early decision so it was the only school I applied to. And I had-you know it meant-really I didn't have much of an image of it. Although I think I hoped- this was 1965- I think I sort of hoped that the Civil Rights was going on and things I'd read about. You know I liked Joan Baez. I liked the idea that we would all sit around and listen to folk music and go on civil rights marches. PICHEY: Had you done any of that in high school? COWELL: Very very little. It was a very conservative, backwater high school. So I was the local in-house radical. I used to argue against the war in Vietnam but there wasn't really any opportunity to do much. So I was initially very disappointed at Brown. In 1965, it was an extremely conservative school. We arrived for freshman week and we were told we had to wear gloves to tea or whatever it was. It was some ridiculous thing. Once a week on Wednesday night we were supposed to dress up with hats and gloves or something and have demitasse before dinner. PICHEY: Demitasse or sherry? COWELL: Well, we had sherry hours but there was also something with demitasse. I remember all these jokes because no one knew what it meant. And there were the sherry hours. PICHEY: What was your first day like? Do you have any recollections of that? COWELL: I remember sort of an orientation. There was a good group of people. My roommate, who was really a shock to me, and in retrospect I think I was a little unfair to experience. She was a very poor, working-class, Greek immigrant who had grown up in West Virginia. Her father had become a coal miner. And then they'd moved to Hartford and her father opened up a greasy spoon. Twelve kids in the family. They were really low income. She could no more afford college, any of it, than she could. I mean it was inconceivable that she could have gone to Pembroke on anything less than a full scholarship, which she was on. She was extraordinarily brilliant. A real rebel. She had been skipped several grades because she was so smart and she was in these awful schools. They didn't know what to do with her. She was barely sixteen. I think she turned sixteen her freshman year. And it was not what I expected. I mean she was a Rolling Stones groupie. She wore mini-skirts. Real mini-skirts before the rest of us did it. And it wasn't what I expected. I expected intellectuals and I thought I was an intellectual. And I think in some ways I didn't give her a fair chance but in retrospect one of the most vivid memories. One thing I've never forgiven Pembroke for is that they destroyed her. They flunked her out. They gave her no counselor. They had to have known where she came from and then she was on full scholarship. And they treated her as a disciplinary case because she didn't look like everyone else. She was obviously a rebel. She had a advisor who saidPICHEY: And she came from a different class background as well. COWELL: She came from a dramatically different class background. And her parents didn't want her to go college. She had no support. What they wanted was for her to marry a Greek boy and going to Pembroke would make it very unlikely that she would marry a Greek boy. So they wanted her to flunk out. And she desperately needed support. They gave her a faculty advisor who said, 'all you Pembroke girls are so smart. Take all the courses you don't like your first semester.' Which was for her a total disaster. So she took some she liked and some she didn't. The ones she liked she got A's in and the ones she didn't like she flunked because she hadn't- she was much too young to have that level of motivation. So they called her in and cut off her scholarship aid. It was horrible. [10:00] It was reallyPICHEY: So did she leave mid-year? COWELL: She ended up-she got through the first year. She ended up taking loans out and that sort of thing. But I don't know if she was ever able to repay them because she flunked out after her first year. But at no point did they give her any supportive counseling. You know she should have gone to a state university at that point where maybe it would have been less discordant. She was one of the brightest people in the freshman class, I'm sure. PICHEY: How did that affect you? COWELL: At the time- I think it's more in retrospect that I realize what a tragedy it was. At the time, it was kind of not what I wanted. I wanted someone who was more like me and could share my experiences. I thought she was kind of weird. She was sort of a proto-hippie and my style was more political and focused. We had one interesting experience when it turned out that she and I were the only two people in the freshman class who refused to sign a loyalty oath to get a loan. I did it because I can and I knew my parents would support me and it was no problem. We didn't talk to each other. We both went into the dean and said the same thing without talking to each other. They must have thought it was a conspiracy and I'm sure that didn't help her any. But for her it was very brave. She really needed that loan. But a lot of that is in retrospect. None of us really could give her support. She did come from a different class with different expectations. And none of us really gave her the support she needed. But it's certainly, I mean, that's influenced my attitudes about Pembroke and about how I feel that kids from working class or minority backgrounds going to Ivy League schools that they're not prepared. That kind of thing. PICHEY: Yeah. I think that's been something that Brown has been-Pembroke has been working to overcome. But I think it's probably still a big problem. COWELL: Yeah. People were still very insensitive then. That was before a lot. PICHEY: Well, were you there during the Black walk-out? COWELL: Yeah. PICHEY: Yeah. That was your last year and my first year. COWELL: That's right. It was either. Probably the last year I was there. PICHEY: It was '68. It was the fall of '68. COWELL: Sure. I was there. PICHEY: And I think at that point that was one of the things that was a demand. COWELL: That's right. That's right. PICHEY: Was to have better preparation. To have, like they'd take the summer between high school and college as a prep period where minority youth who had been admitted could go and get some counseling and bring their skill level up. COWELL: That's right. Even that-at that point I think we probably didn't realize that it applied to people like Rita, who was white and working class. But now there's- I'm sure some of that is-there's more sensitivity of that issue now. I hope. PICHEY: I hope so too. What dorm were you in? COWELL: I was in Andrews. PICHEY: Oh yes. So was I. COWELL: It was an all dorm person for four years. Three years then I had my own apartment. PICHEY: And what courses did you take freshman year? COWELL: Oh God. PICHEY: Do you remember? COWELL: I don't even remember. PICHEY: You remember anything about that or the counseling or initiation into the social extracurricular activities. COWELL: I remember being very disappointed my first year. I had very high expectations. I hated high school. It was a very anti-intellectual high school and I thought Brown would be totally different. That people would be very sophisticated and intellectual and that the classes would be stimulating. And it wasn't really. I mean I did very well without-I actually worked very hard because I was scared but it seemed to me that I was doing very well without trying. And that shocked me because I expected people to be a lot smarter than I was. And it was very unpolitical. I was shocked by that. There was no political activity going on. I developed a very interesting group of people. I was on the mezzanine of Andrews which was very isolated. PICHEY: I was on the mezzanine my second year. COWELL: Were you really? PICHEY: My sophomore year. COWELL: So we had a- we felt like we were set apart and we developed a very nice [inaudible 0:14:108]. I'm still in touch with a large number of the people there who were on mezzanine that year. So that was very nice and I have to say that Brown left me with a lot of close friends. But we were very alienated. We ended up expressing our political activism or our political alienation through these sort of little guerilla tactics. Having to do with we refused to- they wanted us not to wear pants. We wore pants. And if they wanted us to wear gloves, we didn't. And if they wanted us to dress us, we'd dress down and we'd refuse to do the silent prayer routine. And a lot of that sort of stuff. PICHEY: Did you have a senior sister? COWELL: No. If I did it was not anything that came with anything that I recall. [15:00] PICHEY: I remember we had junior counselors also. Did you have a junior counselor? COWELL: I don't. You know what I did but it never developed. We got together once and it was never any kind of [inaudible 0:15:16]. PICHEY: What about your peers intellectually? Did you feel you were not making intellects that were stimulating you? COWELL: Well, my immediate friends. It was a good group on the mezzanine. As a matter of fact, some really extraordinary characters. But we felt that we were different. Classes were not terribly stimulating and the boys seemed rather unimpressive. I was also fairly shy so the classes didn't encourage discussion and I wasn't all that outspoken. So that other than our little band of people it seemed a little disappointing. PICHEY: What did you end up majoring in? COWELL: Chinese studies. PICHEY: How did you get to that? COWELL: Well, the summer before I went to Brown there was an announcement in the course catalogue thing that they were starting a new program in Chinese studies. And I just decided I wanted to do it. I'd always wanted to go far far away. A childhood dream and so I said, why not. And that was something I stayed with until the late 70s. PICHEY: Oh really? You went onto graduate school. COWELL: I went to graduate school. I was at Harvard and Yale in Chinese History and Language. I was in the Peace Corps in Korea after college and then I went to graduate school. Then ultimately after quite a few years in graduate school decided that was not what I wanted to do and left. But I still remained involved in- we have a lot of Chinese members and a very evolving Chinese culture and Chinese-Americans here. So it's been an important part of my life and I don't regret it. PICHEY: So that's an interesting thing that it's a theme that your Brown education ended up being useful even in what you are doing today. COWELL: Yeah. I don't know if useful is the word. We didn'tPICHEY: Relevant? COWELL: Relevant, right. In the 60s sense of the word. PICHEY: What about you did, however, become more politically active from '65 to '69. And I know that when I arrived on campus in '68 there were a lot of things going on. Like curriculum reform, like the anti-war movement had reached Brown, and so on. Perhaps you could talk about what Brown was like when you entered in '65 and the kinds of convocation and all of those kinds of things. You mentioned the silent prayer. If you could go through some of those things because I'm not sure that the people on campus today can even conceptualize what life was like when you entered as a freshman. And then maybe you could talk a little bit about how things changed by the time you were a senior. COWELL: Right. Right. Okay. Brown really did go through a sea change. Although it was the world that was going through a sea change. And I must say that even by '69, we still felt that Brown was a backwater relative to what we felt was going on at Harvard and Columbia. So that in some ways that perception stayed with it but the world changed totally. In '65, there seemed to be absolutely nothing going on. And Brown just seemed so parochial and Pembroke. We were really part of Pembroke. It was a girls school. So even though you went to classes over there you were so much part of the social system of the Pembroke convocations and the dormitory activities and all this sort of nonsense. I think the girls were very alienated from the political life of the campus. And I never- it's funny in retrospect because I'm so politically active now. At Brown, I was never really politically active. I went to demonstrations. I was part of the counterculture that developed. We all were anti-war and talked about it and went to demonstrations and smoked grass and did all those things. But I was never part of an organization and I think part of the reasonPICHEY: Wasn't there a campus action council? Do you remember that? You weren't part of that? COWELL: No. No. I think part of the reason is that the campus organizations were really male dominated. There was a student government for Brown that was only men. And then there was a student government for Pembroke. It was a joke. It was just for the girls, as we called ourselves. We weren't women then. We were girls and guys or whatever. So that we developed, our politics developed sort of this very anarchist plane. That we were rebelling against these rules and regulations at Pembroke. And I was very involved in, as a matter of fact, my roommate and I started this petition in '60- our senior year '68 against convocation. [20:00] We just sort of did it because we realized that wePICHEY: I think I might have signed that. COWELL: You probably signed in. We realized that we had just blown it and skipped all the convocations and we had just passed the deadline. So we decided to be very opportunistic and start this petition saying that on principle we weren't gonna go to convocation. But it was very- for Pembrokers, you weren't part of the political activity at Brown for the most part. Some were but really the activists at Brown, the leaders of almost all the organizations were male. I knew Ira Magaziner and was involved to some degree in curriculum reform but I felt very alienated from that. Girls did the typing. Even in '68-'69. The guys were the leaders. The girls who were active, a lot of them, were the ones that slept with the right guy. I never felt a part of that. Even though my political beliefs and the sessions we had staying up late in the dormitory about politics at night felt political. But not too much in a Brown context. We were involved. There was the whole issue which I think was '66-'67, of ending the parietal rule where we had a massive-at that point you couldn't as a [inaudible 0:21:20] you couldn't have a boy in your room and you couldn't stay out past eleven and all of those rules. There was a massive demonstration that Pembrokers did and it was- we considered it sort of a badge of honor that we were the ones who demonstrated and the guys just stood by and watched. But one night one of the- a bunch of the upperclassmen got out in the middle of the quadrangle there on the old campus with a bull horn and said- this was after curfew at eleven o'clock or so- and said we're protesting the curfew everyone leave the dormitory. And so the entire campus was totally unplanned. Nobody knew what was happening. We just poured out of the building in our pajamas and threw jeans on and all marched on the dean's house which was right around there. PICHEY: And who was the dean at that point? COWELL: Dean Pierrel. PICHEY: That's Rose[mar]y Pierrel, right. Did you know her personally? COWELL: No. PICHEY: Did you know any of the deans or Pembroke faculty? COWELL: No. There were a few who used to call me in occasionally to tell me I wasn't following the rules. I didn't pass my swimming test and all the little things like that. But there was never a positive relationship there. Maybe they should have been role models but they weren't. PICHEY: Was there anybody on campus who served as a role model for you. In the way of either faculty or upperclassmen even. Or classwomen. COWELL: Not really. My memory of it is this little band of my peers who I was close to and who in some senses were role models. But no one who was older. The older classes, the girls who were classes '66 and '67, seemed what we called Penny Pembroker. Goody goodies and we just didn't relate to them. There was almost no female faculty. Dean Pierrel was virtually the only full professor who was a woman. PICHEY: What subject did she teach? COWELL: Psychology. So there were really very few role models. It was, in that sense, not a terribly positive experience. PICHEY: What kinds of interactions did you have with men? COWELL: Well, limited in the first couple of years. Dating. It was very blind dates or someone would look you up in the pic book as they called it, which was the book they put out with all the Pembrokers. Guys you didn't know would call you up and say, 'My name is Joe Blow and I saw your picture in the book.' And you know fraternity parties. It was not a very elevated social life. It wasn't until the beginning of my junior year I started dating the guy I'm now married to. PICHEY: And how did you meet? COWELL: We met in Chinese political science class. He was also a Chinese studies major. And then I got involved with a group of people that included his friends. My best friend in college married his best friend in college. We're still close friends. There was this group, a fairly small group, that was very close and that I'm still very close to. But apart from that, I think the social life was very restrictive. We felt if we didn't have a date we couldn't do much of anything. On Saturday night, we were expected not to leave the dormitory unless we had a date. PICHEY: In other words you never went to the movies by yourself if it was another woman? COWELL: We did. But we felt as if if someone saw you they would almost think you were cruising. That only the guys went out. It was a really very sick environment in a lot of ways. You would never go to a football game without a date. [25:00] PICHEY: Would you describe the football game? COWELL: [laughs] PICHEY: Because I was shocked. COWELL: Were you? PICHEY: Oh yes when I got there. That women dressed in suits. COWELL: Yeah. It was very formal. I didn't go to a lot of them because I didn't have all that many dates but the band was fun. That's one of those old Brown traditions. But Brown always lost and it was sort of people just went and tried to be very Ivy League with their little flasks and their banners and tried to live out another world. PICHEY: Yeah. The women dressed in suits as I recall and the men were supposed to bring the blanket and the flask. COWELL: Right. Right. The flask. It's crazy. [laughs] PICHEY: Do you have any recollection of May day or special things done at May Day, or Ivy Day, or Sophomore Masque. Spring Day? Commencement? COWELL: To the extent that those things happened we would have boycotted them. The whole culture of Pembroke, the whole girls school culture, was something that we rejected. Actually, the most memorable or one of the most memorable events of my Pembroke career was when we stole the chime. Twice my little group of friends, who I became friends with freshman year, decided- no it must have been sophomore year the first time- that we were not going to tolerate the chimes anymore. The chimes were these-do you remember the chimes? PICHEY: I do. But tell me for the tape. COWELL: I don't know how to describe it. You had these little-you'd hit it with a littlePICHEY: It's like a xylophone. It looks like a xylophone. COWELL: Yeah it's like a xylophone that, what was her name? That, the old the woman who was a marine? Ms. something or other. Anyway she played them. What was her name? She was so amazing. Her poodle. And you had to stand up or did we sit? PICHEY: This was in the dining hall. COWELL: Moment of silence. In the dining hall. That's right. PICHEY: This was in the dining hall and it was before you ate dinner and you were supposed to observe a moment of silence. This was in the days of sit-down dinners, which has also gone by the wayside. COWELL: She hit the chimes and we were all supposed to stand there and be silent until she hit them again. And we tried all sorts of things like refusing to stand, making noise during prayer, but it kept going on and on. Finally, we decided that the solution was to steal the chimes. So we made off with them under a poncho and hid them in someone's room. And then we started- rumors went around. Certain people knew. We had negotiations. Our dorm mother at the time was a nun, who was a wonderful person actually. She ended up leaving after the church paid for her education. She was really a neat person. But she was our go-between because we trusted her more than we trusted the other- that crazy lady, the other dorm mother. We had negotiations and we finally promised to give them- but this was the days of official terrorism. Now we've got like a PLO or something- but we agreed to give them back if they stopped the prayer. Gave them back and of course they didn't stop. They kept having the prayer. Sometime subsequent to that we stole them again and we would start doing things like whenever we saw one of these people walking down the quadrangle we'd start playing them in someone's room. And then we'd move them so they couldn't find them. It was really a great experience. We finally returned it when we had a concert with kazoos and chime and we returned it the final time. And finally, they-at that point they had done a survey about how people felt about it and they did finally phase it out. But it was those sort of little things that were political in a sense but it was a very odd sort of politics. PICHEY: And what was the reaction of other Pembrokers to this? COWELL: I'm not sure. We certainly had a lot of allies, especially in the old dorms. We were in Miller and Metcalf. And old dorm people were more rebellious. They were more artsy. So in those circles everyone supported and everyone knew who was doing it. It was kind of very open. I don't know whether there were people on campus who thought that we were violating some norm because we didn't really care. It was kind of we had our own little troop and that was what we cared about. PICHEY: Where the new dorms open while you were there? COWELL: Yeah. Oh yeah. They were open the [inaudible 0:29:29] before my freshman, probably just before my freshman year. So there were new dorm people and there were old dorm people and that was a very clear divide. Once you got to the point where you could choose, you were one or the other. PICHEY: And so new dorm people were superficial? [laughs] COWELL: You're right. Right. And they wore Pappagallo shoes. [laughs] PICHEY: Okay. Do you-how do you believe, if you do at all, that the years at Brown developed a sense of the appropriate role of education and jobs for women? [30:00] Did you come away with any particularCOWELL: Yeah. I mean I think we were't feminist and we didn't- I became a feminist the summer after I graduated, which was 1969 when everyone else in the world did too. There was no feminist movement at Brown up to, there may have been some glimmer in '68-'69 but it was really extremely minimal. The focus was on the anti-war movement. So the focus was very much on the men who were subject to the draft and supporting the men so they wouldn't have to go fight and that sort of thing. It was a very sexist environment and we weren't very sophisticated about that. On the other hand, Pembroke had a very elite feel. We felt we were superior. We felt different. We had very close relationships with women because the dorms were all women. We developed very close bonding with other women. So in that sense, we also we'd work. I don't think any of us thought we would become housewives or anything. It did create a certain align among the women but not- we just weren't explicitly feminist. We were retrospect. It seemed appalling what we put up with and our own attitudes. PICHEY: Did you have any feelings about the merger that took place in 1971? Did thatCOWELL: I don't think alumni should dictate these things. I think it was part of the times. I think women’s colleges just didn't make sense in 1971. I think they did serve a purpose when they existed. I think probably they were good for women in a lot of ways but it if doesn't work, it doesn't work. It just became politically irrelevant. I think it was inevitable. And I think the separation where it was separate but not separate didn't make sense. Socially it was a disaster. Educationally so, in terms of the formal curriculum, I think it was not good. That separation. I understand that there's been a change in the sense that I've had people tell me is that there's much more equality so that the girls don't have that kind of-women now I hope- don't have the sense of being special quite the same way that we did. Maybe that's made-up but who knows. PICHEY: That's the impression I have also. One other thing, the curriculum reform. Were you involved with that at all? COWELL: I was involved. Not-my husband was much more involved and a couple of my friends were very much involved with that almost full-time activity. I was a little less so but I was tangentially there in the middle of discussions and went around trying to convince other people of that. PICHEY: What was the climate like on campus? Were people receptive? Maybe they see this as a revolutionary kind of thing. Or was it just something that it was time it's cut? COWELL: No. Well, I think it was all part of the student power thing. I think the faculty was very nervous about it. The administration was very nervous. Subsequently, they got very smart and they co-opted it. This great PR thing which was very smart. But at the time, I think that- I can't remember the name of the President. Recall? It was… PICHEY: No. Why do I think Hornig? COWELL: No it was before Hornig. PICHEY: It was this guy before Horning. I can't remember his name. COWELL: He was a little overwhelmed by the whole thing. The whole student movement scared him. There was stuff happening at Harvard and Yale that from their point of view was very scary. A lot schools. Brown was- I mean they should have realized how lucky they were to have someone like Ira Magaziner who kept it very much focused on issues like curriculum reform. But I think they were very nervous. The Black walk-out was a very hard one for them because they couldn't just [inaudible 0:34:00] the Black but it had a moral element they couldn't just turn their backs on. So the curriculum reform was a real sense of student power that we wanted to be able to say what the curriculum was. In that sense, it was very heady. '68-'69 was a very heady year and we felt really that you felt like you were part of a nationwide movement. You'd see kids anywhere and we were all kids. We were all allies. PICHEY: Well, Woodstock was that summer. COWELL: That's right. It was that summer that I graduated. And you just knew without having to meet someone that you were on the same wavelength, and did the same things, and you believed the same things. People just sort of floated through. My husband was part of this big apartment with five people and people were always drifting in. Total strangers would show up sleeping on the couch and you didn't ask who it was. It was just part of the movement. So in that sense I think curriculum reform was part of that we want to control our lives. PICHEY: Do you remember the sit-in at University Hall? COWELL: Sure. I was there. [35:00] PICHEY: So was I. [laughs] Why don't you talk about it a little bit. COWELL: Well. I don't remember that vividly. We went in and we sat. It was at a corporation board meeting was at. They left and we refused to leave. I just remember it going on and on. I remember interminable meetings that never ended and people talking about what we should do about it. And I don't quite remember how it ended. PICHEY: I think what happened was Ira Magaziner said we should go home. COWELL: Yeah. It probably was something like that. [laughs] PICHEY: And I remember being somewhat relieved because I was afraid that they would be calling the cops and we'd get suspended or something like that. So I was very glad to have done what we did. [inaudible 0:35:40] COWELL: Right. Right. PICHEY: And I remember being very glad that we could go home without being arrested. COWELL: Right. That's right. Sure. PICHEY: Now you mentioned also the Black walkout. Would you talk about that a little bit. COWELL: That was fall of '68 when all the Black students walked out in protest. In particular there was recruitment issues, support issues for Black minority students who were there. I'm sure faculty hiring was an issue though I don't remember the details of it. What I remember most about it is that there was a big support movement organized by white students and I remember that I was- I remember going with my now husband's fraternity to try to talk to these guys about why they should support the Black students. And that was a lot of fun actually. It was scary because we didn't expect a lot of support and there was some degree of hostility. But it was very nice actually. They talked us through the issues. I think it was a good organizing technique. I think one of the nice things about Brown at that time- and Ira contributed to it- there wasn't a polarization. There wasn't- people couldn't always out radical each other. So that the goal was prove how radical you were. There was a attempt to organize those who were less sophisticated to try to get everyone involved. And that's very important. In a lot of ways the destruction of the ‘60s was the tendency of the left to keep isolating itself by become more and more revolutionary until it became irrelevant. So that was a very interesting experience and I enjoyed that. PICHEY: And they were able to win a lot of what they'd asked for. COWELL: Yeah. It was very successful. It was a good strategy. I think the Black students were very well organized. PICHEY: Yeah. They walked off campus and took refuge in a church. COWELL: A church that was down the hill. PICHEY: A neighborhood church. COWELL: Yeah. Yeah. It was near the campus. But it was very disciplined. It was really very impressive organizing aptitude. In retrospect, we did a lot of organizing, it was very well done. PICHEY: Any recollections about commencement? COWELL: Well we turned our backs on Henry Kissinger. That was the main one. It was indoors. I think practically the only time that commencement's been indoors. It was raining a little bit. But the rumor was that they didn't want to have agitators or something. ButPICHEY: Was it at the skating rink? COWELL: Yeah. And we all turned our backs on Henry Kissinger. And at the time it was funny because a lot of people were saying that he was the liberal of the Nixon administration. But you know I think that was a fairly effective moment and I understand that it had an impact on him. He kept talking about it afterwards. But my mother-it was easy for us because the entire class we all got up and turned our backs. My mother was one of the few people in the audience that got up and turned her back and she got a lot of flak for it. So she was a lot braver than we were. But for us being political, I mean, at that time being political didn't take any courage. It was easy. Everyone was doing it. It was trendy. So in that sense not everyone thought through the implications of it. A lot of people just ended up. They graduated and it became convenient to become a careerist. It was very easy to go back to being a career. PICHEY: But you didn't. What happened with you when you graduated? COWELL: Well. Part of it is I think that my political consciousness went back a lot further because of my family. And then I went into the Peace Corps in Korea, which I did really because my husband was avoiding a draft. We got married right after graduation. PICHEY: At Brown? COWELL: At Brown. We got married, no, in New Jersey where we both live. The draft was an obsession. In '68-'69 if you were a senior it was the only subject that we ever talked. I can't really remember talking about much except the draft. We went from he tried to be a CO and it wasn't accepted. Conscientious objector. It was very very difficult to be conscious. [40:00] Some people I think got off on their physicals. That was a very common thing to bribe a doctor or something. But my husband didn't really have friendsfamily friends who were doctors. So and he had always wanted to join the Peace Corps. It was a deferment that year. So we decided to do that. And that was really the reason. I think I felt uncomfortable with it. It was sort of an American presence overseas. I wasn't sure I approved of the Peace Corps but the draft was sort of overriding. We didn't want to go to Canada. And that sort of thing. But that was very important for me. PICHEY: So you immediately got married and then you went to Korea? COWELL: Well almost immediately. We went to Korea in October. PICHEY: For how long? COWELL: Well, two years and we ended up staying for a third year. Partly because we liked it a lot and partly because his draft number. After we got into Peace Corps they have the lottery. So that those people in Peace Corps training have got a good number out of a high number, several of them walked out the next day. He got a sort of mediocre number and it was very- at that point it was not good. The draft was still going heavily. After two years it was still iffy. He had a reasonable chance not to be drafted but we enjoyed it. It was a fascinating experience and we stayed for a third year. It wasit got me very involved in sort of third world perspective. At that point I was much less interested in what was happening in the United States and more interested in the Third World and what has happening in Vietnam and Southeast Asia and US imperialism. That was really my orientation. PICHEY: What kind of work did you do in Korea? COWELL: We taught English. PICHEY: In a small city or a town? COWELL: In a- well, in a big city. It was the third largest city in Korea. A million people. But it was not like a city. It was like a big village. We lived with a family. We really livedI'm really glad we did it then because I'm now too old to do without hot water and toilets and stuff but it was a great experience. PICHEY: Did you travel much? COWELL: We traveled in the area. We had very little money. Peace Corps paid us forty dollars a month each, which went very far in Korea in those days. They gave us a little travel allowance for vacations. So we went to Japan and Taiwan and came home through the Soviet Union. We took the transiberian railway. But so that kind of-we sort of hung out and spent a lot of time in Japan. You know people so you go sleep on their floor for a month. That kind of thing. Very nice way to see that part of the world. PICHEY: So did you build on your Chinese studies? Is it more of a regionalCOWELL: Yeah. Right. When I came back I was sort of Korea and China. When I went to graduate school at Harvard, I was in Korean and Chinese studies. And that was why I picked Harvard because it was one of the few places that had Korean studies. And I ended up spending two years at Harvard, which I hated because again I thought it would be better than Brown. I had been to Brown. It was mediocre so therefore I should go to Harvard. It would be much better. And it turned out that Harvard was awful and then transferred to Yale, which it turned out afterwards to be a very positive experience. I thought it was actually in some ways the sort of thing I had been looking for for many years. PICHEY: By that time Yale was co-ed? COWELL: Yeah it was co-ed. It had been co-ed for quite awhile. This was '75. PICHEY: Yeah. It went co-ed in '69-'70. COWELL: That's right. And I thought about if it had been a year earlier I would have applied to transfer. PICHEY: Do you remember that weekend that they had at Yale? Where they invited women from the Ivy Leagues? Did you go to it? COWELL: Yeah. No well I couldn't qualify. I was ahead. PICHEY: Oh 'cause you were a senior. Right. COWELL: Yeah. Did you go? PICHEY: No. I always kicked myself for not going. COWELL: Yeah. I think that those women had a very difficult experience. I don't think that was a good thing to do. So in retrospect I'm glad I didn't have the opportunity because they would have accepted me and I would have gone and all that. But by the time I got to Yale it was a very different place. It was a small department. Very stimulating, very exciting kind of place. So that was a good experience but it also got me back into politics. PICHEY: In what sense? COWELL: When I returned to the United States in 1972. Was it '72 or '73. End of '72. The movement had sort of collapsed. By the time I started graduate school- or was it '73. I was in Korea forPICHEY: By movement you mean the anti-war movement? COWELL: Yeah. It was sort of a whole left movement. It focused around the anti-war movement but was broader than that. I was in Korea '70, '71, '72. So I started graduate school in '73. Fall of '73 at Harvard and it a disaster. [45:00] I was horrified. I mean there was nothing going on. PICHEY: What about the women's movement? COWELL: It was unbelievable. I started a women's group at Harvard but it was a-there was very little going. Part of it was that the graduate school was very separate from the undergraduate. But even undergraduate, there seemed to be very little going on. Certainly a women's consciousness but in terms of real political activity very little. I was desperate for something and I looked at all sorts of possibilities and it ended up the only thing that was vaguely viable was trying to start a women's group, which I did. But it was very frustrating. By the time I got to Yale- it wasn't so much Yale- it was sort of starting to pick up again from this sort of collapse, I think almost. PICHEY: Well, I think there was a collapse of focus. As I recall in '73, there were the peace talks and a lot of other things. COWELL: Thats right. The draft ended which took the wind out of the whole thing. PICHEY: Right. And then on the women's front, in Janurary of '73, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of abortion. And that had been a majorCOWELL: I forgot about that. PICHEY: -that had been a really major focus of the women's movement and I think the women's movement floundered around a bit after that. COWELL: That's right. Yeah. I mean I think it was a combination of having them build up so high. When we were in Korea we thought there was going to be a revolution in the United States. We had plans, contingency plans to come home if the revolution happened. We must have been insane butPICHEY: I thought there was going to be a revolution by the bicentenial. By '73[end of side 1] [beginning of tape 2; time counter starts anew] PICHEY: This is Mimi Pichey, class of '72 interviewing Susan Cowell, Class of '69. December 21, 1988 in the offices of the International Ladies Garment Workers’ Union in New York City. Okay. COWELL: I guess the feeling was not so much that it had turned to the right but that expectations were so high that it almost deflated. It was this feeling of collapse. We expected so much. We accomplished so much and then- and I think you're right the absence of the draft and certain concrete things that were achieved- there was no way to sustain it. We were so focused on goals. I think similar things have happened with the suffragettes when they got the right to vote. In this country we've always focused on very specific goals and not had the institutional- this is getting into my theory about why I'm in the labor movement- but not having institutional bases to continue a struggle. We've never had a socialist party, weak labor movement, the kind of things that keep a left movement going in most countries don't exist here. We have movements around ideas, around issues that are very intense. And then once it's achieved or rendered irrelevant as the draft was in a sense. You know the war went on. It was still there but the draft sort of took away the urgency. It sort of collapsed on itself and it was a very demoralized period. There wasn't a lot of focus for political activity. By the time I got to Yale, which was in the middle of- let's see what was happening. It was getting to be '75. End of Gerry Ford. There was a little bit of a coming back together again. The movement didn't end. There was still some continuity and there was beginning to be some issues. South Africa. A few other things that were bringing people back together. But what happened when I was at Yale was that there was a strike of the blue-collar workers and I got very involved in support activities for that. And that really focused me a lot and I think that's when I decided that I wanted to be part of the labor movement. That I really wanted to work around class issues, issues of work and that sort of thing, and labor issues. It was a very exciting time at Yale. And so what happened, coincidentally, I got back in touch with Ira Magaziner, who I had known on and off. My brother had worked with him on the Brockton project, which was an organizing project in Brockton, Massachusetts. I'd kept in touch with part of that whole group of people around Ira who worked with him over the years. And I got a call from Ira. At that point, he was working with a consultant group, a Boston consultant group, learning about business, learning about the way the world worked. He wanted to get into bigger issues, industrial policy and what not. He was doing something in Asia. He knew that I had studied Korean. I'd lived in Korea. He wanted me to go to Asia to help do translation and that sort of thing. So that summer- it was actually the summer before I took my oral exams- I decided instead of studying for my orals I would just take off for Asia. It was too good an offer. I was then poor. We were poor throughout that period and couldn't consider traveling. It was a great offer. And then partly through Ira, I finally got the means to leave graduate school. He was starting a consulting group of people who wanted to work in industrial policy. They wanted to work for unions and for governments that were reasonably progressive. At that point we thought- towards the late 70's, Carter was a possibility. There were some in Europe. And so I finally decided to leave graduate school even though I really liked Yale. PICHEY: So did you get a masters? COWELL: I got- I ended up with two masters. Harvard gave me a masters as a sort of going away present when I transferred to Yale and then Yale- I actually did pass my orals so I got a Masters of Philosophy, which is an A.B.D, an all but dissertation. And they were very supportive. I had one professor, Jonathan Spence at Yale, who was particularly supportive. In the sense that unlike all the professors I'd had before who thought if you're smart and you do well you should be a professor because that's the most noble thing you can do in life. [5:00] He said, 'You know there are a lot of things you can do.' And he advised me that I didn't really- it was clear I was bored of academic stuff. I was much happier writing shorter pieces that were more journalistic in a way. And he gave me the confidence about leaving academia. And then going with Ira was an opportunity to leave so I did that for about a year. PICHEY: So you worked out of Providence? COWELL: Well, we were sort of all over the place. He was based in Telesis, which was the organization he set up, we set up. At that point it was somewhat collective in theory. It was based in Somerville. And then we moved to- it eventually moved to Providence but it was based in Somerville at that point. I was just leaving Boston. Actually, moving to New York, but we were all sort of- we worked at home, we came to the office, we were traveling a lot so it didn't really matter too much where we lived. And that lasted about a year, a little over a year, until that had a kind of blow up. It just didn't work with the initial group and the way it was structured it didn't work. It was supposed to be this democratic collective and it was a disaster in a way. But it was a good experience for me. I got to travel, learned a lot, and just decided I wanted to work in the labor movement. It became… just a decision I made given my sense of the political situation, given that there was not much happening in the short term. I think there was an improvement in the late '70s under Carter. There was a lot more stuff happening but there was still. The euphoria wasn't there. Nothing was going to happen quickly and the labor movement seemed like the place to be for the long term to make a career out of social change. So I just started looking for a union job once we were living in New York City. And the ILGW was one of the few that had a national office in New York and I got a job. PICHEY: And did your husband go with you on all of these moves? COWELL: Yeah. He'sPICHEY: How did it work? Because that's always a major issue. Does the woman move for the man's career or does the man move for the woman's career? COWELL: Well, we had to be very flexible. He was in architecture school. He decided in Korea that he wanted to be an architect and we came back. He got into a program at Harvard. He had no background. He hadn't taken any of the courses required. He had to take an extra year to do physics and some other things. So what happened is when I went to Yale I commuted. Spent five days a week in New Haven and came up on weekends. When I was traveling with Ira, I was away a lot. So we were separated a lot. It was a difficult period but I think a necessary period at that point. Then we both wanted to come to New York. We both decided that was where we wanted to live. We didn't want to live anywhere else. So we came to New York without an apartment, without jobs. Neither of us had jobs. We just sort of showed up and started looking. We were lucky because it wasn't easy to do that in the late '79, I guess. But it did work out. We were lucky in a sense that I decided very early that I didn't want to have children. Never had an interest in having children. He thought, sort of figured that I would change my mind but didn't have any strong feelings one way or the other. But now we are very happy with our lifestyle. It certainly makes life easier. Assuming that you do it voluntarily it's very convenient. So that's worked out fine. At this point, really our careers have always been fairly equal and we've both been prepared to make a certain number of sacrifices. We're lucky we both ended up where we wanted to be in the same place. Both like what we do. PICHEY: It sounds like you've grown in parallel paths together. COWELL: Yeah. We have. We got married not knowing what either of us wanted to do, not having a penny in the bank, not knowing who was going to cook. We hadn't talked about anything. It was crazy but we just sort of- In 1969, you just did things like that. You didn't think ahead. You didn't plan for the future. You just sort of lived for the present. I think we really did grow together. PICHEY: [10:00] So ten years later you ended up in New York City with a job at the ILGW and what did you start off doing? COWELL: I started off working in the organizing department primarily doing surveys, phone surveys. There was someone here who had started an operation, needed someone to design surveys and run phone banks, that sort of thing. And I had no experience in it but they were really looking for someone who could learn quickly and I was smart and that was really all that counted. I was willing to not work for much and I wanted to get into the labor movement and so I was willing to not work for much. We were used to living poor for a very long time and so a couple hundred dollars a week sounds like hey you're on easy street when you've lived on close to nothing. I also did-I knew Korean so I helped organizing campaigns when there were Koreans involved, I did some writing literature, I did some lobbying, working in the sweatshop legislation in New York state and I got to go to all the meetings and do some lobbying. It was- in the beginning, I was not clear what role was in the union and I didn't know my way around. I didn't know anything about the labor movement. I really came in with just an idea not with any knowledge of the institution. But I think it was clear from the start that the potential was there to do a lot of different things. You know I was used to graduate school where you could spend a whole semester studying five years in the tenth century, one of the last that had done it, and I loved being a generalist. It appealed to me immediately so that was very nice. My big break came in '82, summer of '82, our largest local which is mainly Chinese was in the middle of contract negotiations and ran into a major problem. Employers decided to get together to try to break the union. These were all recent immigrants. People thought that they would never go on strike. The employers were Chinese and they were too indebted to their employers, there was nothing we could do. We just got a lot of people called down-I came down. I knew Chinese. At least I could read it. I don't speak the same dialect as our members. We ran phone banks every day until midnight and it was a really exciting period. Got everyone and had these massive rallies. 20,000 women met having mass rallies in Chinatown. It was really an incredible experience. PICHEY: I remember reading about that. Hearing about that. COWELL: Really? It was great. PICHEY: You put out trilingual posters as I recall. COWELL: Well we've always had everything trilingual. We had posters inPICHEY: English, Spanish, and Chinese. COWELL: It was just very exciting and learning about that community, it's a very interesting immigrant community. Everything in the world happens. The gangs got involved trying to, bosses called out the gangs. It was very intense. It was scary. No one knew really what would happen. A lot of people got involved politically who had never been anything more than a sewing machine operator. It was really wonderful. And at the same time I got the manager of that local, the head of that local was the man who is now president of the union and he really has been my supporter since then. He's someone who liked to get talented young people and use them. People who are willing to work twelve hours a day without complaining for not much money and who love what they do. So shortly after that I transferred down to that local and became his assistant. Ever since then I've worked very closely with him. Since then he became-he was rising in the union very rapidly. He became Secretary Treasurer and then President of the International Union. So I rose with him. It was a real opportunity for me. He would say, "we want a daycare center in Chinatown. I want to have it happen. Go out and make it happen.' And we did. The Center started and I was sort of the main person coordinating different aspects of it. The first public-private daycare center in the city. So all sorts of things happening and he was someone who was very receptive to new ideas. It was a real opportunity. And you know it really was you know being in the right place at the right time and having everything come together. [15:00] PICHEY: And you became Vice President of the union? COWELL: Very recently, yeah. I was the Executive Assistant and was getting involved in a lot of areas. We had an Executive Vice President who left and I started doing a lot of his work. So I was really sort of running, supervising in a sense, large sections of the union’s activity. And they decided that I should be a vice president. There are twenty- two vice presidents. It's not the vice president, it's a vice president. A little over a year ago. October, maybe, 7th. So that's where I am today. PICHEY: So your job duties now include what? COWELL: Well, I basically I'm in charge of all sorts of communications, internal and external. I do public relations. I do, I'm in charge of, I don't do it myself, but I supervise those departments that are involved in promoting our union label, doing advertising. Public relations for corporate campaigns and organizing on newspaper. Various publications to our members. Campaigns we do around issues like industrial home work or sweatshops. I just coordinate a lot of those areas. PICHEY: Would you talk a little bit about some of those things because your union is primarily women unionized, I gather. COWELL: About 85% women. PICHEY: And many many immigrant women as well. I think people would be interested in knowing some of the major issues that these women face on the job and in their home lives too. You mentioned the question of childcare and then you just referred to sweatshops and the home work thing. And if you could maybe talk a little bit more about those. COWELL: Sure. Garment workers are overwhelmingly women. Eighty-five percent of our members are women. Those who are not women tend to be warehouse workers, shipping clerks, or a few other trades in the garments-cutters had a lot of men or mainly men. But sewing machine operator, which is the backbone of the garment industry, are virtually all women. PICHEY: And this is not an automated field as I understand it. COWELL: It'sPICHEY: It's one of the few areas of industry that is still primarily handwork. COWELL: Well it's sewing machine not unlike- I mean it's not handwork in the literal sense. There still are some couture firms that are literally have handwork. It's a sewing machine. It's not all that different from the kind you might have at home. When I was growing up, we all had sewing machines. I don't know if people do that anymore or girls do that anymore. And I must say when I was growing up, I never thought about how my clothes were made. It just didn't occur to me. I just thought they came off of a machine somewhere that magically made clothes. It didn't really occur to me that hundreds of thousands of women were sitting at sewing machines and putting every seam through a plain old sewing machine. There are a few different kinds and there's a certain amount of computerized stitches and that sort of thing but basically it's not at all automated. Very labor intensive and that's really the key thing about this industry that makes it such a difficult one for the people who work in it is that. And it's particularly true of women's apparel because women's apparel is very style conscious. The runs are relatively short. It changes frequently. A lot of changes in fabric and style and all sorts of things so that it is very hard to automate. It's very hard to rationalize a large factory where you have a lot of division of labor and a very rationalized production line that looks more like a factory. Men's apparel now looks more like a real factory. Material moves down a line where everyone does something differentPICHEY: What would you say the average size of a shop is? COWELL: In the ILGW the average factory is well under fifty people a factory. Thirty-five or forty is typical. And so what happens is that the key factor, the key cost factor, is labor. And it's a very competitive industry. It's not like autos where you have three firms dominating an industry that pretty much set prices until Japanese imports were a factor. In this country, there's tens of thousands of apparel firms and overseas there's God only knows how many more. Extremely competitive on price. So what happens is the industry has developed an organizational structure which is designed to reduce cost of labor. [20:00] And essentially that and contracting out. Manufacturers and firms that make clothing, that design them and sell them to Bloomingdales to put their labeling, don't, for the most part, have sewing machine operators on their payroll. They'll have designers, they'll have maybe some cutters. They'll have sample makers, people who make samples of the designs to send to shops that actually sew them but they contract out for sewing. And they do it to lower costs. They do it because there are thousands and thousands of firms who can sew garments and they can say to these firms bid against each other and the lowest bid gets the job. And so these firms which have very little capital investment anyone can come in if you've got-, well not anyone, but an immigrant who comes in with ten thousand dollars in savings. And a lot of immigrants do come in with that nest egg put together. You can put it in a garment shop. You can even rent your machines. You don't have to buy anything. In New York you can rent the space. You can rent the machines. If you're part of an immigrant group, you get people from your own area. So and you're essentially just bidding on labor. You're bidding your labor plus your own profit. Some of them do well but a lot of them don't. A lot of the contractors don't make a lot of money. And in order to get work they keep pushing their workers. "You've got to take less or we'll cut the work". Unemployment is rampant in the industry. A lot of layoffs. So that workers get scared. They feel like they have to take less or they won't get to work. And the union's role in this industry since 1900 has been to try to make the manufacturers responsible. We've always said it's the manufacturer who's making a big profit, who's got the name, who's making the design ,who controls the market, who's selling to the store. Today the store is a much bigger factor. We're trying to transfer that responsibility also to the store, which often is a manufacturer itself. They have to take some responsibility for the conditions that clothes are made in. Just because people aren't on the direct payroll doesn't mean they can just say that they're not responsible. We've done that in a number of ways. One of the ways that we do it is to sign contracts both with manufacturers and with contractors. Whether the manufacturer employs anyone or not we've used various kinds of pressure to get a manufacturer to sign a contract saying I will use union labor. We tried to do it with our sweatshop laws more recently. In the- since the late 70s for a variety of reasons because of the pressure of imports, because of large numbers of new immigrants, because of higher unemployment since the late 70s. Because of cutbacks and enforcement efforts in government, there's been an abundance of these small shops that can do it for less. They pay no benefits and pay less than minimum wage. And variousPICHEY: Could you just mention what the union wage is versus what non-unionsCOWELL: Union wage is about six dollars an hour now. The minimum wage is now $3.35 an hour, which has not gone up since Reagan came into office. It's extraordinarily low. And the minimum wage sets the, basically sets the wage for non-union but nonsweatshop workers. They'll earn $3.35-$4. And then sweatshops are basically as low as they can get. $1.50 an hour is not uncommon. The other big difference is that union workers have benefits. They get a small pension. They get basic health and welfare benefits, insurance, health insurance, a drug plan. They're not luxurious. They don't have dental. They've all sorts of little things they don't have but it’s basic health plan. Non-union and the sweatshop sector have no benefits. In the sweatshop sector they don't even get unemployment compensation or workers comp. It's really an underground economy. So it's a big difference even though union workers are very low paid. Our workers are really not too much above the poverty level, our members, but there's still a big gap between those who aren't union. And we try to keep-it's very important for us to keep standards at a decent level because that keeps the whole industry. Our members will lose jobs if that gap gets too big. So that it's always been in our interest as well as our commitment to better standards for the whole garment industry. We do that by fighting for higher minimum wage. We do that by trying to fight the sweatshop. Home work has been a very important part of that. It's something that is not very well understood but in these industries home work has always been a tool to push workers down even lower than they can be pushed in a sweatshop. [25:00] PICHEY: Now are the home workers people who work in the sweatshop and then take work home or are they at home and work is delivered to them? COWELL: They're both. Many of them work at a factory. PICHEY: And they're predominantly women. COWELL: They're all women. Never heard of a home worker who was a man. Many of them work in the factory and are forced to take work home at night either because they can't make a living on what they earn in the factory and they have to earn more or because the boss wants more production and pushes them. Often it's both. Others work only at home. They'll come in everyday pick up work, come back the next morning to deliver the work and pick up new work. PICHEY: Or it's delivered to them? COWELL: Usually they pick it up. It is delivered sometimes but most of them come in and pick it up. PICHEY: What about children? Are children ever then pressed into work in a home setting you have no control? COWELL: That's right. One of the major issues is that child labor is almost inevitable. Piece rates are so low and it's so hard to produce. And even if piece rates weren't so awful. You're sitting there and there's kids who need your attention. You've got a phone rings, someone comes to the door, a million and one things can happen. So it's this constant effort to try to make a little money. You've got a quota to meet. It's always-you know they always talk about the advocates of home work always talk about flexibility. About how women who do home work have so much flexibility. There's a quota. You've got to meet your quota. You don't meet your quota you don't get more work. So that the reality of home work is women working until two in the morning. Their kids getting involved. It's no different than it was. I know many people who grew up in families in the 20s or 30s when the whole family did home work. It's exactly the same today. It's really amazing how nothing has changed. But the Reagan administration decided that home work was fantastic. That it meant women get to stay home which is where they belong. They get to stay with their kids because they ought to. Kids shouldn't be put in child care. They don't make much money but that's okay anyway because it's so wonderful staying home that if you make two dollars an hour that's not so bad. It really fit their ideological agenda and we have spent the last eight years and it continues today. The Bush administration is continuing their intent on eliminating the regulation on home work. So it's been a really major fight. It's a tough fight because people don't understand it. The idea of free choice is so attractive in this country. I think most Americans have so little understanding of what they average blue collar worker, the average, they think thewhat the average person earns-half the people in this country live in very constrained economic circumstances. Half the families in America earn under, what is now? Twentynine thousand dollars. To live in this country on that is very difficult. And the degree of compulsion in the workplace. The degree to which people-is shocking to me. I think until I got involved in the labor movement I really didn't understand that even the better paid blue collar workers really live lives of such compulsion, of such stress. A really very modest earnings even at the upper level. PICHEY: I worked in an auto plant for a couple of years. COWELL: Did you? PICHEY: So I know what that's like. COWELL: Yeah. Yeah. And they're the ones everyone complains about. About how good they have it. PICHEY: Now let me ask you. It appears from what you're saying that the issues you've raised are not particularly women's issues. They're women's issues because your union is- the workers are predominately female. COWELL: Right. Well childcare is an issue we're very involved inPICHEY: That was what I wanted to ask. Was whether there are special either health care concerns or child care concerns that are being addressed that are particularly female issues. COWELL: Well, I think that apart from child care our priority- the priority issues for our members are probably not specifically women's issues. But we ask our members what their top priorities are. They're minimum wage, their health care, and social security. They're the basic benefit issues. Other than child care, they're really not women's issues. Our members for the most part don't relate to really specifically feminist issues. Abortion isn't too important. We're pro-choice. We're-certain segments of our membership that's pro-life but for the most part our members are pro-choice. But it's not the real issue that they face. The real issues that they face is the bread and butter issues. Child care is very important. [30:00] When we started in Chinatown, it was particularly important for our Chinese members because they come from a country, most of them come from the People's Republic of China, where child care is part of every factory and it's a right. They expect it to be there as a right. They consider it an ideal to have a child care center. They came to this country and there's nothing and it was very shocking to them. For some of our other members, there's much more reliance and almost to some degree to the younger kids a preference for the informal child care. Finding a babysitter. So that it's very, it's an important issue but it's not-it's a little more diffuse than it is for our Chinese members who are a little younger. Garment workers tend to be, partly because it's a declining industry, older. Our average age is forty-five. So that the majority of our members at this point have grown up children. But it's an important issue and we're looking for other situations where we can start daycare centers and work on child care. We work on negotiating good parental leave. We've extended our parental leave to six months. Now it's unpaid, which is difficult for our members, but at least they know they have a job. Only the disability portion of it paid. So that those sort of issues related to child care are very important. Other than that, it's not- they're more family issues than women's issues. The way our members frame those issues that we think of as women's issues are much more family issues. Pay equity is an issue because they have to support their families. Less of a sense of a feminist right to equal wage. It's an economic issue. They need a living wage. PICHEY: In terms of who runs the union, activists who are presidents of their locals and the people who work in the headquarters alongside of you, how representative are they of the membership? COWELL: Well, at the top level they're not terribly representative like most organizations. It's a fairly male dominated organization. That's changing. We have five women vice presidents out of twenty-two. Every level down the percentage gets higher. At the staff level, now there are a lot of very good bright women who are department heads or assistant department heads. When you get to the officers that are lower level managers of locals in the field, presidents of locals, much higher percentage of women. The activists, the local union presidents who work in the shops are almost all women. So I think it's, in terms of the power structure, there's no doubt that there's been inequity and sexism and all of those things and women haven't had an equal chance to rise to the top. But in terms of empowering women at a rank and file level, it's an enormously important institution. I think that sometimes we focus on top-level and the unfairness of the fact that people at the top aren't women, but for our members the union has been an incredible opportunity for them to have a community role. A lot of our members are involved in campaigns. They work in politics through the union. They get to know their representative. They become community figures of some importance. They become presidents of the PTA. They run for office. At the local level we've had members become mayors of towns. It's a very- unions really involve a lot of people and I think that college graduates who don't have a lot of contact with the labor movement have all sorts of stereotypical images. There are hundreds of thousands of activists around the country who are just rank and file workers who have had an opportunity to become leaders, to participate. And in this country, very few people really participate. You're either a professional. I'm a professional political person. My friends who aren't, who are lawyers, or doctors, or architects or whatever, for the most part don't participate in politics. It's a really, I think a tragedy. We've given up our participatory politics. It's all money. It's all professionals. You can write out your check for twenty-five dollars but other than that you don't do anything. And the people who are doing the work now, who are manning those phone booths or going door to door, an awful lot of them are union activists. We've really kept the people in politics and provided that opportunity to an awful lot of people and that's a very exciting thing about the labor movement. [35:00] PICHEY: Would you, I know you've been active in CLUW, the Coalition of Labor Union Women. Would you talk a little bit about your activities with them? COWELL: I've been a member of CLUW since a couple of years after I joined the ILGW. Active in the local chapter, going to conventions and what not. It's an exciting organization because it brings together women who work in so many different kinds of workplaces. It brings together construction workers who are women. It brings together flight attendants, postal workers, public employees, nurses, garment workers. It's just very exciting. It's very racially mixed. It's probably close to half Black. Maybe forty percent Black. So that's a really important segment. And age range from very young to senior citizens. It's just a very exciting organization and it's a wonderful bridge just because we're women. I think it's a wonderful bridge between the labor movement, which is still male dominated. It's still for a lot of reasons a male dominated industry. It's probably just because we're not organizing. So it's easy to organize now so that as women move into the workforce it tends to be in the area they're less well organized. It's harder for us to organize them. It's still, the labor movement as a whole, is still much more male dominated than my union is. So CLUW is a wonderful bridge between community organizations and the labor movement. I was very involved in an exciting event last May, it seemed like, I can't believe it's only this year. But May 14 in '88, CLUW sponsored what we call the American Family Celebration, which was a rally in Washington around family issues. Well, we really had two goals. One was to sort of reposition a lot of these issues as family issues. We felt that that was a good way to frame these issues in a way that made sense to working women who really perceived the issues as economic and family issues, family support issues, rather than as women's issues. It was a good bridge to bring a lot of different groups together to support an agenda which included things like pay equity, child care, and family leave but also included the economic issues of minimum wage and rights of unions to exist, basic social things like health care, social security, and that sort of thing into a broad agenda. And try to argue that these things have to go together. It doesn't make a difference to have child care if they women you're giving it to all work a minimum wage job. So a whole sort linking the child care with welfare reform. You need, families need a decent income. Women are supporting families. They need to have equal earning power. So that we really wanted to have an integrated view of what people need in the context in which they actually live. I think that we were successful. We didn't get- you know it was a successful rally. We didn't get the sort of press attention that we had hoped for but I think that we did help frame the issues in a lot of circles. Certainly in labor circles we may have had a tremendous impact and in a lot of other ways we did a lot of coalition building. PICHEY: I know that CLUW use to be very active in the fight for the E.R.A. COWELL: Yeah. Oh yeah. PICHEY: It's taken up a lot of otherCOWELL: No, we've always had- very strong on feminist issues but we really wanted to make that bridge to say these aren't just women's issues. We wanted to really show that everyone had a stake in it. The other thing we wanted to do is really to get the rank and file activists involved. And to give them an opportunity, the women, the rank and file women in the local unions, an opportunity to say to the male leadership, 'this is our activity. We want to organize it. We want your support.' And so we had- we turned out from the labor movement about forty thousand people and that involved an enormous number of-when you think of the number of buses that takes with fifty people on a bus. Each of those was a group of women in a local union somewhere that is basically the Northeast. [40:00] Basically did well in Michigan, industrial Mid-west, throughout Pennsylvania, New York, whatever. All these women in women's committees or who just were the only small group of women even within male dominated unions who went to their leadership and said, 'this is an activity. It's not just a women's activity. It's important for all of us. It's endorsed by the A.F.L.C.I.O. We want you to spend a thousand dollars to send a couple of buses to Washington.' And it was a really empowering kind of experience for people. I think we really had an impact on the labor movement. I think that was, for us, a very exciting thing. People were really moved by it. They felt they came to Washington and the next day we got all our activists together and they said, 'you know we really did it. We never thought we could do it. We never thought we could get people to do things.' The turnout was very exciting. PICHEY: I have one sort of just general question about organizing workers abroad. Since you're involved with an international organization and I think, for example, of the women in Korea, which is a big garment center. Or Taiwan. But I was just curious as to whether you're personally involved with any of that or whether the union is. COWELL: Well, we're international in the sense that we're Canada, the U.S., and Puerto Rico. I think when the ILGW was founded it was in a period of socialist fervor. It was 1900. It was founded by Italians and Jews, who were-the Jews were Socialist. The Italians were anarchists. They were very ideological and I think they thought it would be an international organization and all the workers of the world would unite. It hasn't turned out that way and unions have become very nationalistic throughout the world. Each country wants their own labor movement. They wouldn't accept- and they shouldn't- accept American interference. We try to give support. We obviously, it's obviously in our interest and part of our principles that workers everywhere should organize. Our ability to do very much about it is limited. We try to do strike support. We try to help with training. Help with a certain amount of financial support. A lot of unions don't want American financial support. Understandably a lot of distrust of the United States. So ultimately we are very aware that a protectionist strategy ultimately can't work. And that ultimately the solution is a redistribution of wealth but until every worker can afford to buy the products they produce you're never going to solve the problem. There's simply an excess of people in the world who can produce goods but they're only selling them in the developed markets. Every country in the world can make garments for the U.S. market. The market is not big enough. Even if the U.S. industry went out of existence, there are enough third world countries out there to compete with each other. They could all undermine each other until- which is what they're doing. In Korea, now, workers are overpaid. They're told they have to- they're either paid too much. They can't compete anymore. So the work is moving into China. It's moving out of Hong Kong, which is now too high, to China it's moving to Indonesia, which is much lower. To Sri Lanka. It's starting to move to Central America. And in every country the bosses say the same thing they say to our members, 'you have to take less because someone else will work for less.' It's always been-we fight. In some ways, we fight our rear guard action. We believe we need less competition in this industry. Competition is sort of a code word in this country. We all love it since the late 70s. Competition can be very scary. When you're competing over labor rights, there's no bottom in the world and it's at a worldwide level. So that we've got to find ways to establish minimums throughout the world, establish basic standards that no one can violate. We've got to protect workers from having to compete with each other. We support market sharing because there's no way American workers can compete with the third world and Korean workers shouldn't have to compete with Sri Lankan workers. They should have the opportunity to raise their living standards. And if they don't, they won't develop their own markets and we'll never have a world market big enough to buy the goods that people are capable of producing. [45:00] We're very aware of the big picture. We are also aware that our responsibility is to make life better for our members who have very difficult lives. PICHEY: We're running towards the end of the tape. Let me just ask whether you have anything more that you'd like to add. Anything in particular that you'd like to say to Brown and Brown students. I know there's no more Pembrokers left. [both laugh] COWELL: Well, I hope that college students learn more about the labor movement. As difficult as the times have been for the labor movement, as much as we are still in decline, there's a lot of organizing going on. There are a lot of possibilities. I think it's essential that this country have a strong labor movement. If we're ever going to have a country that is more equal. Where people have more opportunity. And I hope that people learn more about it and some of them will lend their talents or even organize where they end up working. It's been very exciting for me and I think when I was at Brown, basically I had a set of stereotypes about the labor movement. I never in a million years would have thought that I would ever work for one of those reactionary, rear guard, patriarchal organizations. [laughs]. But it's very exciting and it's part of the fight. PICHEY: And satisfying. COWELL: It's very satisfying. Absolutely. And you can make a career of it, which is[end of part 2] [end of transcript]..