 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Today is October 22, 2007. My name is Tanya Finchum. I m with Oklahoma State University Library and we re doing a project entitled Women of the Oklahoma Legislature. Today I m with Jan Collins in south Oklahoma City. And she was in the House of Representatives, elected in 1984 and served one term. One term. Thank you very much for letting me come to your home today. Well thank you for asking me. It s been a pleasure. Let s start by having you tell us a little bit about your childhood siblings and Okay, yes. My father was in the service so we moved around a lot. I had one sister and she was eleven months younger than I was. We played twins a lot (Laughs) and got away with it, actually. We were very close. We moved a lot. I lived in fifteen towns and nine states before I was nineteen years old. I went to twelve schools in twelve years of elementary school and secondary school. It was very interesting and I got to see a lot of this country. My mother was an extreme history buff. If we were near anything that was an American memorial, we were there. It was a great education and it was a great way to meet a lot of the ethnic groups in the country. We lived in an Italian neighborhood, a Czechoslovakian neighborhood a lot of neighborhoods with a strong ethnic flavor and met people from all over the country and all over the world, really. In the service you meet a lot of even foreign born whites. It was just very interesting. I just think it was the perfect life for me. I m kind of nomadic by nature, I guess. I love going everywhere and seeing everything. 5 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins And I had a very close knit the four of us our family was very close knit and it was very nice because I always took my best friend with me, which was my sister. My parents were very supportive of anything and everything we wanted to do. They were just, I think the greatest parents you could ever have, myself. I think they were fantastic. They were a little strict but we needed the discipline, I guess. I just can t tell you what a great life it was. I loved it as a child. I mean, I really loved it. And it s been very I still feel strange about living in one place many, many years. So how long have you been in this one place? We have been in this place nineteen years. Okay. And that s my record. (Laughs) Well how did you come to be in Oklahoma then? My dad is from Oklahoma, so wherever we lived or wherever we were, Oklahoma and Texas my mother s home and my father s home were base. We spent all of our leaves coming home to see family. We re very large and close families. And when he retired, we moved back here. I was nineteen when he retired from the service after twenty-three twenty-two and a half years. He came back here and we came here and of course, I met my husband who is definitely an Okie. He wouldn t leave this state for anything. Although he did for his career for a short time. We actually lived in Sterling Heights, Michigan; Huntsville, Alabama; and Tulsa before coming back to the Oklahoma City area to settle down. That s a mixture too. Mm-hmm. From Michigan and Alabama. Mm-hmm. I had already lived in Alabama before I d married him. Not Huntsville, but Selma. But I was familiar with Alabama. When did you get interested in politics? I guess I was always interested in politics. I had one aunt who was very politically minded in Texas. She was an unmarried old maid, no children. All of her interest was focused in politics. And she and my dad 6 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum were opposites. He was the republican, she was the democrat. They would argue politics forever. They loved to argue and I guess I just heard about it all my life and I guess I was also kind of bossy and domineering as a child. My parents my friends always said, Yeah, she s going to grow up to be President of the United States. So I think somehow I just acquired the idea that anytime I wanted to, I could be a politician. Never actually intended to do that, it wasn t ever a positive plan for me but when my children went to school, I followed. I became a volunteer in the Oklahoma City Public Schools and with the Oklahoma PTA Parent Teacher Association and through that I got very interested in legislative action. As a result, I went down to volunteer to help in a campaign and somehow I ended up being the candidate. (Laughs) It was not my intent to do that but lacking a candidate in that area, the Republican Party just sort of said, Here, sign this and you ll be the candidate. It was weird. I not only was the candidate, I ended up winning the race against all odds. It was kind of a deal with republican coat tails Ronald Reagan coat tails, actually. I didn t really know what to do once I won. I was very startled. How did you campaign? What kind of strategy did you have? That was the strangest thing of all. The Republican Party actually did a little campaign school for us, which was very effective. Unfortunately, in the area I lived a little north of here at the time very much in the middle of the Capitol Hill area a very democratic stronghold. My register was 76 registered democrats, 21 registered republican And you won though. and 4 independent. Right. The idea was to go door-to-door. There were many neighborhoods when I tried to walk door-to-door the police would stop me and say, You should not be doing this. This is not a safe neighborhood to be walking in. There were times when I tried to reach groups I was just discounted as a candidate. So being (A) a woman and (B) a republican in a district in which you just couldn t do that. I was not invited to speak. I made three speeches. It was a very easy campaign and a very inexpensive one. But it worked well. I was very surprised when I won. In fact, so were my supporters who were all we didn t even have like, a campaign victory party planned. My husband was on-hand with hankies to console me. (Laughs) And all of us were a little bit surprised when I won. What were you doing that night, though? Were you sitting by the TV set election night or by the phone? 7 Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Oh, actually, no it s a very compact district. That was one thing the south Oklahoma City district was very compact. And so we had eleven poling precincts. We just went and picked up the results. We were just at home, kind of waiting on the results mostly family and a few friends. Nothing really big planned. We were just all sort of shocked into silence when we actually realized we had won. Then what did you do the next day? Do you remember? I don t. I don t think we did anything extraordinary. Did you have a slogan? A campaign slogan? Not in my House of Representatives race, no. Were you the first woman to win that seat? As far as we know, yes. I have not actually researched that to any degree. No one actually could ever remember a woman winning it and no one actually ever remembered a republican winning it. (Laughs) So I don t think there was ever a woman before me. And what was it like the first day you were sitting there being sworn in? Oh, sort of overwhelming. I was mostly just taking in the thing. I had actually never been in the State Capitol before that. Well, before my election. I had been down there in between that and the swearing in. But it was just awesome. I was just trying to Hold it together, huh? (Laughs) Yes, it was. I was just trying to learn all the names and faces and places and put them together and negotiate the geography of the building. Learn all of that learn how to get to my own office and back. Where was your office? At that time, it was on the fifth floor. It was the smallest office on the fifth floor and we were sharing double. At that time, there was no sixth floor on the capitol. There was no dome. No, the sixth floor was, more or less, a couple of little nooks of attic storage. We were on the south wing. I looked right out on to the little oil well which was still there at that time. We had an oil well on the capitol. I was very disappointed when they took that down. It was so distinctive to our state. Moved it over to OHC Oklahoma History Center I guess. 8 Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins I think so. So your second year, was your office still there or did it move? No, it was still in the same spot. My officemate changed. The gentleman that was my officemate the first year changed parties, became a democrat. His office moved then to the democrat side or the floor actually. They were mostly on the fourth floor. And I got a new officemate. Did you live at home? Yes, I did. You were close enough you didn t have to Yes. I had a very short drive to the Capitol, actually only about nine miles. Describe a typical day then. A typical day we usually started in the morning with committee meetings. I usually had one, maybe two. We used the mornings a lot to make the rounds to go visit with each other and see what legislation was coming up and everybody s views on certain legislation, what we were going to deal with that day. Session usually started after lunch, usually at one and was usually over by four or five at which time we debated a lot. That was mostly the formal part of it. Evenings I usually stayed until about nine or ten reading bills. Originally, when I first went in there, they do a nice orientation for freshman legislators and we were kind of instructed to find friends on different committees. The committees look at the bills in more depth. And we were kind of instructed to get friends on every committee make friends with someone we trusted on every committee to learn how we wanted to vote on certain legislation. Unfortunately, that was a good piece of advice that I failed to take. I thought I had to read every bill. I really tried to read every single bill and so I would stay late very often reading bills. There were many days that I didn t. In the early part of the session, most of the special interest groups will try to get you to come to a dinner or a meeting or something just to get to know you and you get to know them. I went to some. I was sort of advised that it s a good idea to go the first year and then thereafter you can skip it because you ll know who they are and what they are saying and who you trust and who you don t trust and whose advice you want 9 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins to take. I tried to go to a few. I didn t go to a lot. How early would you get there in the morning? Usually between 7:30 and 8:00. Did you bring the bills home with you or you just left them at the office? Well I tried to read as many as I could there. And those that I couldn t, I would bring home. Do you remember the first one you presented on the floor? Actually, no, I never wrote a bill that got out of committee. (Laughs) Did you participate in debates then? To a degree, very seldom. I was more inclined to debate is sort of is not the primary method of passing a bill. It s usually you visit with individual legislators and Decide how you want to vote? Most people, by the time a bill comes to the floor for third reading, they have their mind made up how they re going to vote and the debate is, more or less, just a presentation. We often went office to office just visiting on certain bills, you know. You go ask someone who maybe had an expertise in that area. Maybe if it was an insurance bill, you would go visit one of the this was the thing, we had 101 legislators. With 101 representatives, you have a good opportunity that every area is going to be represented by somebody who can tell you something very specific about that area and what the good points and the bad points are. You want to try to put in an amendment or anything or if you want to do that. I tended to rely more on what I read then on what I was told. Were you on committees? I was. Which ones, do you remember? Yes, I was on Education. Which makes sense. I was on the one I really remember which was really strange was 10 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins having a brain glitch here elections it was concerned with elections. Normally, everything that would go through this committee would be procedures for voting, procedures for registering voters, all of these sorts of things. We had about five or six bills on those topics the first year I was there and not one came through our committee. They were all assigned to a different committee. And I was very surprised. I could not understand why these were not being assigned to our committee. There were only three representatives on that committee and not having looked for a prejudice against us, I was very surprised to find that we were all three well, we were two republicans and one democrat and this was a strongly democratic legislature. I was very surprised to find that the Speaker did not assign those bills to us simply for the reason that the democrat side would not be the majority vote. Interesting. Were there other women on that particular committee? No, it was two men and myself. How many other women served with you? Eight. There were eight in the House? Eight in the House. There were four republicans and four democrats. We were evenly matched. Did you do much socializing with them either throughout the day or after? Some, I wouldn t say a great deal. I don t think any of us actually changed our social life because of the legislature too much. Our friendships we were very cooperative and helpful. One of them is back in the legislature that served with me and that s now I m having a Rebecca Hamilton? Rebecca Hamilton, yes. I served with her and I understand she is back in the legislature and I understand doing a fine job. She was a great researcher a very concerned woman at the time and I think she still is. Did you notice any different treatment for the women or was being in the minority party more of an impact? Being in the minority party was more of an impact. I did not notice a great deal of discrimination against us as women. One thing I did notice 11 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum is we didn t get invited to the drinking parties. (Laughs) They might have gotten a little rowdy and maybe for some reason that was a normal prejudice but there were a lot of the legislators met and talked in bars after work. And we didn t get invited to that too often. Sometimes, but not too often. Maybe we just turned that down too often, I don t know. Do you have a favorite campaign story? Actually, that campaign was so brief, it seemed to me it wasn t brief, it was long in time, but it was brief in actual things. One of the things that actually surprised me was that so many of the organizations, like the Elks Club and the Lion s Club and those that candidates usually go and speak to didn t want me to come and speak. It wasn t that they were like openly hostile. They just wouldn t set aside a time for me to speak. I was very surprised at the South Side Chamber of Commerce, I spoke there once. I only made three campaign speeches in that whole campaign, believe it or not. I spoke at the South Side Chamber of Commerce and was later told that certain legislators would never speak on the same podium with me again. I didn t think I was that hostile, but maybe I was. (Laughs) I spoke at the Shideler-Wheeler Community Center and one other group. That was a lot of military retirees and I can t remember exactly who sponsored that. But anyway, I was very surprised at the number of people who just didn t even consider a republican candidate. It was the party more than the Yes, it was the party more than the gender issue. I didn t feel that much gender difference. Was it that same way the second time you ran? Did you have that, that kind of reception? Yes, mm-hmm. I really did. And I m not the world s greatest campaigner. I m not crazy about door-to-door campaigning because it kind of annoys me and I kind of think it s annoying. So do mailers? I did and I did not have a lot of money. In fact, we always laughed the campaign school that the republicans sponsored said we would need to raise between 10,000 and 12,000 for these campaigns. I actually spent 2,999.61. I always said if I d had another thirty-nine cents, I could have a 3,000 campaign. (Laughs) But I didn t make that. How much did you do the second time around? 12 Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Oh, I don t remember. Do you know that I still have my ethics commission reports, though? So I could probably go find out. But it was more at that point. When you become an incumbent, you have a lot more access to funding. I ve learned that. What is your favorite memory in the House when you were in the House serving? Oh, gosh. It would have to be the opportunity to have lunch with Ronald and Nancy Reagan. How did that come about? At that time Maureen Reagan, Ronald Reagan s daughter, was very, very busy pushing the women s agenda throughout the world. We were having those African conferences and everything else. The International Year of the Woman and all that and she wanted all female legislators to get the opportunity to meet her dad. So she was kind of arranging wonderful briefings. I mean we got a briefing from every single department at the federal level. She wanted to help all local legislators, especially to meld our agendas with the federal agendas in healthcare and a little bit ahead of her time, actually, on homeland security. At the time they called it emergency management or whatever, you know weather related and other emergencies, too weather and emergency management. She was concerned about the possibility of external struggle. I don t think she ever mentioned Iraq particularly. She was a little concerned about Iran, even back then. She was a little concerned about North Korea back then and China. That we possibly could be in a defensive posture soon. She wanted everybody to know and to try to get the states as involved as the federals in homeland security and housing education welfare programs, how to take over Medicare, Medicaid, the difficulties that we all saw coming in financing those. And just to talk to her father about his agenda. I think she really wanted to influence his agenda more than ours. (Laughs) But anyway, she did arrange for female legislators from almost every state to come and have lunch with the Reagan s. We were in groups of 60 to 75. In D.C.? Uh-huh in the White House small dining room. It was very impressive. Actually impressive. I spent a lot of time watching the waiters. They were as choreographed as a ballet chorus and it was unbelievable. It was just unbelievable. It was just an overwhelming experience. It is very formal and it s very organized. Orchestrated is probably the more correct 13 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins word. Anyway, it was very enjoyable. Did you get to shake his hand or Oh yes, I got to shake his hand Brief conversation? Brief conversation actually you know, every table had a cabinet member at it. We were in tables of eight and every table had a cabinet member sitting there. At my table, I had Haley Barbour who is currently the Governor of Mississippi. He was political director for the Reagan White House and he wanted to sit by me because he wanted to ask me questions about Don Nichols s re-election. And the next table over was Nancy Reagan and we could actually lean over and talk to Nancy. We were a little farther away from Ronald but it was supposedly a draw thing how you get in there. And I actually missed one of the briefings because I couldn t get in. I don t know if you noticed on my sheet, but I don t go by my first name. I go by my middle name. Okay. So when I presented my driver s license for security clearance, I was listed as Jan Collins and my driver s license says Elna J. I had a little trouble getting in the door for security reasons. So I missed one of the briefings and I was just surprised I got to get in. It seemed to be a big problem there and since we gave our social security numbers and our IDs and everything else but it was a memorable day. I was very surprised. I had to wait until they changed the badge to put my name right. Was there a piece of legislation that you really wanted to push through and just couldn t quite get it done? Yes, there was. There were, actually, two. I have a big problem with some of the retirement bills. I thought it was highly unfair that a teacher who has taught in the public schools and becomes a politician or a legislator can stay in two retirement systems. Many of them are making more in retirement than they made serving, you know. I thought that was a little unfair since we don t offer that opportunity to any other career. So I really wanted to kind of adjust that. I felt like that was a little unfair. And I was hoping to be able for servicemen to somehow shorten the timelines on the election process of the absentee ballot. They had to request an absentee ballot. I think it s like ninety days before the 14 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum election. They had to have it back in forty-five days before the election. I think that has been adjusted since then. But it was not adjusted during my term. We tried to get that timeline a little shorter. People serving in a war zone or a foreign country really don t think about that local election that far ahead. And with today s mail service, I think it would be real easy to do that. One other thing I have always felt like is that we have way too many boards and commissions. We have way too many county employees. That sounds crazy but for one who was a county commissioner later, but Oklahoma historically set up counties to be within a one day horseback ride. It was communications and the transportation all counties we don t need seventy-seven counties now. We really only need four. We need to, you know, I had hoped to divide the state down I-35 and I-40 and make four counties and that would save us something like, 197 county commissioners. Instead of seventy-seven county clerks, we could have four instead of seventy-seven. And that s very doable. And school districts are like that too, right? Yes, yes. We need county consolidation and we need we have an excess amount of bureaucracy for things that due to transportation and telecommunications increases, we can easily do and would eliminate a lot of overhead. Did you have a mentor? Would it have been your aunt or someone different? A role model that helped while you were in the House or to get you to the House? Umm, I didn t really. I had several that helped and I had a lot of people who took an interest strangely and helped. Al Snipes was very, very helpful. The chairman of the Republican Party was very helpful, Nancy Apgar at the time. But mostly, it was my dad. My dad and my husband, they were very supportive and they re very logical men. They re very logical, they re very down-to-earth. They were very helpful at just keeping me right on course. While you were working late till nine o clock I guess your husband became a good cook or learned how to call for pizza? (Laughs) Actually yes, he s always been very self-sufficient. I wouldn t say he cooks. He s more inclined to have some sausage and cheese or something like that. He loves peanut butter sandwiches. And he could subsist on Braum s hamburgers. Children were around back then, too. 15 Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Yes. He s always been very, very good with the children very, very happy to be with them. He s always a great dad and a very supportive husband. He s wonderful. I was reading when I went through the newspapers looking for information about this that you were for the Right-to-Work? Oh, yes. Well that was an active, very active campaign at that time. And yes, we were unsuccessful for several years. But here again, my mother s family were union organizers and they really had a point. You know, the unions had a great point. But almost like every good idea, they kind of got overboard. The unions kind of got to the point where the unions were tyrannical. I thought they were driving a lot of jobs out of Oklahoma. Actually they were driving a lot of production out of the whole country. So I was for Right- to-Work because I thought we should get a balance back. It s a shame that people always have to go overboard. They got to the point where they were taking more from the workers the unions were taking more from the workers than they were providing. And they became top-heavy with management and everything else. I just saw so much of that and having gone back and forth, trying to get the balance there, I was just very much in favor of right to work because it was killing the state. Construction and government contracts were just going crazy. You had to work for the government in Oklahoma or you couldn t afford to eat because they were the major pushers of inflation. So now we have Right- to-Work. We could use a little more balance now we need some union things back, maybe. (Laughs) I m not sure. And then there was something about House Bill 1114, something to do with gun control. I don t remember that one. Well, I remember the bill. Yes, I remember the bill and it did pass. The primary point of it I don t remember having any controversy over it. The primary point of that bill as I recall was just that cities and counties could not restrict firearm carrying anymore than the state. That was kind of to protect gun owner s rights from being overly restricted by counties and cities and that was the only point. I remember that and I don t remember a lot of controversy about it. One that I remember controversy about I kind of like controversy. I got a lot of criticisms for a lot of no votes but I very strongly feel that government doesn t need to be in about two-thirds of the areas it s in. People can handle that and I don t think government should handle anything that people can handle without government, which is most everything. And I remember one that for some reason seemed 16 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins controversial to a lot of people. It didn t to me, but we have coal mines in Oklahoma and there was a bill to give a 5 tax credit, I believe it was, to Oklahoma coal which is pretty high sulfur actually over Wyoming coal. It was aimed, I m sure, at OG E Oklahoma Gas Electric and ONG Oklahoma Natural Gas and the utility plants. I voted against that and I think I was the lone no vote. I think a lot of the legislators thought we should give the in-state coal companies the boost. I felt like that was a free market issue. I prefer that my utility company buy the best coal at the cheapest price. So I remember some controversy over that. The one vote that I d have to say that I regret is voting for the Ethics Commission. Were you for it? No. I actually intended to vote against it. I voted for it more as a favor to Helen Cole and certain other legislative friends who really believed that it would be a great help. I don t feel that it s made a difference. I feel that it s created a new bureaucracy that is very selective in what it looks at and I think the people are the ethics commission. I think voters are the ethics commission. I think we should require our voters to know who and what they are voting for. Were you the deciding vote? No, oh no. They wanted it to be unanimous. That was the whole point. It was very important to some people that it be unanimous, particularly Helen Cole. And Helen had been very helpful to me and I felt like I wasn t going to win this vote. There was no way I was going to win it so I could make it unanimous for Helen and some other people to whom it was very dear. I thought they were misguided but it couldn t hurt. That was my one compromise vote. I generally didn t compromise. Did she return the favor at some point? No. No? I don t think I ever asked her to. I wouldn t ask someone to vote against their better judgment. What have you done since leaving office? Ran another campaign of some sort? Yes, about, I guess it was four years after I left office, some people came to me and asked me to run for county commissioner down here. We had 17 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins a problem with the commissioner in this area. And some of the gentlemen that were very involved from Norman came up and asked me if I would run. I really wasn t too eager to do that, either, but there was a reason I needed to do that. Now that was kind of a gender based issue. We had a little sexual harassment going on down there with our county commissioner and a lot of people really felt that a woman would be the answer. So when I found about twenty women asked me to run county employees I did choose to run and I did win. I was very surprised again. That was a hot and heavy race too. Although this area was pretty much evenly split, at least registration-wise. But there were two male candidates and I in the primary and there were four male candidates on the other side the democrat side. Were you the first woman to hold that slot? I wasn t the first county commissioner in Cleveland County that was a woman. There was one in the seventies. The second one? Mm-hmm. Has there been one since? I don t think so. At the time I was county commissioner, there were three female county commissioners in this state. And one was from Stillwater, actually. One was from Stillwater, one in Oklahoma County and one here in Cleveland County. So I thought that was kind of interesting that the two university counties would have one female commissioner. How long was that office? I held that office from well I was elected in 90, took office in 91 through 95. Four year term? Yes, it s a four year term. Then what? Well, right after that Governor Keating appointed me to the Housing Commission. I was a trustee on the Oklahoma Housing Finance Agency for seven years. My daughter and I had a little business for a while, a short time. We kind of say we can t actually stay in business too much 18 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum because every time she opens a business something drastic happens. The first business she opened was followed very shortly by the Oklahoma City Bombing. This business we opened down here was followed very shortly by 9/11. We re afraid to do anything, it s catastrophic. (Laughs) My daughter, who is very, very talented, had a dance studio. She s a licensed attorney. She was working for a major corporation as an attorney. She had a private practice. She had the dance studio and she had this little specialty clothing wear job for cheerleading and dance ware. Then she became pregnant first child. And she said, Uh, I m going to give you the business, Mom, and I m going to close the dance studio and get out of the private practice so I ll have time for this baby. I said, No, not quite. While you re at your law office, I will be attending that baby. My first and only grandchild. So we gave up that business and I kept my granddaughter ever since love it. Do you think your daughter aspires to go into politics? No, I think she s very, very opposed to being in politics herself. She s an excellent attorney and an excellent researcher and she s got a very good job and a wonderful future. Did she come to the Capitol to see you in action any? Actually she did and she even came down and was a page for me at one time. Yes. She was fifteen, I believe and my son was you had to be fourteen to be a page. My son was never a page for me because he was too young, he was thirteen. But he was a page later. They both enjoyed it. Well who knows. You didn t think about it until later. No, I didn t think about it in fact, I never actually had that as a goal. It was never a goal. (Laughs) It just happened. Did you take government in high school? Oh yes. A lot of history and a lot of civics, government courses. And the PTA. Yes and the PTA. You get very involved and you spend a lot of time down at the legislature. And I was a stand-by substitute teacher for the schools. And I was the treasurer for the PTA state-wide PTA. So the education bills that came through were probably 19 Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Probably the strongest for me, yes. I had worked and my husband worked for IRS Internal Revenue Service and so I had actually asked to be on Revenue and Taxation, which they did not assign me to. The Speaker did not want me on Revenue and Taxation, but I had a lot of knowledge in that area so I got to be a little influential anyway on some of those bills. What was your last day in office like? Oh, well your last day in office of course is not during session. Yes, the session is not in at that point. But when you didn t win re-election, then what? Do you go back and collect your things from your office? Or when the session is over, do you clear stuff out of your office? Actually, you can do it either way. You can clear it out or you actually still serve until the next person is sworn in, which is like in January just before the start of the next session. Well no, they re sworn in, in November. We were sworn in right after we were elected. I was sworn in on November 21 or 22. So yes, you have two or three weeks if you want to go down and get your things you can. If you don t, you actually serve until they re sworn in. I think I had some constituent work that I did in that period of time, but very little. So I just kind of cleared my office and left. Did you have your own secretary or administrative assistant? Administrative assistant, secretary actually, we shared a secretary. So the two of you had one? The two of us in one office shared one. Although, all the secretaries were very helpful all up and down the floor. I can remember several times I would be there at 9 or 10, 8 or 9 at night and I m a horrid typist just a terrible, terrible typist. At that time, we didn t have computers in the office. We had typewriters. And I would be down there going click, click, click and another secretary one of the secretaries was always working late. They would come from down the hall and say, Can I do that for you? (Laughs) It was just amazing. They would always they could hear me a block away typing and know it was me and come and get my work and type it up for me. Was it safe leaving the Capitol at that time of night? At nine o clock at night? 20 Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Usually yes. There was always a Capitol guard around to ask us if we were leaving to walk us to our car. Parking places were assigned too? Yes, they were. And I had another female legislator Sue Milton, a friend there, who was often there with me. She was there that late a lot. There were quite a few women in there at one time. That s a pretty good group. It was a good group. There were twenty-nine republicans and that was the most republicans that had been in the legislature since 1921. And there were was it ten women? Eight women? I was thinking it was eight, but it was ten wasn t it? The way I have it counted there are ten. Yes, that s right. There were ten six democrats and four republicans. And we were all very nice and very friendly fairly friendly. (Laughs) We disagreed a lot on political issues. Did you have to have a new wardrobe? Yes, I did. (Laughs) Yes, I did. You know, you don t wear blue jeans. (Laughs) I actually didn t wear that many blue jeans but I did wear casual clothes mostly. I had not been working for a couple of years when I ran and had to start over. (Laughs) Two or three-piece suits. People said it was very cold in there. It was. We would nearly freeze to death, especially in the back rows. I never made it past the back row. That s a status thing in the legislature. You start in the back row as the freshman and you work your way to the front, the higher your seniority and your status in the House, the closer you are to the front. And I never got off the back row. (Laughs) That s where the cold really was. I believe it s very warm when you get up to the front. Was there a Mouth of the House your freshman year? A Mouth of the House? I ve heard about the Mouth of the House I don t know if they do it every year 21 Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Yes, there was. I don t remember who it was. I m thinking it might have been Male or female? It was a male. I m thinking it might have been Dale Patrick, I m not sure, (Laughs) who was my officemate. Oh, he spoke enough for both of you then, huh? He Dale Patrick did. And he had a beautiful voice. I have to say I didn t care anything at all for his brain. But he had the most beautiful voice. You could listen to him forever. (Laughs) We had four beautiful voices. I can remember that there were four men that I just loved for them to get up and debate something because their voices were so mellifluous. They were beautiful. Who were the other three then? They were Frank Davis, Frank Harbin, and Mike Lawter. They practiced a lot? I hated to hear myself. I ve always hated to hear myself on tape because of the twang and such a horridly tinny voice. But they had beautiful, deep, resonant just beautiful voices. I didn t always like to hear what they said. I just liked to hear how they said it. Who swore you in? Do you remember? It s usually a justice isn t it? Yes. Another glitch, huh? Another glitch, yes. You know we did have a swearing-in ceremony and it was a Supreme Court Justice. Of course my favorite justice was always Marian Opala and I don t believe it was him. I may be wrong but I m thinking that it may have been Alma Wilson. A female? A female. There were two female Supreme Court Justices when I was there. That was something. People ask us a lot if we experienced a great deal of prejudice because we were women. Oh, we got a few jokes and a few remarks but they were never malicious or even really serious. They were just humor. I think that there was a tendency by most of the men to 22 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins treat us a little gently, courtly at first and then when they found out we were pretty determined they just said okay, here we go when they found out we were as bound and determined as they were. I do remember that Nancy Virtue and Rebecca Hamilton had some women s issues that they seemed to sponsor legislation on. Other than that, I remember that the women pretty much sponsored the same kind of legislation the men did. They pretty much debated the same way. And we were pretty much treated like the men, except as I said for the parties. We weren t invited out to the bars all that much. Maybe some of the others were. Maybe it was just me because I said, No, I m going home. When you weren t doing your homework and you had time for fun, what would you do? Usually the same thing I did before I went into the House. I went and visited with the family No hobbies? had dinner and lunch with the family. I took my daughter to dance. That s a hobby enough. That s a pretty good hobby right there. I played with the kids and pretty much that. I didn t really have any serious, strong hobbies. I had a lot of family here and I felt lucky to have them here and I visited with them every chance I got that s what we did. How many of that group showed up for your swearing in? Could you have three or four people or could you have as many as you want? Oh, as many as you want. And yes, I had several. I m trying to think. My family and my parents were there. I m trying to think who else. I think we took the kids out of school and took them. It s always on a Tuesday for some reason, or it was then. I think we took them out of school and took them to see it. Not that it would hurt either of them to miss school any my little geniuses. What advice you would give other females who are interested in possibly running for office? Actually, I do that a lot. It seems that a lot of ladies do ask if they re going to run or if they re interested. I tell them to, first of all, be sure that their family is supportive because it does take you away from your family a lot. You need to know that they re behind you and that you 23 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins aren t going to damage a family relationship. You don t want to do that. You also need to know where you stand on the issues. You need to know what you want to accomplish. I didn t when I went into the House. I really had some narrow ideas of what I could do. It will broaden your outlook to find out how much government is involved in, my goodness. Everything, they ve got their hands in everything. And you need to know what you want to do and you need to know what your limits are. You need to know how much you want to give, I guess. I do tell them a lot when you are running, make sure that the campaign runs on your agenda and not on somebody else s. Because you ve got to fulfill it once you re in there. Don t make promises you can t keep. How did the media play into that? Actually the media didn t cover me at all. (Laughs) So I didn t have a media problem. Okay, easy answer then. About the only thing I can think of is that, you know, to the victors go the spoils and so the democrats assigned all offices and seats and everything during my term. I guess in the first year of my term there was a special election. A legislator died and there was a special election and the gentleman who won was a republican. Well there was no office space available for him that they wanted to give him on our floor. We were kind of all crammed into two-people offices and so they cleaned out a closet, which backed up to the elevator and made a little office for this gentleman. And the media did cover this, the new legislator coming in. And I happened to be walking down the hall and they grabbed me, it was Jennifer Eve. Do you remember her? She was a newscaster here many years ago. Anyway, she grabbed me and she said, Would you just walk into this office? We want someone to say, welcome to Larry as he was coming in. I walked in there and I thought I would die. That little office I have a bigger broom closet, I think, and that elevator shaft came into the room and everything else. I couldn t open the door because the desk took up too much room to actually open the door wide. And I just started laughing, I just really got tickled. (Laughs) It was no lady-like laugh. I was just guffawing actually and they did treat me nicely then. They did not put that on camera. She was photographing it but they didn t actually run it. When they ran the piece they left out my (Laughs) ridiculous reaction. So I was grateful for that. 24 Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Finchum Collins Well, is there anything else that I need to ask that I haven t? Anything else you want to be sure that gets covered? No, I can t really think of anything. It was kind of an interesting year. I mean, I really enjoyed it. Then my last question usually is, when history is written about you, what would you like for it to say? I guess just that I served as honestly and as nobly as I could. That will do it, won t it? Well thank you very much for your time. It s been a pleasure. Well thank you. I really enjoyed talking to you. --- ---..