 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Today is January 9, 2008. My name is Tanya Finchum, and I m with the Oklahoma State University Library and we re conducting an oral history project called Women of the Oklahoma Legislature. I m here in Tulsa, Oklahoma to talk with Pam Peterson, who was elected to the Oklahoma House of Representatives in 2004 and re-elected in 2006. Thank you for joining us today. Thank you. Let s start by having you tell us a little about your childhood and then we ll work forward. All right. I was born in New York City and lived there until I was eighteen when I came out to school here to Oral Roberts University (ORU) in Tulsa, Oklahoma. I quickly fell in love with Tulsa and Oklahoma and I thought, I really think I d like to stay here. I grew up in a home that was very active politically as far as citizen involvement. My parents weren t elected officials or anything, but I learned early on that our freedoms are to be protected and we need to be involved. That s how our system was set up. I was raised to, Support the candidate that shares your values and your principles and work for them. So I started working in campaigns at the age of twelve. Oh my. I was knocking on doors at twelve, and then in my late forties when I ran for myself, I was still knocking on doors. It was just part of growing up and part of my family. We had many discussions about politics around the dinner table. I lived in a suburb of New York City and had access to the waterfront and it was a very suburban area. It was a nice place to grow up and yet had access to go to Broadway shows before they were 50- 60 dollars a ticket. They were 8 dollars a ticket and sometimes I d 5 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson get front-row seats. So I grew up in that kind of environment exposed to a lot of things in arts and actually had a real love for drama and singing. My mom sang on the radio, on a national radio show, in the 1940 s. She has a great singing voice and taught me to sing. We even performed in hospitals at times when I was a child, USO type shows. So I grew up with that part of me, too, just involved in theater, school plays, community theater. Then I came out to ORU and I was a communications major in telecommunications and worked in the television area at ORU when they were producing their shows. My senior year, the highlight for me in drama was I was Eliza Doolittle in My Fair Lady. That was a really wonderful part to have and a great memory. Did you have siblings? I have one brother. Older or younger? He s younger than me, and he s living in another state, unfortunately. I m very proud of him. He served in the Marine Corps for four years and he s a great brother. In high school did you run for class officer or anything like that? You know, that s interesting. Most people, I find out, have that kind of background. I really didn t. Bigger pictures. Yes, I guess because that was really fun for me and I thought, I can really make a difference in the real world. And I was more involved in theater when I was in high school, as far as the school life there. The one interesting race that might be of interest when Bobby Kennedy was assassinated, he was the U.S. Senator, of course, from New York. That was 1968 and in 1970, there was a U.S. Senate race to replace his seat and it was a very interesting race. I m a republican, but in the New York area they had a conservative party, and the conservative party candidate was James Buckley, who was the brother to Bill Buckley. I worked in his campaign, walked the streets, worked in the campaign office. I was just fifteen years old 1970 and I just had the best time. We had a watch party at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, and Buckley won. That was one of the most exciting campaigns that I was involved in because it truly was an underdog race and yet we won. It was just exhilarating and 6 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson I think I really got the political bug after that campaign. Did you get to visit him in D.C. while he was in the Senate? You know, I didn t. I was just focused on school and went off to college here in Tulsa. Why Tulsa? I wanted a liberal arts Christian school that was liberal arts. I came out to visit ORU and just fell in love with it fell in love with the people. It just was a great place and is a great place. I just knew that this was where I needed to be. And after your degree, what did you do? I got married a few months after my graduation, and my husband was off to medical school at the University of Minnesota. So we lived up in Minneapolis, and I worked for a TV station in the Twin Cities area and also did some television commercials and industrial type films. I worked a little bit for 3M and General Mills and some bank commercials. It was fun and helped pay the bills a little bit. And then you moved back here? Well, we had a few more detours. We had residency went back to New York for that. And then we lived in Wisconsin for a couple of years prior to coming back here. We always really loved both of us loved Tulsa, and I think that was always our goal to try to get back and raise our family here. It s a great place but as you know, with training and schooling, you don t always get to pick where you re living. So then we lived a few years in Madison, Wisconsin. Madison is the capital and a university town. I would read the paper every day and I d say, Oh, we ve got to do something about this. I just was always so moved every time I d read or listen to the radio, and I thought, You know, this is a small enough town that I think people can get involved and make a difference. Well, Concerned Women for America came to town and they needed someone to kind of keep tabs on things happening at the Capitol in Madison. Not a paid position, strictly volunteer, so I did that and I got to testify before committees and learn about legislation and little did I know that I d be running for office in the future here in Oklahoma. But it gave me great perspective and in fact, I got to know Senator Russ Feingold through the process. He was my state senator. I was also appointed by Governor Tommy Thompson to a task force on family and children which was 7 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson great experience for what I am doing today. And then bring us up to the point where you decided to run. Okay. Well, when I came back to Oklahoma I got involved in the Republican Party. I think my first campaign was with Senator Nickles. I volunteered for him in 92 and then helped Jim Inhofe and Steve Largent and just tried to do what I could to help good candidates win elections. I also was a national delegate in 92 to the Republican National Convention in Houston, Texas. I became 1st Congressional District vice-chairman in the party and I became Tulsa County Republican Chairman in 2003. So those were interesting experiences all volunteer. Those volunteer jobs take a lot of time. I really enjoy working with people and meeting new people and so I had a good experience. Representative Hopper Smith decided to vacate his seat in the state House and fulfill his duties as Lieutenant Colonel in the National Guard. He left his seat in September 2003 to serve his country in Afghanistan. He said, I m gonna go if my men are gonna go. I just really admired him for that a great American, great statesman. And so his seat was vacated at that point. I had been very politically active and a few people said, Well, why don t you run for that? And I said, Well, I hadn t even thought about it, at the moment. I took some time. I counseled with my husband, family and friends, and prayed about it. I really didn t want to step out if this is something that I wasn t supposed to do or God didn t want me to do it. So I took a little bit of time there thinking about it and decided, Well, okay, what s the worst that can happen? I ll lose. (Laughs) And I ll still go back to my family and my friends and they love me so it s not that big of a risk, really. So I ll just go for it. So I did, and I had three other opponents. Male, female? Male opponents, and I won. It was a special election on January 13, 2004. I won with sixty-eight percent of the vote. I just was so grateful. It s a very humbling experience, running for office like that and putting your name out there and knocking on doors and asking people for their vote. It was a great experience and I m just honored to be in the state legislature. Did you have a campaign manager? I did. It was someone who was a good friend of mine that helped me. It was really kind of a grassroots campaign, knocking on doors. You ve 8 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson probably heard that from the other folks. That s what you have to do. You have to knock on those doors. I had some very good people who endorsed me, which was helpful in my mail pieces. Do you have a favorite story from the campaign trail? Oh, a favorite story, oh goodness. No, nothing really stands out to me other than well, it s kind of interesting. My daughter turned eighteen and she voted for the first time in that special election. Yours. was mine. So her very first vote was cast for me. (Laughs) That s pretty neat. So that s kind of a fun story I like to tell. When you ran for re-election, was that a little bit different than running for Well, I haven t had an opponent since that first run so the way it is, if you file and if nobody else files, you re automatically in, so Has any other female held the seat from the district? Well, actually Joan Hastings had 67, but it was a different configuration at that time. We ve really grown south in Tulsa. Considerably. Right. So it s a little different lines, but I think she actually held House District 67. During session do you live here or live in Oklahoma City? I live in Oklahoma City with another female rep. We have an apartment for those four months. And so describe a typical day. How early do you get up and get there? You know, people say describe a typical there is no typical day. I ve yet to see a typical day. You may have it planned out, a typical day, but I guarantee you it s not gonna be the way you ve mapped it out. It just doesn t happen that way. There are things that are changing up there at the Capitol on a minute by minute basis. The Senate might do something 9 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum and then you re gonna have to caucus and reconfigure. Everything is in a flux, I guess. So it s not a typical day, but you go to the Capitol Monday through Thursday during session, the first Monday in February to the last Friday in May, and that s our session. I come home on the weekends and those are treasured times. (Laughs) Yes. Do you live where you come down Lincoln Boulevard toward the Capitol? Yes, every day just to see that building and think, Wow, I have an office there. It s very humbling, and it s an awesome feeling. Well, talk a little bit about your swearing-in day. My swearing-in day. Well, because it was a special election, I was the only one. So I had the privilege of inviting my family and friends and could fill the chamber if I wanted. (Laughs) We have a great video of that because I had family and friends there just in the chamber as opposed to the normal swearing-in where 101 of us are taking the oath together at our desks with just family and friends in the gallery above. So it was a really special event. Chief Justice Jim Winchester swore me in. Of course, his wife served with me in the State House, Susan Winchester, and so that was special. It was just a great day. Did you have a watch party? I had a watch party at my house, yes, and it was just a blur, I guess you could say. A lot of people came and some of the state reps from the area and some of the other ones came to support me. I had Representative Fred Perry at the time, who is now County Commissioner Fred Perry, put together a board and was tallying up all the precincts as they were coming in. Sure. Where s your office in the Capitol? I m on the third floor, Room 303. Has it changed since the first Oh, yes. When I first came, I had Hopper Smith s old office on the fifth floor. And of course when I came in, we were the republicans were in the minority. Then my next session, we were in the majority. That was quite a change and so we had different offices at that time. This is my third office, and I like it. I hope I get to stay. (Laughs) You ll be doing a campaign this summer, if someone files. 10 Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Yes. All the House members are up. So if you had a special election then would you be considered a member of the freshman class for 03? Technically I guess, but I m all by myself. I say I m in a class by myself, you know. I was trying to figure out how many other women you might have come in with. I really don t. I m a little bit of a misfit in that I came in by myself, but I was very well received. I ve been very appreciative of my colleagues. So you don t get to tag along with any of the other ones? (Laughs) Well, not technically. I guess they would include me, but I usually don t get up and have my picture taken because I really didn t come in at the same time, so I m all by myself. They need to do one with special elections. (Laughs) Just me now. It used to be Fred Perry. He also came in in a special election. Do you remember the first time you presented a bill on the floor? Yes, my first time I did not have a bill because I came in in a special election. I missed the deadline so my first session I didn t introduce anything. I had to wait until the next time, but I was very proud of the next session I introduced the Unborn Victims of Violence Act, the Laci Peterson bill in Oklahoma. I was very proud of that, that we were able to recognize that unborn child as a second victim because women are subjected to a lot of violence when they re pregnant, and it s a very important bill. So I introduced that. It ended up getting enveloped in a bigger pro-life bill, but it was a neat experience to be involved in that. On the floor actually doing it though, any nerves or Oh, absolutely. Yes, it is I mean, each time you get up there and you realize everybody s watching you and you want to do it right. So, yes, there are those nerves and those jitters that, I think, probably are good. I just look at it as an opportunity to try to serve my district and make good public policy in the state of Oklahoma. I take that responsibility very seriously, so, yes, I get a little nervous. 11 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Does it get a little easier with each one? Yes, sure you get a little more comfortable with the process. Of course, we ve changed the rules that was something that happened. We had a different set of rules when I first was elected because we were in the democrat majority. Then when the republicans took over and Todd Hiatt was the first Speaker, we changed a lot of the rules. So I was really trying to learn those first set of rules (Laughs) and then we got a new set of rules then the very next time. Then they ve since been modified with our new Speaker, Lance Cargill. So, yes, you really need to learn the rules. That makes the whole process a lot easier. Sure. You were the Majority Whip? Yes, I was, under the first republican majority in eighty-three years. That was a real honor. What did that entail? Well, there are certain votes, there s things that happen kind of quickly that you want to get a pulse on your caucus, where they re at on a particular issue. The Speaker needs to know how his caucus is on a particular issue and uses the Whips to get that feedback from the members of his caucus. And talk a little bit about committees that you ve been on. Well, my first committee assignment was as chairman of the CareerTech Committee. That was a great experience because I learned a lot about that system and what a jewel it is in Oklahoma and how it s recognized worldwide. We have subcommittees now under the new leadership and regular committees, so CareerTech has been incorporated into the Higher Ed Committee and currently I serve on that committee. I chair the subcommittee on Children and Families. I also serve on Human Services and serve on the subcommittee on Criminal Justice. And I chaired last year the task force to stop sexual violence. And then out of the task force you usually come up with bills to present? Yes, and last year we came up with a bill that actually passed and is current law, which I m real pleased with, dealing with the CLEET Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training hours, the CLEET training hours, the police hours. What we found in the course of the task force was that police officers were not sufficiently trained in rape and sexual violence cases, and many times felt a little insecure going to those kinds of when they had to be called in to go to those 12 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum reports. And so we thought, Wow, we can certainly improve that system by increasing the CLEET hours for sexual violence training. So we ve got, I believe, six hours now in addition to the CLEET hours that we have for all police officers in the state. I think that s a positive change. And we tried to get a coordinating council. There s some ongoing things that we re looking at that we weren t able to implement right away, but as you know, it takes years to make changes. It s a process. It s a process, yes, and I think it s important to keep that perspective. Anything currently in the mill that you re working on that you want to talk about? Oh, yes. That s what we re in the middle of right now on our bills, and I m just trying to get them all lined up as to what we ll be actually introducing this year. Have you noticed any obstacles? To ? To just being there I mean, besides being new and having to learn the rules as they change, but being from Tulsa or being a woman or being anything Well, I m one of twelve women in the House out of a hundred-and-one which, is interesting and it s an honor in its own way, too. It s been a good experience. I think my male colleagues have been very fair with me. I can t really complain. So it s been a positive experience. Obstacles? Sometimes I do believe Tulsa gets a little shortchanged. I ve heard that several times. So we do try to stand up for Tulsa when we can, the Tulsa delegation, and I think that is a challenge plus the urban versus rural legislators. We re trying to get something passed we think is really great and the rural people think, This is gonna be awful for us and so those are challenges that are real. I guess there s a balance at some point. Yes. Trying to tip it one way or the other. 13 Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Oh, that s right. You have to learn to negotiate. That s right. I had been told to ask if you were a Girl Scout. I wasn t. I buy their cookies. (Laughs) Then both of your children were already out of high school then by the time you ran? Well, my daughter was a senior and so she was like, Go for it, Mom. (Laughs) So you didn t have to juggle with child care and all that. No, no. And I admire the women that do that. For me, that would have been a real challenge. It probably would have been a real barrier for me to run. Sure. Because being from Tulsa and having to live in another city, I don t think I d be willing to do that if children were small . Do you have a political philosophy you want to share with us? Well, yes. I really am a strong believer in our Constitution and keeping to the founder s principles of limited government. I see a direction in our country going to more and more government control of things, and I m very concerned about that. I want the government to get out of the way when it needs to and support the family as much as possible because the family is the foundation of our society. As the family crumbles around us, there is an increase in poverty, crime, costs in government assistance programs, etc. The family is foundational to a health society. Some of your goals going in were to do work in those areas? Yes, absolutely. You re starting to do that. Yes. 14 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson After you ve served your twelve years, what do you plan to do? Have you thought that far ahead? No, I really just try to look at what s in front of me. I didn t see this on the horizon for me (Laughs) a few years ago either. I m very content serving in the House and I don t know what the future holds. When you re campaigning, is the biggest issue money? I mean, having enough And that s the least favorite thing, I think, for most of us is raising money Right. Nobody likes to do it. You have to do it to get your mail out and all of that, but that s probably the least favorite part of the campaign. It is for me. And I understand being an incumbent is a little bit easier to do that. I haven t run as an incumbent yet. When you ran, did you have a slogan? I didn t. It was so short a time. Colors on your campaign signs? I had blue and gold. Blue and gold. Yes. Any dog stories or horror stories from the campaign? I haven t been bitten by a dog yet. I hear other people have been (Laughs) but no real horror stories. Actually it was a very positive experience going door to door. If the election was in January, then you were having to campaign between November and December and during busy Well, I do remember walking on icy steps in a very hilly neighborhood one time and, going, Oh, I hope I don t fall and break my leg or 15 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson something, but it went okay. Most people were like, I can t believe you came out in this weather. And I said, Well, I don t have a choice, the election is in a week. It was kind of challenging to work through the holiday schedule. You didn t want to interfere or step on people s toes or definitely not when OU or OSU were playing football either. I had to be careful about that. We didn t want to make people mad when you ring the doorbell in the middle of the game. (Laughs) So I d kind of listen in my car radio if there was a game going on and, if there was a commercial break, then I d run up to the door and ring the bell. Or halftime? Yes, or halftime. That s right. I just didn t want to offend people during those precious moments of a game. You have to think about little things like that. Yes, especially in Oklahoma during football season. Once you got there, did you have a mentor? I did. I had an excellent mentor, Mark Liotta, who lost last year. He was a major player in the transportation funding that we got accomplished and great statesman. I miss him terribly, but he was great. Now because I came in all by myself, usually freshmen have freshman orientation and classes, and I was just put out on the floor. I had to ask a lot of questions and I did (Laughs) and I still do. I think it s good to ask questions. I ll back up a little bit then as you were growing up did you have any role model that you admired? Well, actually my dad, he really inspired me. He lives here in Tulsa, both my parents do. And he s still a great source of encouragement and wisdom for me. He s a great inspiration. He keeps up, he s eighty-six years old and he is up on everything. Sharp as a tack. Good sounding board. Yes, he really is. Yes. Is there any difference in the culture after 5:00, the women hang together and the men hang together or if there s any interaction there? Well, there s usually there s a lot of dinners to go to so then you re together. 16 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Right. Sometimes we ve gone out as a group, men and women Let s go see this movie, so a group of us will go out to a movie. It doesn t happen that often, but occasionally it does. And a lot of the women have young children and commute and go back home. For that reason in the evenings they re not around. Well, if you share an apartment with someone else, too, that s Yes, we do things together. I was just curious because Hannah Atkins had said that she would have breakfast with the men and discuss who was gonna vote how and so I was just curious if something like that still happens. Well Not for breakfast? Breakfast is hard to get people going (Laughs) early in the morning, but there s a lot of breakfasts at the Capitol. Different groups come in and serve breakfast at times. One of those older ones mentioned a cheese thing. When session was over, they would go over to a hotel and they have a wine and cheese session like an hour or so. Every night? Yes. Oh. No? That doesn t happen now? Well, I don t know. I haven t been. (Laughs) Okay. Any advice for women that are thinking about going into politics? Oh. Advice well, I think you just need to really weigh all the challenges that you re gonna face as a woman. I think as a woman you probably have more responsibilities if you do have children and things that fall on your shoulders as far as coordinating. For me I waited till after my children were grown because that s how it worked for me. If you re married, make sure that you have the full support of your family 17 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson because otherwise it won t work. I mean, you do see people who have trouble in their marriages because of the separation. It s not ideal to be apart for four months like that. So be sure you don t go out there without the full support of your loved ones. You need them back home supporting you at all times, and so I would suggest making sure that s the right decision for your family before you launch out into it. And in the meantime, there s many ways to get involved on the local level. A lot of people think, Oh, I want to do this, way up here at the Capitol and feel they can t and so then they sit back and don t maybe do anything. So I just encourage you to get involved on a very local level, a city council race even, a school board race. It s quite educational and you meet a lot of people and you make a lot of contacts, and who knows where that will lead eventually? Any fun stories in the House? Oh, my. Oh, yes. We laugh a lot. When you re dealing with that many people and I ve told my husband sometimes I feel like I ve joined a fraternity. I can t think of something right off the top of my head. I d have to really think about it, but we do enjoy each other for the most part. There s a camaraderie there. We all got there the same way so we re all kind of really equals in that regard, whether you re male or female, and Rural or suburban. Yes, we all still have one vote. (Laughs) It s kind of an equalizer, isn t it? And do they still have Mouth of the House? Yes, they do and that s fun. The last day, or next to the last day of session, we have that little ceremony and it s just kind of fun. It s a tense week that last week and so it is a little bit of a tension reliever. And did you notice if you had to change your wardrobe any? Yes, well, I had to get suits. You know, there s a dress code at the Capitol and yes, absolutely, I had to get more suits. Warm ones? (Laughs) Well, I don t mind it. I m at the age where I like it kind of cool so it works for me. (Laughs) The cooler the better. (Laughs) 18 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson I ve had many complain about how cold it is. It depends where you sit in the chamber, too. We have these little fans, and sometimes if you re near people other members put on a fan and that fan can be blowing on you and then you re gonna be colder than others. Did you ride the train from the I did. What an honor that was really fun to be part of the Centennial. Do you want to talk a little bit about it? Oh, yes. We took a train from Oklahoma City to Guthrie, the first capital in Oklahoma, to commemorate the hundred years of our state. It was just an exciting time. We met at Guthrie and had a mock ceremony, or a session, and it was great. It was just neat to think back to what it must have been like one-hundred years ago Sure. It was an honor to be a House member during our state s centennial. Did everyone in the legislature get to do that or just Well, everybody was invited. There were some members missing and for whatever reason they couldn t make it but I would say we had a majority of the members in the House and the Senate there. That sense of history had to be overwhelming. Oh, yes. It really was. It was humbling to think, Wow, we re able to serve in the legislature at this special time. And then, you would have been in Oklahoma when the bombing occurred? Yes. That was before you got Yes, I was not in the legislature. to the activities of politics. I ve asked some about that, too. Yes. 19 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Let s see. Do you find that your support network when session is going on is more the colleagues there, or do you still have some major interaction with your friends here Tulsa ? Yes. Well, it takes more of an effort because you re not really here a good part of the week. We have a great network. I have made some wonderful friends there in the legislature. Every year when a few of them are either termed-out or, you just kind of get a little choked up and say, Oh, I m really gonna miss that person now. They re not gonna be here anymore. You re kind of like a family for those few months or being on a team together. You re working toward common goals, especially in your individual caucuses. You re working to achieve many of the same things and working hard together day in and day out. There s a real close bond that you develop with the people that you work with there and probably a different work setting than most other jobs. Have you had the same assistant the entire time? No. I had one that retired to be a grandma and another one last year, she had been the Speaker s assistant, I was so honored to get her for that time. She was kind of ready to retire and be a grandma also. Now I have a brand new assistant and I m very honored to have her. She s gonna work out great. So this is my third one. That s a big key, if they know your district Right. and constituents. Right. Yeah, that s important. Do you have very many visit you from Tulsa? I do. Many times they come say with the teachers or schools or advocacy groups. And a few times, they ll just come up on their own. I think because I m in Tulsa they know they can reach me in Tulsa and call me and then I try to meet them on a Friday in my district. So Fridays you may show up anywhere in your district? Yes. And there are a lot of things that go on. There are other groups or schools and the chamber has many events and they hold them on Fridays during the session because they know we re back in our districts and there s a more likely chance that we ll attend. 20 Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum So it s not a four-day week four work day? No, no. It ends up being Friday day in your district. Saturday and Sunday, too. It could be. I try to keep Sunday totally free. Friday pretty much ends up being a lot of work-related visits. Which is fine, that s what I m there to do. It s probably fun being hand-to-hand and face-to-face with the people Yes, I really enjoy when your position or your office is able to make a difference in somebody s problems. There has been some issues that have come up this week you make a few phone calls and hopefully your office and your contacts that you can make can make a difference for that person. Those are very rewarding moments, when you can help. We had a situation two years ago and it was too long of a process. I got a bill and an appropriation for these constituents who had their gas shut off for months due to a gas leak that was not related to PSO or anything. It was an unknown gas source and so without going into all the details these people lost their heat in the middle of winter and we had to find a way to remedy that situation. Actually my office talked to the homeowners on a daily basis during that session. It took awhile, working with the Corporation Commission and different entities. It was a long process, but we were able to, I think, get a good result in the end. And that s always very gratifying because you think, Well, I was able to make a difference in somebody s life. It really shouldn t have had to go to that level? Well, sometimes it has to because there are so many layers. And what happens oftentimes is everybody s passing the buck Oh, I m not responsible for that. That s why you need somebody on the state level to say, Okay, we need a coordination plan here. This is a problem that we need to address and we just can t keep punting it off to the next person because they re not doing anything with it. So that s when we can coordinate something hopefully to make a difference. Have I forgotten anything that we need to cover? Well, if you forget something, you can always come back and see me at the Capitol in February. Your office in Tulsa is it at your home or is it actually 21 Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum I don t have an office. I was curious if districts had one that everybody used That would be way too expensive. (Laughs) Let s see. How has your life changed since you ve been elected? I really don t feel like I ve changed that much my schedule has changed That s a better way of asking Yes, my schedule has changed, but I really don t feel any different. I still have the same friends, and they re more valuable to me now, I think. There are people that are nice to you at the Capitol because they have to be, and then when you re out of office you ll never hear from them again. That s just the nature of the business. So your friends at home and the ones that you ve had for years become even dearer to you because you realize they re your friends because they like you and not because of your position. Are any of them interested in taking this next step and running for election? Oh. I ve had a few conversations with some folks that have been very curious about the process and may have interest in the future and don t live in my district though. (Laughs) So they wouldn t run against me. Are your children interested in it? Not really. No. Have they been to see you in action? My daughter has, yes. My last question then is when history is written about you, what would you like for it to say? And it doesn t have to be just about your service in the House it can be whatever. That s something to really ponder. You don t want to take that too lightly. That s an important question. You can limit it to just your service if you want, if that s easier. 22 Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Yes. That I did the best that I could with what I was given in the time that I was given, and showed God s love to those around me as well, and made maybe a small difference in some way to improve public policy in our state That s fine. I m sure I could think of a lot more things. I ve never been asked that question. Oh, who was Gusty? I was supposed to ask. Who was Gusty? (Laughs) Oh, Gusty. Who asked that? Someone said, Be sure to ask her about that. Okay. Well, Senator Pruitt actually introduced that, Gusty for the state cartoon. Don Wood, who was a media or weather person here in the Tulsa area for years and years he still lives here and so it was Scott Pruitt that initiated all of that. Then he asked me to carry it in the House to have Gusty in Is it still going? Well, it s the state cartoon. It originated in the Senate and then came over to the House. It was Scott Pruett that really started that, and I m not quite sure how he was the one to start it. I don t know all the background on that, but I was just the House author. So it was already passed the Senate and had come over to the House. I didn t initiate it in the House. So it s been a fairly recent occurrence? Yes, it was oh, two sessions ago probably. And it had been a cartoon before? Well, he used to draw Gusty are you familiar with what it is? No. Gusty would reflect the weather. Don Woods would draw if it was going to rain, he d draw an umbrella and rain. Every night Don Woods would draw the Gusty cartoon to coincide with the forecast. That s a good side story. Some of your main issues you wanted to attack were school accountability and reform measures. I read that early on. 23 Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Finchum Peterson Have you done some of that or still planning to do some of that? Well, yes, you know, everything that we do up there is a team effort. Twenty-five percent, I was told, of the House members have been in education either they were administrators, principals, or teachers. So most of the time those kinds of measures are introduced by those members. I m working with my colleagues to achieve those goals. With your husband being a physician, do you find yourself pulled toward the health? I m interested in that field obviously, very much so. It s an important issue for our state. So you d at least know one or two people to ask for information if you needed to on a particular health issue And I served on the Medicaid Reform Task Force two years ago as well, which was very educational. All right. I don t have anything else. Okay. Thank you for joining us today. Well, thank you. It was fun getting to know you and hear your story. Thank you for allowing me the opportunity. And hopefully after your twelve years are through we ll do this again Okay. Best wishes. Thank you very much. --- -------..