 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Today is November 13, 2007. I m in Bristow, Oklahoma. My name is Tanya Finchum and I m with the OSU Library s oral history project called Women of the Oklahoma Legislature. Today I m with Skye McNiel who was elected to the House of Representatives in 2006. Yes, ma am. So she s new to the arena but she ll have lots to tell us today. So thank you for allowing me to come to your home. Thank you for having me. Okay, let s start by having you tell me a little bit about your childhood, where you were born and then we ll work forward. Okay, I was born right here in Oklahoma. I was born in Sapulpa, Oklahoma just a little ways from Bristow. I was born into a very large family. My family owns and operates Mid America Stockyards which is a livestock auction here in Bristow. When I was born, my great-grandmother and grandparents and my great-aunt and uncle owned the livestock auction. My great-grandmother passed away about a month ago. And so now, within the auction, my grandparents own it. My dad and my brother and my mom we work there. My dad s two brothers and all their families work there. So there s about twenty of us as a family unit that have a business that we work together every Saturday, every other Monday night we sale horses and every other Saturday we sale cattle. So I was blessed to be born into such an amazing family. They are so supportive it s a huge family. It s just a fantastic way to grow up. I grew up very rural. My dad is an order buyer. He goes to sale barns and buys cattle, brings them home and we ship them out to their new owners. So I grew up 5 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel working in that industry and in that field. From the time I could walk, we would go out and gather up cattle on Sunday afternoons and that would be our fun thing, that s what we would do for fun. We would ride horses and it was just a great way to grow up in rural Oklahoma. I think my parents instilled in me good work ethics and just a good way of life that I hope to pass down on to my children. And that s what we do for fun. We take our girls and we go ride horses and we gather cattle and we work and they help their dad raise pigs. It s a lot of fun and I think the rural way of life that I was born into I am very blessed to be born into this life and to be raised this way. I m very thankful to my family, my parents. How many brothers and sisters do you have? I have one brother and he is married and I have two wonderful little nieces. Is he older or younger? He s older, yes. I unfortunately was not taught to do a lot of the girl things. I was raised a lot like a boy and so I was sent outside to work to work with animals, to work with cattle, to load the trucks, to drive the trucks, to doctor, to feed, to do all of those things and so cooking is not one of my fortes. And so fortunately, I have an understanding husband who has allowed me to kind of learn some of that. But I was raised just like a boy. I was raised that I could do anything a boy could do. That if I just put my mind to it that I could get it done and it didn t matter that I was a girl. Where did you go to college? I went to college at Oklahoma State University. You re an OSU girl. Yes, I m an OSU girl. I had a double major in agricultural communications and animal science. I wanted to go and be a lobbyist for the agricultural industry and took some different turns in the road but I think I ended up where I needed to be. Well what got you interested in the political arena then? I actually had a really good friend who was quite a few years older than me but I always really admired her. She was just a really classy, neat person kind-hearted and I kind of wanted to be a little bit like her. She went to be a lobbyist in the agricultural industry and I thought that was 6 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel just fantastic. She was really making a difference in the way we live and our livelihood and I thought that was a great thing. And so I kind of wanted to do that and I took some steps that she took and one of them was being an agricultural intern for the Ag Committee in the House and the Senate. I did that when I was I think I was a sophomore, junior in college. I took a semester off of college, moved to Oklahoma City which was quite a move for me, and lived there went to the Capitol every day, got to go in the meetings. I got to see the things that were going on. I got to be a part of the hustle and bustle up there. I thought someday I might want to come try this. I tried it a little earlier than I thought I might. I didn t realize I would be trying it, you know, at twenty-seven years old but that s when I started. You re probably one of the younger ones currently in I m one of the youngest females. They say I am the youngest female to be elected. I haven t ever looked that up, particularly, but I m certainly not the youngest that has served. There have been some men that have been quite a bit younger. Well let s talk a little bit about your campaign. Did you have a manager? I did. I decided to run when I was about seven months pregnant with my second daughter and everyone thought I was a little bit crazy. I had always said I was going to run but I thought I would run a little bit later in life. But sometimes doors open and you ve got to step in them or watch them close. And I decided that I was going to try to do it. My mom was a huge support to me and she was on the campaign trail with me every step of the way. We would often times load up the kids, put them in the back seat, turn on a movie and we would go door knocking. My oldest one would get out a lot of times and go door knocking with me. So that was a family affair again. But I had some amazing people who worked on my campaign. I had a consultant who helped me out, which was new for me. They did a lot of things that I didn t understand. It was all new. It was all a learning experience for me to learn how to send out the mail pieces and the photo shoots and the commercials and things. And so, it was kind of a different experience but I had some great people who when you run a campaign, you really learn who your friends are because they re going to stick beside you. They re going to be out there knocking doors with you. They re going to be the ones who come and help you put on your fund raisers. They re going to be the ones who stand beside you, even when some people are standing up against you and saying things that are 7 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel wrong and negative against you. It was really an amazing experience for me and I have made a lot of great friends from it. Do you mind saying how much it cost, your first campaign? My first race was a little over 100,000 about 106. And your opponent was a male, female? My opponent was a female. She was my seventh grade English teacher. It did make it hard. She was a really neat lady someone I looked up to, someone who I admired in school still do. We ran a really clean race. We respected each other. We ran on our merits and she I think her race cost a little bit over 40,000. She s a nice lady. We still see each other. Her husband had been a legislator a few years ago. And so, it was a great race but it s hard to run against somebody you know and especially somebody from the same town. But I just, when it was all said and done, I remember praying lots of nights, God, I m going to just give it my all. I m going to do everything I can from down here and if it s meant to be, then let it be me who is named November the 7th that I will be the next representative. And if it s not, just give me the satisfaction of knowing that I did all I could do and it just wasn t the will that I d be up there. So talk a little bit about election day then. (Laughs) Yes, it was a little bit crazy. We continued to knock doors. I really pushed myself and my family pushed me, in a good way, to continue and to be sure and get every single vote. And to let people know that we re out there and what we re about just let people know that I m not just a young mom who is not just out trying to make a point or make a statement. I m a person who is out to try to make a better life for herself, her family, her kids, the generations to come, for all of Oklahoma and all of District 29 and rural Oklahoma. So that s what I did. I continued door knocking that whole day. We knocked up until about four o clock just making sure people went out and voted. I m so happy that I did because I won by a very small margin. Had I not done that, my margin may have even been smaller or perhaps I wouldn t have won. But I only won by about 250 votes. I had a very small watch party because I really didn t know who all would come. It was my first time to do this. We re a small town so I just opened a little bitty building on Main Street. I have a business on Main Street and the building next to it I own and it was empty at the time. We had kind of made it our headquarters so we opened up that building and it was packed the whole night and I just couldn t imagine all these people came out to support 8 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum me. I was just I was overwhelmed by that. I thought if I win or lose, this is amazing to know that these people thought enough to take their evening, which they could have been a million other places, to come out and watch the results with me. And it was just really humbling to walk into that room and see. So I would go into the other room and get the results and we had runners out going all over. I have seven towns that I cover. We had to send people all over Creek County to get the results. So we were just waiting on the calls and some of them had to go out so far that they didn t have cell phone service. We would have to wait on them to get back into town so they could call us. It was up and down. I would lead for a while and then I would be behind for a while and then I would lead for a while. And it was just the most nervous thing I have ever been through. Then when we found out we had won, we were ahead of the newscasts coming out and saying we had already because all of our people had already gone to the precincts. So it was just a really serene kind of a moment that what we had been working for, for literally over a year had already happened and was just amazing. I was so emotional. I had said, I m not going to cry. I m not a crier. This isn t what I do. I just couldn t help it. It was amazing. I just was so thankful and blessed that all those people came out to share that moment with me. I think that was the most exciting part. When you go to the Capitol, do you go down Lincoln Boulevard or do you come from a different direction? I do, I go down Lincoln. And what are your thoughts as you go down that road? You know, I drive up there every morning. I don t live in the city. During session, I drive back and forth every day and every night so I can be home with my kids. And you know, the drive up there sometimes gets long but when I turn onto Lincoln and I see the dome and I see the Capitol, I get real excited because I know that what I m going to go do that day will hopefully make a good difference in somebody s life. It s just a very humbling experience to drive down that road and to know at the end that there is the Capitol and what hustle and bustle are going on in there, what things are happening inside of there are so amazing and the amazing people that work there. It s just kind of an adrenaline rush the closer you get to the Capitol, the further down Lincoln. I love that drive. Where is your office in the Capitol? 9 McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel My office is on the third floor right below the Speaker s office. I go up the back steps, into the chamber and I share an office with another freshman member. He s an amazing help to me. We ve had to learn the course with each other. But to actually be in that office is so amazing from when I was an intern there to actually have my own office and to be in those halls again. It smells the same, it feels the same, it has the same nostalgia to me. It is amazing that I went from wishing to be there to now having my own office and my own name on my door. Sometimes I just look at my door and think, This is just amazing. What a dream come true to see my name on my door as being a state representative. How wonderful is that. Then, at the swearing in day? Yes, it was a very hectic day and really fast paced. I had been on the floor before but never sat at my desk with my name on it and it was just amazing to sit there. I had my kids down there with me and my whole family was lined up and the people who helped me on my campaign had come. Just an enormous amount of people had come to watch this day, which it was their swearing in too. They had been such a part of it. I always said, We are going to go to the Capitol. It s not going to just be Skye McNiel going to the Capitol. It s going to be a team effort because that s what got me here and I won t ever forget that. It was never, I got me here, it was the team that got me here and I ll take the whole team with me. And I still communicate with those people every single day. The lady who was my campaign manager, if you will, I talked to her this morning and we talk constantly about things that are going on and she has a full-time job and a family. But we still communicate about what s going on and what people are saying. You know, maybe they don t want to call me. Or they re afraid to call me or have an issue that they think isn t important to me. So it really keeps me in-touch and lets me know what people are talking about, other than the people who just come to me and some of the gossip rumors I hear. It s real important to be in touch with people around the community that you think are involved in different arenas all over my district to know what s really going on, what the real problems are. But the swearing in day was just fantastic. I mean, it s just a day I ll never forget and I was so proud to introduce my husband and my parents and my grandparents and my great-grandma was there to watch me do that. And so it was amazing to have them be a part of that with me. Four generations or five? Five generations. 10 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Five. Yes, because I have children so they were lucky enough to know their great-great-grandmother. My oldest one is old enough that she will remember her for the rest of her life. And so it s just been I just feel so blessed with the family I have. So driving from here every day, how early do you have to get up and get going? It depends on what time I have to be there. I m an hour and ten minutes away from my desk. So it just depends on how early I need to be there. The way they scheduled it this year, some days we don t start session until one. So I can get up there mid-morning, spend a little bit of time with my children that morning. I m there typically throughout the late evening. Then sometimes we have to be there by eight o clock. And so I have to leave rather early. (Laughs) Then I might get home a little earlier some days. Like my Tuesdays last session, I had to be there at 8 and a lot of times I was home I wasn t home until past 10. So I was gone from 8 to 10 from my kids well from, 6:30 to 10 I guess. And so it made for some long days, but then I had some real flexible times that I got to spend the mornings with them or we d get out of session early and I would get to come home and work from my office in my house and get to have them here with me. So it worked out real nice. There are some long days and there are some short days. You just kind of balance it out. Can you see yourself doing this twelve years? I can if God is willing and my family is willing. I always tell people this is the only job I m not looking for what s next. I m not saying, Okay when I leave here, what am I going to do? What can be better than this? What could be more exciting than this? What could be more gratifying than this? This is it for me. I feel like this is where I m supposed to be right now. I feel like I just need to make the most of where I m at and use what talents and skills that God has given me to make the best out of this job and improve the district that I represent and improve Oklahoma. That s what I m supposed to be doing right now. Are you working on a particular issue at the moment? I feel like I m all over the board on issues. I m really, right now, involved with some DHS issues some Department of Human Services. My district is, like we ve mentioned, very rural. It covers seven towns and it s a district that s very we have a lot of people who are involved in DHS whether it s through foster parenting, whether it s through adoption agencies, whether it s through social services being on food 11 stamps or being on some of the services like that. So there s a lot of issues that I get called on that deal with DHS and so I seem to find myself, that my district is pushing me in that direction. That s not where I started. That s not an area that I even felt like I knew much about, but I feel like my district is guiding me and telling me that this is where I need to go to best serve them. And so I do pay a lot of attention to DHS and to the Human Services side of what I m doing. I think that we re going to see some changes in DHS and I m excited about those. We need to re-vamp a lot of it. There are some good people up there and we need to give them the tools to do the best job that they can. It may take us a couple of years to get that done. It s going to be some statute changes, and it s going to be some procedural changes and just some changes within the structure of DHS. It s going to take us a while to get there but we are going to get there. I m also very passionate about rural Oklahoma. I m the vice-chairman of the Natural Resources Committee which is a full committee. And so I m very involved in that whether we re talking about water right issues or water issues, in general, for people to drink because there s a huge argument now going on between rural Oklahoma and urban Oklahoma. Everybody is pointing fingers. Everybody is saying, You rural people by having your hog operations and your cattle operations are polluting our water. And rural people are saying, Well you put so much phosphate and chemicals on your golf courses and your lawns that it s drifting down and getting into our water. So until we decide that we re going to stop pointing fingers and we re just going to fix the problem and we re each going to do our part to fix the problem rural and urban until we decide that, we re going to continue to have this issue. The main goal needs to be providing good water for our children to drink and the future generations to drink because it is a resource that we have to take care of. We only have what we have and we ve got to really watch that because it s not something we can make. Water is so valuable and so precious. But there are lots of issues like that, just pertaining to rural Oklahoma and the way that we live. If we don t protect what we have, if we don t protect the rural way of life, we lose a lot of things. We don t always lose a lifestyle, but we lose that that s where our food comes from and people don t understand that. I ve heard it said lots of times not lots of times, but multiple times if you want good healthcare, if you want good schools, if you want good infrastructure, move to urban Oklahoma move to the city. I often respond, If you want to eat, move to rural Oklahoma or at least let us survive. And that s what we have to remember. We have to co-exist. We need the cities and we need rural Oklahoma and that s my job. 12 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel That s what I feel like I m up there to do is to make sure that we can co-exist and we can realize each other s importance in how Oklahoma is so unique and so wonderful. And I hope my children live in rural Oklahoma. I hope they live right here, just a few miles from me. My parents live a few miles from us. My brother is building a house just a few miles from us. I would love for my children to live here if that s what they choose to do. But I want to make sure that that is an option for them. I want to make sure that we have good food to eat, that we have good crops so we have all the bread and all of these things corn and wheat and barley and all these things that we need. That, also that we have good meat to provide us and good protein and we need rural Oklahoma to do those things. Well it looks like you have a good agenda ahead of you. I have a big agenda. (Laughs) Have you had the opportunity to debate a bill on the floor yet? I have. I took a couple of bills to the floor actually I was lucky enough to get several bills to the floor. A couple of them were easy. I had two bills that were we spent a little bit of time debating on and they actually had to do between rural and urban Oklahoma. One of them was to do with the hogs and providing rural economic money back into rural Oklahoma. And it was quite a battle that I thought I was prepared for and when we got on the floor, it kind of shocked me a little bit. They had always said, You know, you think there s a flight between democrats and republicans. And they said, But when you get up there you will realize that there s really a fight between urban and rural. I really didn t understand it until that bill and truly there is. There is a mind set of some people who think that if rural Oklahoma cannot survive on its own without any type of subsidies for economic development or farming for whatever it is, then they should just shrivel up and dry up and go away. They don t understand the importance of it and rural Oklahoma is drying up. We re losing businesses going into the cities. We don t have much of a tax pay structure to work on our infrastructure to provide a way of life for people, to provide us sewer lines, roads, bridges. We don t have a lot of sales tax to come back in to our town to take care of these things. These rural these reap grants will go back in and provide some of those things you have to apply for them as a city. There was a big battle. People did not want to see that money going back into rural Oklahoma. They just think that rural Oklahoma should be able to survive each little town should be able to survive on its own and it s just not possible. It s just not possible. 13 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel You know, I live here in Bristow. We have a Wal-Mart and a couple of grocery stores but we don t have any place to buy clothes. So I have to go or shoes or some of the baby things I need or need or some materials to build a home. You know, a lot of things we have to go into maybe Tulsa or Oklahoma City to do that. So we spend a lot of our money on those cities also. Sometimes they don t realize that we come to their cities and spend our tax dollars because we don t have the base to have a lot of these. We don t have a Lowe s or a Home Depot right here in Bristow, Oklahoma. And so there s got to be a balance and people from both sides can t be so stubborn and so narrow-minded that we don t see each other s importance. When you re discussing this, does it come down to gender any issues? No. I don t see much of that. I guess growing up in maybe the word would be a man s world I m just, I m used to that. And I don t see a gender I guess if I were to look for it and look for an issue for it to be a gender issue. I could probably make it into that if I wanted to but certainly the bills on the floor they didn t attack me because I was a female. They didn t attack me because they thought I couldn t do it because I was a female, they attacked me because I was rural. And that doesn t matter if you re male or female. Or young. Or young or old, absolutely. Absolutely. Geography comes into play a little bit doesn t it? It does. (Laughs) Do you have a role model there? At the Capitol? Mm-hmm. I have lots of role models. The thing about being at the Capitol is, everybody should be there representing their own district. Everybody s districts have such a different make-up. But I can tell you the people I admire the most are the people who truly represent their district. If it means they have to stand up against their own caucus, against the entire House of Representatives and be the lone voice of one to speak up for what they feel like their district needs, those are the people I admire the most. And that varies from a group of republicans to a group of democrats to some freshman who have stood up this year and said, I 14 Finchum McNiel just can t do this because this is not what my district wants of me. And it takes a lot of nerve and a lot of guts as a freshman to stand up and go against, perhaps, your party or leadership. I do admire those people because they are there for the right reason. They are there to do their job. There are some people that I do admire Representative Lee Denney is an amazing woman who knows what she s there to do. I admire her a lot because she s very straight forward. She s tells you just like it is. It may hurt your feelings a little bit, but she s going to tell you like it is. And if she tells you she ll be there or she ll do that or she ll carry that bill, that s what she s going to do. She s going to do it to the very best of her ability and I admire that about her. There are also a couple of male representatives from rural Oklahoma who have really had to take a stance for rural Oklahoma, Representative Dale DeWitt and Representative Don Armes. They have really forged or blazed a trail, perhaps, for rural Oklahoma and for making sure that we have a way of life. They grew up that way, their children are growing up that way, and they see the importance of it. So I m so fortunate to be able to kind of watch what they re doing and watch how their leadership has moved us forward and to hopefully be able to pick up some of the pieces and to pick up what I need to carry on for them and continue forward. But I look up to so many people up there. Everybody has a little different trait. There s not one person I want to be like. But everybody has a little different trait from maybe the way they handle the press to the way that they carry a bill on the floor to the way they conduct themselves on the floor. Maybe some of the people really have a great relationship with their constituents and know how to handle all the problems kind of just right it seems like. I admire those people. There is a balance between policy and constituent work and you have to find that happy medium. What about outside of the legislature then? Well I have lots of people outside of the legislature. Mostly, my family my grandmother is a huge role model for me. She is very determined, very independent. In fact, we had the discussion last night as we were at the horse sale. She owns her and my grandfather own the sale barn. I work in the office on Monday nights and we sit across from each other and have lots of conversations about lots of things. And she s very honest and open with me and I m very honest and open with her. So we discuss lots of things and how to handle different situations. I so appreciate the fact that I can go to her and say, Here s an issue here s a problem, how would you handle it? Sometimes we have to 15 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel tone it down a little bit because she s pretty bold and sometimes I have to watch myself because I might be a little bit too in your face or a little bit too bold. But I think that s important to be, not because I m a female but because I need to get somewhere in life and the only way to do that anymore is to be honest and to say this straightforward and to be determined about what you re going to do. She s given me some of those traits and some of those skills and I m so fortunate to have her. My mom also has been just the most support you could ever get and I know a lot of people say, You know my mom and my grandma , and I think that it really is true, especially as a woman who hasn t lived a traditional life as a woman. I haven t just followed all the steps a girl might follow. I ve done a lot of things that isn t traditionally a female field or female-related or something that a female does. They ve always been so supportive and they ve never even said, You can t do that because you re a girl. Or, you know, they ve always encouraged me to act like a lady. They ve always encouraged me to be a classy lady, to be a professional lady and I thank them for that. I thank them for giving me the tools and the skills to move ahead and never think that somebody owes me something because I m a girl. Or to never think that I can t do it because I m a girl or any of those thoughts that might come into your head. It just doesn t play a part that I can or can t do something that I deserve or don t deserve something because I m a girl. They just say, If you prepare yourself, you can do it. My mom is just the most supportive, and sometimes you just need that little card that sometimes ends up mysteriously in your purse that says, you know, I m so proud of you. Have a great day. Or a phone call that says, You re just a great mom. Thanks for what you do. And she s always the support for me that I need. You ve got a good support system all the way around. Yes, I do. Well do you have a favorite campaign story? I have lots of campaign stories (Laughs) being in rural Oklahoma, we do a lot of door knocking, not in cities. It s out a lot. And so I ran into lots of dogs, lots of dog chasing went on in the campaign and one of them in particular I have two dog stories. One of them, we were in this very remote part of my district and my mom was door knocking with me that day and she was in the car because we would have to drive sometimes two and three miles to get to the next house so it wasn t a walking deal. So she let me out and there were lots of leaves on the driveway on the sidewalk where I was walking. I walked up and I knocked on the door and I could hear somebody inside and I could hear the dog barking 16 inside. And it sounded like a little dog. So I knocked on the door some more and I didn t hear anything. But I could hear the leaves rustling behind me. Then I heard a dog kind of growl and I thought, That dog inside is getting bigger I believe. (Laughs) My mom never moved, never said a word. But then I hear the window roll down on the car and I hear her going, Skye just whispering at me. And I thought, This is strange. So I turn around and there is the biggest German shepherd I have ever seen standing just about four feet from me. He wasn t particularly growling at me but he wanted me to know that he was there. And so my mom backed up and got real close to where I could just jump in the car and go. But there were people home, they never came out and I think that dog might have eaten me if I had stayed one more minute. We were in another neighborhood just not long after that just a few days after that and my sister-in-law was with me and she was driving the car and my mom and I were door knocking. And these houses were a little bit closer together so we could kind of walk from house to house and then she would pick us up and take us to the next street. I d been knocking this neighborhood and so I knocked this house and I went to another house and knocked on the door and nobody was there. But I heard some barking and I knew it wasn t inside. We were in a neighborhood, so you know, typically they have to keep them locked up or in a fence so I wasn t too nervous until my sister-in-law started screaming at me. I look and there are two Rottweilers chasing me and I m running across these people s lawn. I couldn t find any place to go. There was no security, no safety from these dogs. The only thing I knew to do was the next house down, I thought there might be somebody home and they had a glass door and so I ran or the house that I had just knocked at. I kind of thought somebody might have been there but they just didn t answer the door and so I ran back to that house with these dogs right on my trail. I opened the glass door and there was a solid door there and I crammed myself between the solid door and the glass door. My sister-in-law the funny part is, is she was driving behind me and we d had Fig Newton cookies or whatever, for breakfast that morning on the campaign trail she s whistling at the dog, throwing the Fig Newtons and they turn around and start eating these cookies and leave me alone. And so we laugh that she saved me with the Fig Newton. So they re all the time, cracking jokes or occasionally a mysterious package of Fig Newtons will end up in my briefcase or they ll show up and laugh about them. But the dogs in my district are very vicious. And they will get you. But my favorite things about the campaign are when people invite me into their home and be very honest and open with me about their issues. And we would sit down, maybe at the table and have a cup of coffee or a 17 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel glass of water and or a lot of people would offer me water or a drink because we were knocking in the summer time. It was very, very hot and in the winter it would be it was cold so they d offer me a cup of coffee. My district is very, very kind. But I enjoyed the time of just being able to sit at their table and visit with them or on their front porch and talk about real issues and real things that were important to them. Not political, not just a political agenda. Not things that we talk about that are big and important to the general public but things that are really made a difference in their lives. Things that they might need some help with that I could really and truly help them. It may not be a bill. It may be a phone call. It may be giving them some direction on where they need to go to get some assistance. That s what I enjoyed the most. That s what I when I started doing that, that s when I really felt connected and a calling to do what I do. Did you notice if there were many grandparents raising grandchildren then? That is a huge thing in my district. We had a lot of conversations, mostly on the phone. I remember one particular day I had three calls, when I would call people and that s what they wanted to talk about is grandparent s rights. And they were raising grandchildren. I have a wonderful family right here in Bristow that are raising their great-grandchildren four of them, in fact. So that is what is happening in Oklahoma. And I mean, we re just fortunate that we have these grandparents who want to step up and do it but there s a gap. There s a generational gap or something wrong with a generation of parents that we need to figure out. Well, what are we going to do with these kids? How are we going to make these kids lives okay and functional and know that a family unit is a good thing? A mom and a dad is what we need to get back to. But how fantastic is it that we have good grandparents in Oklahoma who are willing to raise their grandchildren or their great-grandchildren? As you look forward, do you have something new on the horizon you want to accomplish this next year? I do have a few bills that I m working on. My goal for this year is to be productive to be a lot more productive. I feel like I did some good things last year but I m not completely satisfied. My goals that I ve set for myself this year are to pick the eight very best bills that I possibly can and to get them to the floor and to get them passed. I want to take good legislation that s going to make a difference in Oklahoma. I don t want to just carry a bill anymore because I m a freshman and somebody needs to get it through. I want to carry some meaningful legislation that is going to do something. We have enough rules and enough laws on the 18 Finchum McNiel Finchum books. We don t need any more of those. We need something that s important and my goal is to be a hub my office to be a hub of information for my district. That s what they sent me there to do was to serve them. And when they call, I want to be able to say, This is where you need to go. This is who I can call for you. This is who you need to call. Here s our plan of how we re going to fix your problem. That s my goal. I feel like last year was a learning process. I feel like I kind of walked through it blindly some of the time. There was some great leadership. In fact, the leadership in the House was so good to the freshman this year. I could walk into the Speaker s office at any point that I wanted to. I think you look back in history and you ask a freshman if they could go into the Speaker s office, I think they would laugh at you. I mean, how fantastic is that? That he was so open, all of leadership, from the floor leader to the Speaker Pro Tempore to the Majority Whip, anybody. They were so open and open to our ideas and our thoughts and our suggestions and really listened to us. And so what an amazing year I had last year. They showed me. They took the time to teach me the right way to do things and they would help me when I d get myself in a jam because sometimes that happens. Sometimes you think you re headed down the right trail and you get off a little bit and you ve maybe messed a thing or two up. And they were so wonderful to help me get that back on track. But now I know a little more how to do it. I don t have it all figured out. I think it might take me a full twelve years to get that done, but at least I can be a better servant of my district because now I know a little more. I ll be a little more effective, a little more productive, and that s what I intend to do. Do you have the same assistant as you did last year? I do. I have a fantastic assistant. We work well together. She has some children. She has a daughter and we complement each other. She complements me. She s a little bit softer and she can deal with sometimes some of the situations that I m a little too gruff on, or a little to abrupt on. But she keeps me organized and I m really fortunate to have her. And she takes care of two of us. I haven t been able to be completely dependent on her although I feel like sometimes she s my right leg. Sometimes I feel she is what holds me up. But I had to realize that she has to split her time between myself and another legislator. But she s been really good to me. I m fortunate to have her and I hope to have her for lots more years. I hope somebody doesn t steal her from me. Well back to your campaign, did you have the same spiel that you would 19 McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel say when you would knock on doors? I really didn t. I would typically just knock on the door and say, you know, I m Skye McNiel and I m running for the House of Representatives. And after they would look at me and look at my picture and go, Is that really you? (Laughs) or You re so young, or they would always have some type of reaction. I would just say, you know, I would really like your vote and your support. I d like to visit with you if you have any ideas about what you might want me to take to the Capitol. And so we would visit a lot of times. Sometimes they would say no. Sometimes they would have an hour and a half long spiel of stuff they would want to tell me. And most of the time, they would just take the brochure and I would just say, Thank you, and tell them to please call me if they ever wanted to visit. Sometimes they did and it was fantastic. They d call and go, You know, you were by my door a couple of days ago and I just realized there was something I did want to talk to you about. But no, I tried to mix it up because I didn t want it to sound rehearsed. I wanted every door knock to feel special. I wanted them to feel like I came that day to see them. Granted, they know I m going to go see 500 other people, probably. I wanted it to feel not rehearsed, not like I m so tired of doing this. I can t knock one more door. But like it was something I looked forward to doing was knock on their door and I was there to listen to them for that moment in time, they were the most important person. And that s what I wanted it to feel like. So how many doors would you typically knock on in a day then? Well, my average isn t so good because we would have to drive a long ways between them. Depending on if we were in a real remote part in a real rural part or a more populated part, it would vary. I would say anywhere, the group as a total, because I typically knocked in groups. I had some great people who would go with me. We would get anywhere from 100 to 200 homes. In a day s time? But I took a group. But there were some days that my mom and I went that we might only get thirty houses that might be a full day. But you average those out and most times, especially toward the end, we would take a group of six to eight people out and we would knock houses for several hours. And you know, you take ten people they knock ten houses. You ve already got 100. So it sounds like a lot of houses but it s really not. But me knocking personally, I m very slow. Especially when you re the candidate, they want to talk to you. So if you would ask me 20 Finchum McNiel my average on a day, it would be a lot smaller number. I would say I would get I don t know, heavens, somewhere between 25 and 60. I don t know what the number would be because I m very slow. I mean, the volunteers would often laugh because we might be in a little housing addition and I d be four houses down and they would be all the way around the block. (Laughs) I felt like it was important that I make those people feel important and my campaign the volunteers would a lot of times say, Well Skye is right here. Would you like me to go get her. And so they would come and pull me off of a doorstep and I would go to their house and we would switch. So I would knock their route for awhile and they would take mine because someone would want to talk to me directly. And I think that was important instead of them going, Well I think she might be for this. They could just go get me because we were always knocking in the same area together. So our average, our average varied. We d get anywhere from 25 to 150 houses a day. Well did you approach it with a plan on which neighborhoods you were going to do first? We did. We had a walking list. Sometimes the walking lists worked and sometimes they didn t. Sometimes we would just throw them back in the car and just say we are going to knock the neighborhood, this is quicker, this is what we need to do. But in the rural, remote part of my district we definitely went by the walking list. And a lot of times we would send a group of two people. We tried to send three groups of two out to go knock rural Oklahoma. My goal is to get entirely through the district one time. I made it about a time and three quarters. I didn t quite get through it two times. Almost. There were some rural parts that I did not get back to twice. But we did a good job. I didn t know what I was doing. I didn t know how this door knocking thing worked. I can remember the first day my mom and I went. Neither one of us had ever done this. I felt like a fruit salesman. I felt like one of those people that knock on your door and want to sale you some apples or oranges. And so I would go knock on the door and I would just stand there and pray that they wouldn t come to do that door (Laughs) because I didn t know what to say. I was young. I knew what I wanted to do but I couldn t articulate that to the people. A lot of times I had to say the right words because I was so young they would look at me and think, Girl, you re not even out of high school, you can t go to the Capitol. You know, I got a lot of times, Are you old enough to vote? So I was very nervous that people would judge me before they ever even heard me talk or got to know me. But once I got over that fear, then it was okay. 21 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel That first day of knocking, I think we maybe only knocked five houses because we d pull up there and Mom would be like, Okay, you need to go. And I would just sit there. I was nervous to go. By the end, knocking was no problem. I d just jump out and the quicker we can get it done, the more houses we can get to. But it took me a long time. I like to I don t want to bother people. If they need me, I want them to know I m here but I don t want to bother them. I don t want to bother their family time. You know, a lot of people will knock through till late, late night. I just refuse to do that. I won t bother people. When I come home, it s important that I spend time with my children. And I feel like that s important for everyone, not just me. Every family needs to spend time with their children and I don t want to bother that time. If a Mom is cooking dinner, she doesn t want to talk to me. And if a Dad just got off work and is trying to play with his kids, he doesn t want to mess with me. I really respect people s time so I had to utilize from about 10 in the morning until 5:30, which was 6, which was really pushing it for me because people were getting off work. I had to utilize that time to the best of my ability and to knock as fast as I could. I didn t want to start too early because maybe there were people that worked late nights and didn t get up early or whatever. I really respected people s time and sometimes I got in trouble for that. Sometimes people, my consultant would call and say, You need to go out and knock more doors. You didn t have a good week. You didn t knock very many. Or, It s ten o clock, why aren t you already on the doorstep? Or, It s 7:30, why are you not still out? And he didn t understand my view on that but I think it worked out. I mean, I don t think he was realizing how many doors we were getting to a day and how fast we were moving and how many people I had helping me get that done. It wasn t just me out everyday knocking from just 10 to 5. It was a group. But I think it s important that as candidates, that we respect our voter s time and that we respect their time with their families. We can t just assume that they want to have eight robot calls a night and they want to hear our spiel. It has to be heartfelt and if we re doing it just as a robot would do it, then it s not heartfelt anymore and it loses some of its usefulness and then I m wasting my time and their time. Did you have a slogan? No. No. No, we didn t. 22 Finchum McNiel Colors? Colors yes we did have colors. And it was really kind of funny picking colors with my campaign consultant, who has worked with lots of rural people. He worked with Speaker Todd Hiett who held the seat before I did. And Todd was also another role model I had growing up. He let me page for him and so I got to see him. He worked at our sale barn. He was an auctioneer at my grandparent s sale barn and so I got to know him through that. He was really kind to us. He would visit with us about issues coming up and he was really good to me and really he s the one who came to me at seven-months pregnant and said, Do you want to run? And when I said yes and he went back to his consultant and said, Okay, Skye wants to run. Do you want to be her consultant? And he said, Well I ll meet her first. The first time he met me I was eight- or maybe almost nine-months pregnant and we had been out all day at a roping with my husband and my oldest daughter. I was dirty and huge pregnant and we came walking in and I you could just see the look on his face. And he was just like, I can t take this. I can t make a legislator out of this. You know, you could just see that look on his face. So we met that night and it went okay and then we met a couple of days later. He said, Skye, you giggle too much. You ve got to stop giggling. And I thought, Well, that s just me. I m just a friendly, happy person. So I ve had to watch my giggling. And he said, Don t giggle like a schoolgirl. So I don t know what I did or didn t but I don t think I do now. But we laugh now because he will tell me he said, Skye, they had to convince me that you could do this. Todd Hiett had to convince me that you could pull this off. If anybody in your district could pull this off, you could do it because you had such a support team, such a family, such a good network of people that you could get this done as a team as a, in a group. There were lots of times I would call him and just say, Todd, I don t think this is going to work. My poll numbers were apparently very low so I think he was very nervous. And Todd had a lot of I don t know what the word would be. He just really saw something in me that I think some other people didn t see sometimes. He saw the fire burning. He knew what that looked like in a person because he had the same. He went through the same obstacles I was going through. He really had some faith in me that other people when they wanted to bail, he encouraged them to stay hooked with me and I was going to carry out my part just as I said I was going to do. If they would just hang with me, and if they would do their part as a team, we would get there. But I needed them to guide me and they needed me because I was their only candidate in Creek County. So we made a team but I have to really 23 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel commend him and thank him because there were a lot of times I think he might have been, you know, it would have been easier for him just to say, You know what? This isn t going to work. She s young, she s got a young family. We have a lot of obstacles against us. But he stuck right beside me and had enough faith in me that I could carry the torch on that he had started. And there are some big shoes to fill and I m very honored to be able to try to fill those shoes. But my colors kind of get off from one thing to another. That s okay. But my colors, the campaign consultant wasn t 100 sure on taking me and he called me and said, Well we need to start getting some things lined up. What do you want to do for your colors? I said, Well, I m an OSU girl so we have to have orange. And I think navy. He said, What? I said, Orange and navy. He said, Okay, we need red, white, blue do you have any of those colors in there? And I said, Well navy would be an off-shoot of blue, wouldn t it? He said, Skye, we just can t do orange and navy. And I said, Well you put it together and then we ll discuss it. So he put it together and he said, You know, I think this just might work. So it did work. We have orange shirts with navy writing but it was really kind of funny. He just said, I don t think orange and navy will work. We had lots of those discussions. I would want something and he would say, Skye, I just don t think that will work. I would say, Let s just try. Let s just try one time. I like to think outside of the box. I like things a little different. That s just how I know to do things. And so, a lot of times he would kind of let me get out of the box a little bit from the typical candidate mold. And it works for me, that s what I think is important. We all have to be individual starting from our colors to our platforms to whatever. We have to be individual or we just get lumped into the old politician group and I don t want to be there. Did you take anything from home to your office? I took lots of stuff from my home. But the most important thing was I took three pictures off of my wall. My oldest daughter, who will be five soon, had made some pictures and I framed them in these little glass frames and I had them hanging up on our wall. She had finger painted them when she was about three years old. I took them and put them on my wall and I put them right where I could see them. They are eye-level right above my phone. That s what I see every single day while I m sitting at my desk talking on my phone. I took a wedding picture with my husband in it because he is just fantastic support for me and a fantastic father and a wonderful husband. But I took lots of things. 24 Finchum McNiel When I was unpacking my pictures, I found this little picture of my daughter s little Shetland pony. And I thought, How odd is this? My mom had helped me pack my stuff, and in fact, was helping me unpack my stuff. I said, What is this, Mom? And she said, Well I just want you to remember that if you ever get on your high horse, to remember us folks down here on our Shetland ponies and you need to join us. (Laughs) So I have that hanging in my office and sometimes people come in and go, Why do you have that pony in your office? I say, Well , and I tell them the story that that s what keeps me grounded and I remember that I m not really anybody very special. I m just a person that some people had some faith in and I need to go up there and remember why I m up there. I need to serve them and I need to remember to stay down on my Shetland pony and not get up on my high horse. So I did take that with me. I took some quotes and some things with me and just some things from home. I didn t want it to feel like a stuffy old office. I wanted it to feel homey. I wanted people to come in and really be honest with me and open with me because that s how I m going to be with them when we re talking. Whether we re talking about policy or whether we are just visiting about family and friends, I wanted it to be comfortable. And so I took a lot of things. My office is very full of stuff and that s how I like it. Have constituents actually come to visit you? They have. They have and it s just amazing to watch them come in on the floor. I hope that I make them proud when they see me working on the floor and that s my job. I never know when one is going to come and be up in the gallery watching and so I always try to conduct myself very professional on the floor so they would be proud of who they helped send up there. I m very mindful of what they think about what I m doing up there. I don t want to disappoint them and I don t want to embarrass them. But I have and it s so wonderful to have them come from home and see where they have helped us get. And to know that they took enough time to drive, you know, if you drive properly it might take you an hour and a half to get there. (Laughs) Yeah, or sometimes 50 minutes or an hour, depending on how late you are. (Laughs) But to know that they took time out of their day to come up there and to look me in the eye and say, This is an important issue to me and I need to know where you stand. It s just a great feeling to know that they take that much consideration about their government and about what goes on up there and to come up there and visit it and to see it for themselves. And to just not assume that we are all bad people or it s not going to happen the way they want it to so they re not even 25 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel going to take the time to visit with me. But to actually drive up there and it s wonderful. When I see anybody from home or from my district, I m so tickled to have them there and I just want to take them to my office and visit and have them on the floor and to introduce them and to let people know that Creek County is a force to be reckoned with. So you do introduce them from the floor? We do, yes. We are able, if the floor leader will allow us and he was so generous to us we re able to introduce most anybody. You are vice-chair of Natural Resources. I m the vice-chair of the Natural Resources Full Committee. I m also on the Social Services Subcommittee. I m also on the Aerospace and Technology Subcommittee, the Energy Subcommittee. And I m an Assistant Majority Whip. And what does that entail? I was on a family vacation when the Majority Whip called me and said, Would you like to be an Assistant Majority Whip? And I said, Sure. I don t know what it is but sign me up. I m there. When I got off the phone, I told my husband. I said, I m an Assistant Majority Whip and I have idea what I really do. (Laughs) I said, But I think it s something important because I remember when I was an intern at the Capitol I would see Majority or Minority Whip on doors so it s got to be something. So I just said I would do it. And I said, I better figure out what I m doing. So what it is, is I have three people within the caucus that I work directly with and I can go to them and talk to them about bills coming up, if they have some problems, if they have some issues, if they foresee a problem coming up with a certain bill they can come to me and say, Skye, this is where I stand. Or, You know, I have this issue this particular issue going on. Or, I don t like this bill coming up and we need to discuss about it in caucus. Then I can go to leadership and say, I have one of my members on my team who has some problems and some issues and we need to talk about this. And so I m kind of a go-between between the caucus and leadership. There are two levels of whips ahead me. There s the Deputy Whip and the Majority Whip and then leadership. And so we have a meeting once a week where we all go in there and visit. We try to really solve problems and it s a way for everybody to be in communication because sometimes, especially as a freshman, it s intimidating to go up to 26 Finchum McNiel leadership and say, Listen, I have a problem with your bill. I don t think it s very good. So this is a way for them to make sure that they are doing their very best and they are letting people know when they have issues without going directly to the Speaker. Or without going directly to the Floor Leader and saying, I just don t like what you ve got going on. It just makes things a little more open. And we don t have to say it was Representative So-and-So. We just say, A member of my group has some issues, so they feel a little more comfortable with it. It s a great way for me to bond with three other members and I ve gotten to really know some really great members. And Representative John Enns, from Enid, who is just a fantastic man. He s in a wheelchair. And I just admire him for his determination so much and I was lucky enough to be his Whip and so I get to go visit with him and he just has an amazing outlook on life. He s so intelligent. And so I might not have gotten to have that relationship with him had I not been his Whip and he is an absolute blessing to know anybody who knows him. And then Representative Earl Sears, who was a principal and has been in the school systems and knows all about that. I have a very comfortable relationship with him that sometimes if I don t understand a particular school issue, being his Whip, I ll go to him and say, Give me some guidance. Give me some insight on this particular issue. Is it good for schools? Is it bad for schools? And we have a great relationship. In fact, Earl called me in the middle of the Interim to say, Skye, just thinking about you. He s a fantastic guy and I might not have had that opportunity to really get to know him had I not been in this position. Then I also was the Whip for Representative Trebor Worthen who is out of Oklahoma City and who is a more senior member than I am. And so that s been an opportunity for me to get to make friends with somebody who has been there, who has been through a couple of sessions. I ve been able to learn from him kind of some of the moves you have to make to get where you re going. I have a great group of people that I get to work with by being a Whip and I started out not even knowing what a Whip did. So I m very happy to be one now that I know what it is. (Laughs) Did any of the senior women take you under their The senior women in our caucus are fantastic. You just don t get better. I mean, they all did I remember walking into that first meeting like four days after election. I was so nervous, I didn t know what I was doing. I mean, it was a whirlwind. And they were all so kind. I mean, sometimes women can be a little catty and sometimes a woman can be sometimes they are harder on their own gender than men are. And that s what I was 27 ready for. I was ready to walk in and have to battle the women and not particularly battle the men. And they were fantastic. I mean, they want to see everyone succeed, whether you re a man or a woman. But they re certainly not going to try to hold me back because I m a female. They would often come up Sally Kern perhaps might have been the best. She would often come up and say, Skye, how are your kids? Did you have a long drive this morning? She was always worried about me driving home every single day. Skye did you make it okay? Now you need to drive home. You need to drive careful. You need to get out of here as soon as session is over. She was always concerned about me and Representative Denney and Representative Billy I ve perhaps grown the closest to. Representative Billy is closest to my age and has several children, young children, who are close to my kids ages. And Representative Denney, oddly enough, is about the age of my mother and we were laughing one time. We were at a convention and I had just got done speaking and a gentleman walked up who knew Representative Denney and said, Well Lee And I had walked over at this point. I had been speaking throughout a breakfast and walked over to Lee because she and I had ridden together to the meeting. He said, Well Lee, is this your daughter? And I laughed. I wanted to cry because I thought clearly I didn t make any kind of a statement because I had been speaking for thirty minutes up here. I said, Yes, sir. And she said, No, this isn t my daughter. This is Representative McNiel. So since then I have teased her about being my mom. And we were driving one day and she said, Skye, you know, I bet I m near your mom s age. I said, Well, how old are you? And she told me and I said, You are near. You re four years older. So that s kind of been our joke. So for Mother s Day I got her a little gift and took it in there and put it on her desk. But she perhaps has given me the most guidance and she reminds me of my mom not in a bad way, but in a good way. I can go to her and just be Skye. I can tell her honestly, openly how I feel about something and it may be the wrong thought or the wrong viewpoint and she ll tell me. Not in a motherly way but in a friendly way. She s a very good friend of mine. And we just have a great connection and I m so blessed to have her. And Representative Billy is right down the hall from me and so a lot of times I ll just go down to her office and vent a little bit about an issue. Or we can talk about kids. Our daughters are close to the same age and so we visit and it s just refreshing to see another mom go through the same kinds of things that I m going through. Not that it s hard or not that it s this is obviously what we want to do. But sometimes there are trials and tribulations with having a young family. We might miss a 28 ballgame or miss a t-ball game or practice, which most of us tried so hard to make it home to all of them. But sometimes it made it comforting just to go in and say, You know, I didn t get to go home to Paik s ball game tonight. And we just visit about that. She s a very spiritual, Christian woman and it s good to go in sometimes and get renewed with her spirit and her faith. And you know, we ll just pray sometimes that we ll get through the day and that our kids will be proud of who we are and that they are learning something from their mommas. It s just a great relationship. Fantastic women. There are some fantastic democrat women that, when my great-grandmother passed away who clearly was a very important part of my life, when she passed away, I get this wonderful card from Representative Jeannie McDaniel in the mail. And it was just so thoughtful of her to take the time to send this card and write such nice, kind words. When we get on that floor, we typically are a unit. There are some dividing lines like we talked about, some of them being rural, some of them been urban, some of them being democrat, some of them being republican, some of them being just different districts. Just different make-ups of districts or points of view. But as a whole when we walk off the floor, we re mostly friends, the majority of us. Depending on which side of the aisle you sit on, you still have made lots of friends on the other side of the aisle and I think that s important to know. I encourage people to come to the Capitol and watch the make-up of the floor and watch people go across each side of the aisle to visit and to tease and the camaraderie that goes on. And you need that. Some people think that, Oh, they re laughing down on the floor. They re cutting up. But, you know, we need that. We need that on the floor to remember that we are real people that have a very important job, like a lot of other people have lots of important jobs. Whether you re a banker or a school administrator or a teacher or a stay-at-home mom who s raising her children. Regardless of what you are, your job is important to somebody in some aspect. We just have to remember that we have to have those friendships. You ve got to have people there to vote on your bills. You ve got to have an open communication line with so many people to tell them why your bill is good and to be able to have some open communication of why your bill may not be good. If you re all closed off thinking you have the perfect idea, you have the perfect bill and you don t need to discuss this with anybody, they should just clearly see how good you are and how good your ideas are. You are wrong. You need to have those friendships on both sides of the aisle because you need both sides of the aisle to get stuff through. 29 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel Jeannie McDaniel, I interviewed her a few weeks ago, and she is a neat lady. She is very neat. She gave a speech at the Professional Women s Association Woman of the Year banquet just did a fantastic job. I didn t know her then because I was only a candidate and I was so excited to get to meet her. Advice for women who were thinking about politics do you have any to offer? You know I was talking to a group of women called Professional Women. It s a group in Bristow, which they were having their district meeting. It s a group of women who worked outside of the home, and they just come together. A lot of them maybe are retired now and they come together and just visit. It s just a way for them to outreach and to make some friendships. I was lucky enough to get to go speak with them about a week ago. But we talked a lot about that and I made the assumption that there are two types of women. The first type of woman, and I think we all fit in one of these categories and maybe both at different points in our life. One of them is, I am a woman and I deserve certain things because I am a woman. In that type-A, you might think, People need to be nice to me because I m a woman. People need to give me a little bit of an advantage because I m a woman. You know, I think there is a certain group of women who fit in that category who were brought up to think that they aren t as smart sometimes or they can t do it because they started out behind. Then I think that there s the type-B woman who says, I m going to do it because not because I m a woman, but because I m skilled, I m knowledgeable, I ve prepared myself and I m going to do whatever my goal is. I think that s where I think we need to move women into thinking. I think we need to teach our daughters not to think I deserve something because I m a woman. I think they need to say, I m going to get something because I ve prepared myself because I m smart enough, because I m strong enough, because I m capable of doing whatever it is they want to do. For me, it was politics. I wanted to go into politics. I never expected anybody to vote for me because I was a woman. I don t expect anyone to vote on my bill because I m a woman. I don t expect them to be any nicer to me or to be any ruder to me. I don t expect anything because I m a woman. I expect them to view me as a legislator. And if I m capable and if I am knowledgeable enough and if I can articulate my message to them and they think it s a good idea, I expect them to vote for it. If they think it s a bad idea, then I expect them to come to me and 30 say, It s just a bad idea. I m not voting for you this time. But I think we have to be in the mindset that we re just as smart as any other man or any other woman. I m not going to let anybody stand in my way, whether it be a man or a woman. I don t care what they are. And I was taught that if I act like a lady a lady doesn t mean that I have to pretend like a man is smarter than me or that I m smarter than that man. There are lots of men smarter than me. There are lots of women smarter than me. That s just how it goes. But as a woman, I have to be professional. I try to conduct myself that way. I try to conduct myself that would make my parents and my grandparents and my daughters proud that I m doing whatever it is I m doing. I think that as a lady, I also have to be nice when a man is being nice to me back. When he opens the door for a group of women coming through, you know, I ll often times will see a woman, Well I don t need you to open the door. He was being nice. Chivalry is not dead. And I think that as a lady, we accept that and we say, Thank you, sir. When they pull out a chair for us at a meeting, I don t take that as they don t think I can pull out my own chair. I take that as they were raised right and their parents taught them the way to treat a lady and as a lady I try to give them the respect and tell them thank you and show them that I was raised right. I know that they were just showing me a kind gesture. I think that we have to get back to that. Women and men are equal in their career. I think we can do anything a man can do and I think if you re still in that mindset that you either deserve something or you can t do something because you re a woman, you re only holding yourself back. That s why I do what I do. I want my children I have two girls I want them to know that whatever they want to do, if they want to be a stay-at-home mom, I want them to be the very best stay-at-home mom they can be. If they want to be a teacher or own a flower shop, which is what I did for a while, I want them just to know that they can be the very best at that. And they don t need to take any lip off of anybody, man or woman, and listen to people tell them they can t do it because they are strong. They re independent. They re very capable little girls right now and hopefully women. And I think it s so important. So many times I hear women talk about how men don t treat them right. Well, if you demand that respect if you demand that you be treated the same, which is what I hope I do I don t always succeed in everything I want to do but I hope that when I walk in I conduct myself in a way that men know I m there for business. And that women know I m there for business. I m not there to play any games. I m not there to play girl games or to conduct myself in a way that might think that somebody 31 might get the wrong impression about me. I m there to do my job. I happen to be a girl. I happen to sometimes wear a skirt and high heels, you know. I like heels and I joke with people that I m going to do what I set out to do and I may do it wearing red heels. I think that that s just who I am. I want to be somebody that blazes a trail for somebody else. And hopefully I can do it with some class and some style and people will respect that with me and go, You know what, she did something good. She didn t sit back and let people do it for her. Or she didn t expect that people should do it for her because she was a woman. She just did something good whether she was a man or a woman, she did something good. And that s what I want. I think if people want to get into politics women, don t think, Can I do it because I m a woman? Think, Can I do it because have I prepared myself for it? Do I have the knowledge to do it? Don t say, Will people vote or not vote for me because I m a female? I did lots of those interviews. Lots of interviews after I was elected. Well what are you going to do now that you are a mom? Well I was a mom before. I ve been a mom, this isn t new. And this is something I prepared for. I prepared myself to be a working mother. I ve prepared my children that mom s going to go to work and here s what mom s doing. Here is why I go to work, girls. This is what I do. I call home and visit with them after school. How did your day go baby? What did you do today? And you have dance, you know, this afternoon. We ll talk about it. You ve got dance this afternoon, Maw-maw is going to pick you up and Daddy will be there. And I ll be there to cook you dinner. Or, You know what, I m not going to be home till after you re in bed but I ll see you in the morning. I ll wake you up and let you know that I m here. My daughter, she had a saying I would always tell her, Paik, I love you all the way to the moon and back. And that was on a movie sometime back in college. She would say, Momma, I love you all the way to the Capitol and back. I don t know where she came up with that. She thinks the Capitol is farther than the moon so she teases that she loves me more. But my girls know what I m doing. I think they, to the best of their knowledge at age four and two, understand that why Momma does what I do. And they hopefully are learning something. And my daughter will just go out and kind of talk to anybody, my oldest one. My youngest one is going to be the same way, I think. But we were at Halloween and the Police Chief was standing over there and in our Halloween you go through Main Street and you kind of line up like a herd of cattle. You just kind of line up and go down the street and the business owners will 32 Finchum McNiel Finchum McNiel give you some candy and so I was being Mom that night. And everybody said, Well you should have had a campaign you should have been passing out candy for your campaign. And I said, Sometimes I ve just got to be Mom. I ve just got to be Paik and Jamison s Momma and that s what I ve got to do and tonight is one of those nights. I m proud to see my little girls dressed up as a little clown and superwoman and I m here to do that. But on the trail, the Police Chief was blocking one of the streets and so I just kind of stepped over a little bit to shake his hand and told him I was glad to see him and thanks for keeping our kids safe on Halloween. And I didn t know it but my daughter, my oldest one was behind me and my youngest one was in front of me and my oldest one would just walk by and reach up and shook his hand just like I did and said, Thank you, sir, and kept going and so everybody behind me laughed and I turned around and they told me what she had done. But I hope she learns how to conduct herself and I think that just shows that maybe, just maybe, I m on the right path. And there are lots of times that I fail and I think, Oh, Lord help me. I want to raise these girls right. But I think if you re a woman and if you want to run, just prepare yourself. Just prepare yourself to be knowledgeable, to be open, to be articulate, to be ready to run your tail off, and work hard. And don t ever think twice about being a girl. It doesn t make any difference. Five generations in your family that s saying a lot isn t it? Yes. Were politics ever discussed at the dinner table? No, no. When I decided to run, we had quite a discussion right outside my house with my mom and dad and my husband and my oldest daughter. And we visited about it and said, you know, they don t know anything about government or politics. They, for some part have this same perception as a lot of people to do. You know, politicians are bad and they re all bad people and they are there not for the right reasons. But once they took a hold of the idea and they had the same vision I did we do talk about it now. But when I was growing up, heaven s no. We didn t know anything about politics. We knew who the governor was and we knew who our state representative was and we could call our state representative because we knew him. But we didn t know the intricate parts and we didn t realize how much government affected our everyday life. It s amazing to me now that we didn t. Not that we didn t know but we didn t understand our role in it. We didn t understand our role in government as citizens, what our role 33 Finchum McNiel was to be in touch with our representative and our senator and our congressmen and women and let them know where we stood on our issues and how everyday decisions somehow government plays a part in that. So now we are more aware of that. And we talk about it around the dinner table with my kids sometimes. I want them to know that there are lots more out there. I don t want them to think politics because Momma did it that they have to do it. But we talk about it and I let them know that they have to make a difference and it may be politics and it may not. But it is interesting. The conversations have certainly changed since I ve been in government since pre-government and they still sometimes have a bad view of politicians and I get harassed a whole lot. But it s good harassment. It s eye-opening for them and for me because we talk about real issues. They don t pat me on the back and say, Oh, we re so proud of you Skye. Anything you think is just perfect. And we have real discussions about real issues and within my family, it s such a large family, we have differing issues on a lot of big topics. But we are able to sit down and talk those out and discuss. I don t always agree with them and they don t always agree with me but at the end of the day we ve talked it out. We re still a family and we go on about our day. Do you have anything that I haven t covered that you want to make sure we get down? I don t think so. I m honored. I don t do many interviews on women. I talked a little bit, the last interview I did on being a woman, the lady kind of wanted to give me a hard time about being a working mom. And I said, Ma am have you called any of my colleagues that are freshman men who have young families because there are three men I can think of off the top of my head who have children the same age as my girls or at least as young as my youngest daughter? She said, No, I don t believe I have. I said, I ll tell you what. You call and get an interview from a man and you ask them about how they re going to be a working dad and how they re going to take care of their families while being in the city and how they re going to be a legislator and juggle that with being a dad and then you call me back and I ll give you an interview. And the phone was pretty silent and the conversation was over. I haven t heard from her since and I don t think I ve done any more of those types of interviews. I don t particularly go to women s meetings or clubs because I don t think that that s the best use of my time. I think the best use of my time is to go to groups where we re going to accomplish something as a whole. We re not going to say, we re a different group apart from someone else. Not that those groups are bad, it s just not a thing that I m into mostly. And so I had some reservations about doing this particular 34 Finchum McNiel Finchum interview. But the more I thought about it, I think it s important that young girls do know why maybe I don t do some of those interviews and why I don t give a second glance or second thought to being a female. I know I m a female and it s apparent and I love being a female. I love being a mom. It s the most wonderful thing in the whole wide world, is to be a mom, and I want young women to know that they can do absolutely anything in this whole wide world they want to do. But don t ever think somebody owes it to you because you re a girl. And don t ever think you can t do it because you re a girl. It s just not an issue anymore. It s amazing how I ve talked to women from the 60s forward about how it has progressed to this. It s just great to hear someone younger than me say this. So there s hope for the future. There is. Thank you for doing it, I appreciate it. Okay, thanks so much. --- ---..