 Barbara Anton: The date is September 29, 1987, we're in Providence, RI. I'm Barbara Anton and I will be interviewing Martha Dickie Sharp Cogan, Brown class of 1926. I'll, let's start this morning, Martha, with, uh, by having you tell me a little bit about your family background, uh, where you grew up and your family, members of your family and so forth. Martha Dickie Sharp Cogan: I was born in 1905, on April 25th and on Gano Street in Providence, RI to an English family, recently come to the United States and it happened that my aunt and uncle lived on the ground floor and my father and mother lived on the second floor. And, when I was born, my aunt had uh, uh found that she couldn't have any more children and she'd always wanted to have a daughter and so she shared care for me with my mother and was a second loving parent. Later on, when my parents had to move away, I, my aunt insisted that I stay with her. By this time, however, my, my father and mother had another child, a daughter and then a son and so my mother had two children of her own that kept her rather busy. So, actually, I grew up in the, in my aunt and uncle's home and their name was Dickie, my uncle was a Scot from Edinborough and they were very disciplined people. My, my aunt loved gardening and they always, she always had a garden full of flowers all around the house. And, my uncle worked on the railroad, a very, had a very reponsible job and I use to take his hot lunches to him walking up along the railroad tracks to the Seekonk River bridge which he use to open and close. So, you can imagine what it was like, this child walking out every day with a hot lunch for my uncle. I went to public school and graduated from Hope Street High School, unfortunately in the middle of the year so that I either had to double up in order to finish college because I graduated in February, I mean in the mid-season. And, so I, it meant that I either had to double up in order to go and be the class of '26, or else stay six months longer and be the class of '27 so I decided that I'd double up and take. The most important influence, I think, on any of my life in, in Hope Street High School was the fact that I had a perfectly marvelous teacher, French, Susanna Wy Cushing, whom I admired and who taught us a great deal about France and about the world outside. And, I also had a, I went to First Baptist Church with my uncle every Sunday from the time I was this very small child and so I was brought up to be a God-fearing Baptist and my uncle taught the Men's class, in the Men's class because he loved the Bible and we had, what you would call, a very religious home. And, my Sunday school teacher was Sophie Houland Giled, who was a member of the, of the church and who took a very great interest in me and who began to do all sorts of little things like asking me to come over and help her and work with her in various ways and she'd pay me for it and I was very grateful for the money. And, later on, when I went to high school and began to think about college, Sophie Giled was very much interested and she spoke to her son who was the Registrar of Brown University and suggested that he, see if he could arrange for me to get a scholarship at Brown. Meantime, I had two or three passions besides babysitting and other kinds of activities in order to earn enough money to prepare for the great event of college, I had, I learned to play tennis because the boys in the neighborhood all played tennis and I learned from the boys and played with the boys so that when I came to college, I was able to make the tennis team and played as captain of the Pembroke team. BA: Hm. 1 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: Should I say anything more about the tennis? But, at any rate, I won the championship at Brown and then, also, played as Brown's champion against women in other colleges. Somehow those of us who are at Pembroke were not in, in very much relationship with the men. About my sophomore year, I became so interested in overseas missionary work that I thought it would be great if I could become a medical missionary and so I began to take courses in Biology that would prepare me for a medical degree, without understanding the fact that it would be four years of medical school and that I couldn't possibly afford it and so when I finally graduated from Brown after - actually, Pembroke - after three and a half years, I decided instead to go out to learn to be a social worker because we had had a person who came to the college and spoke to us about the training that one could get in Northwestern University in Chicago at Hull House and thereby graduate with a degree and be a appropriately educatedto be a social worker. BA: Well, I think it was interesting, though, that you back, back in 1923 or whatever, were thinking about medical school because, surely, most women weren't thinking along those lines. Uh, what was it like to be taking all these science classes with, uh, were you the only woman in the classes, for example? MSC: Very often I was the only woman because, and we had to go over to the man's campus to take them, you see, because we didn't have any of that kind of teaching going on at Pembroke. BA: No science? MSC: No science, at least that I had a chance to. I think we must of taken geography and various courses that would be considered partly scientific, but, actually, the business of Biology and all kinds of other medical courses had to be taken there and what I did was to sign up for those, in addition to the regular literary courses that one normally took. And, so, actually, uh, I, when I graduated in 1926, I got a funny degree. It was called P.H.B. and not a n A.B, you see, and, then, decided that I would go to the Recreation Training School in Chicago. So, in 1926, we found out that I was accepted by the Recreation Training School in Chicago and, uh ... BA: Excuse me, can I ask you a few more questions about Brown? MSC: Oh, sure. BA: Go back a little bit about something what the atmosphere was like. What was the social life like at Brown? MSC: Well, the, uh, I loved all of the athletic things. I played on the fistball team and the basketball team and other things and, uh, and coached athletics at the local Wheeler School and other places to make enough money on afternoons and help with my expenses. So, I loved sports of all kinds and, of course, finally concentrated mostly on tennis because, when I made the tennis team, then we had to go around visiting other colleges and playing the other colleges and they had to be women's colleges and not very many women's tennis teams in those days. Urn, but, actually, life was quite separated. The girls did things by themselves. But, the boys would invite us on dates to the fraternity houses for parties and dances and it was great fun and, of course, I met a lot of boys in the Biology classes and so I came to know several boys who always invited me - I think of the three boys that always invited me to anything that was going on, where they had to take a girl along. And, there was none of this kind of, of social life like today. You either got all dressed up and went to a ball or a party, there were no cocktail parties. Nobody drank. I can't even remember ever having a drink of any kind of liquor. 2 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 BA: Or anything being served? MSC: Or anything ever being served and there, and the explicit kind of sex in movies and stuff like that just didn't exist then. When we went to movies, they were usually historical films if we went at all or things were really fitted very well with the kind of life that a young person growing up in a Christian neighborhood and interested in the Bible, reading the Bible everyday and believing in that as the principle of life that we were taught in Sunday school. So, it was quite a different kind of experience. And, in the summers, I went, I was asked by Mrs. Oiled to go up and work at her place in New Hampshire - she had a house on the lake. She had a whole group of children, as well as, uh, one of her sons who was the Registrar of Brown. And, they would all visit her during the summer and we'd all cook, we'd do the cooking. She also had a grandson who would come up from New York and he and I use to scrub the floors and keep the house clean and go swimming everyday with all the other children whose families lived along the edge of the lake. So, it was lots of fun. BA: You were a city girl, urn, when you started at Brown, anyhow. MSC: Yes, yes, of course. BA: Urn, did you feel that you missed out on a lot of college life being a city girl versus a dorm girl? MSC: No, because I was a city girl for the first three years and my senior year, a family friend, member, decided that I ought to have one year in the dormitory so I went to live in Metcalf House and I was elected President of Metcalf, so I was responsible for some of the things that went on. It was a, was a very interesting experience, of course, got to know. I don't think we had roommates in those days. We had our own private rooms, but this was the time during which Dean Morriss was Dean of Pembroke and I was always invited to all the dances at Brown and went out frequently with boys. I remember Dr. Kenneth Brittain of Providence who was one of my beaus and we went out one night to a dance, somewhere out at one of the college fraternity dances being held at someplace. And, we didn't get back, because we had a flat tire, until after three o'clock and you're suppose to be in the dormitory by three o'clock. So, the next morning Dean Morriss questioned me and she said, "What were you doing?" And, I said, "Well, we had a flat tire and we had to walk miles in order to find a garage and get the tire fixed." And, she said, "Well, I'm sorry but I don't believe you, so I'm going to put you on campus for the rest of your senior life at Metcalf." So, that meant that I couldn't be out in the evenings after 9:30, when the doors shut and I had to be extremely, uh, and that I couldn't go even to our own parties. I remember missing after 10 o'clock at night, I brought one of my friends, one of my beaus, I brought as to, to the dance that night, but I had to go upstairs. I got him to stay and dance with the other girls, but I had to go upstairs at 10 0' clock becuase I was on campus. And, years afterwards, Dean Morriss said to me, "Really, was it really true what you told me?" I said, "Yes, I told you the truth and you really ruined the whole end of my social life as a senior at Brown, at Pembroke." BA: Was that your only contact or your only, your biggest memory of Dean Morriss? MSC: No, we use to see a great deal of her. She always spoke at Chapel services. And, uh, she was a very interesting person to listen to, both as a speaker and also as a person. And, of course, we felt - also one of the other things that I really owe Dean Morriss was that girls were not allowed to smoke when I was in college. 3 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 And, one of my friends was dismissed from Pembroke because she smoked. And, that was enough for me, I just wanted to get my college education, so I wasn't going to dismissed. And, so, I never learned to smoke. And, later on, when my husband was a minister, we had two little old ladies in our parish out in Western Pennsylvania and they said that one of the college president's, or one of the college professor's wives smoked and they thought she couldn't be a really religious person because she smoked and I thought, "Well, if it means so much to them, I never did learn." So, never in my life have I, have I smoked and it was really, uh, I'm very grateful for it too because I never needed it. BA: Nice, nice. MSC: It's really, and that came out of college. Of course, we had a, I had a wonderful class. We all knew each other very well and the girls came from a very varied background. And, we studied and worked together and were in sports together and really had, you know, a perfectly delightful college life. And, all of us, most of us came from middle class families, all of whom needed the help of the girl working, either weekends taking care of children for people or, or I read to two old ladies in Providence at twenty-five cents an hour and ... BA: Everyday? MSC: Everyday from 5 to 7 and I had this job for almost two years, I think, while I was working at college and it was, they wanted to have very interesting books read to them - I found the books interesting and the reading interesting and I read just two hours, from 7 to 9, and I'd have supper beforehand and then I'd go and do my studying afterwards. And, then, we also do, and before 7 o'clock I could do my coaching at Wheeler School or anyone of the other Prep Schools where I was working with their girls and teaching athletics. So, it, it was a very busy and delightful life and I enjoyed it very much. BA: Well, it certainly sounds as if you got as much as you could possibly get out of it. So, what made you decide to go to Northwestern? Was it that woman who came to Brown to talk? MSC: We had a woman who came to speak at Chapel one day and she was a graduate of the Recreation Training School in Chicago and she told us all about what it was like to work in the settlement houses in Chicago and that if we went to that school, that we would - and she told us the kind of courses we'd take. For instance, we would be taught folk dancing of all the different European countries, like Czech, Moravian, Bohemian, and French and all the rest of it. And, they also, we had Sociology courses and also that we would have to do, we had to do work afterwards, volunteer work with the families of the children. So, I, I applied and was accepted and we lived in a settlement house. I lived in Chicago Commons, which was started by friends of Jane Addams. It was the second largest settlement house and in the settlement houses they had a group of, of people who would work who gave part of their time as volunteers to taking classes and to helping people in the neighborhood, as well as paying for their room and board. And, there were some really, very interesting people living in the house as residents, so-called. BA: Were these the girls? The girls didn't live in the houses did they? MSC: No, these were men and women who worked in Chicago, who lived in the settlement house and who gave one or two evenings a week to take classes in whatever field they happend to be particularly endowed or educated. And, we, we had a regular school day which began at eight o'clock in the morning and we'd take the subway, the bus down to Hull House, which was quite near Chicago Commons 4 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 and everyday Jane Addams would be having lunch in the lunchroom. They had a public lunch room where people could come for meals and so I very often sat and talked to Jane Addams about her early days and how she got Hull House started, ... BA: Exciting. MSC: Her own interests and she was a delightful woman. And, she would often bring friends of her's, whom she had interested, she had a number of very wealthyf friends who helped endoe, endow Hull House in the early days. So, it was a, it was a very interesting picture of life among the 26 nationalities, girls who came to my classes and whom I taught folk dancing. What I learned in the morning, I used in the afternoons and evenings in the classes which I was expected to lead as a member of the Hull House residence staff. So, urn, I went there and graduated in a year and at the end of that year, the Girls Worker, who was in charge of all the girls work - we put on plays, we managed all kinds of activities for the girls - this director of the girls activities became ill and had to resign and I was asked if I would take her place. So, then I became Resident Worker in charge of all the girls' work. And, while it was a very, very low-paid kind of job, I was excited about doing it because the girls were all these different nationalities, mostly Polish, Czech, and German. And so, of course, and many of them were, spoke the language of their background and we had mothers clubs to teach the mothers how to speak English and try to integrate the mothers into the program that we were working with the girls in the afternoons. And so we came, and so I think we probably went to one Polish wedding every week. Weekends were full of these amazing weddings at which everybody danced the Polka and, and they must of had some wine, but I don't ever remember drinking, drinking as being one of the things that they did. But, they had wonderful foods and, urn ... BA: Music? MSC: And music and, and orchestras that, uh, reflected this whole culture of the family in which there was a wedding. And, the other thing I realized after working there was the fact that we were, in spite of its being in what they called Hell's Kitchen - it was the worst part. It was 955 West Grand A venue. It was one of the most dangerous parts of Chicago and it was during the time when the gangs, the Italian gangs, especially, were doing all kinds of things. Nothing ever touched us and I realized that it was because we were the teachers and they respected us as the people leading their children and I think that in many cases we were really taken care of and we didn't know it because they would follow us. They knew what our program was and we never had a, any kind of untorrid experience. BA: That's interesting. MSC: And I'm perfectly sure that we were protected from it, so it was a very interesting - so I spent, uh. At the end of my first year there, my aunt and uncle in Boston had asked - my aunt was the president of the Sunday School Union at the Unitarian Church in Boston. BA: Now, who's your aunt ... ? MSC: This is Aunt Edna and Uncle Livingston Sebance. BA: That's your? MSC: They were extended, they really were not Aunt and Uncle, but they had a niece who was in Pembroke who was one of my best friends in school and so they always invited us whenever they could, they invited us when we could go, to go up 5 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 and go to the Boston Symphony with them on weekends and, because she had, wanted, invited to bring her friend, I was invited along. So, they weren't my real aunt and uncle, but they became very deeply interested in helping both of us get our education. We were both in the same class and as a result, they were interested in my experiment in Chicago and as a result, my aunt was afraid that I might be having a very rough time out there and she asked the young man who had just graduated from Harvard Law School and had decided to work with the Unitarian Sunday School Union nationally, if when he was in Chicago, he would look me up and take me out to dinner and see whether or not he could find out if everything was going alright with me and report back to them. So, Waitstill Hastings Sharp, a graduate of Harvard, the son of a professor at Boston University, for whom the library is named and his wife who was a Hastings and went back to the Battle of Hastings, as far as her family was concerned, came from a family in Ohio, whose grandfather was given the land because he was a soldier in our Revolutionary Army. BA: Oh my word! MSC: So, it's that kind of an old family. So, Waits - his name was Waitstill Hastings, named Hastings for his mother because she was a Hasting, Sharp - had grown up on this, well, estate, it was a farm in Hingham, Massachusetts, which his father commuted to daily with a horse and buggy at the station in Hingham and would then take the train everyday to, to teach in Boston. And, he himself had gone to Boston University, had started in, had gone to Harvard when his father was teaching. He was one of a famliy of three and he had, no, of two. He had a younger brother who also was just a year of two than he was. But, any rate, my aunt asked Waitstill Sharp if he would come and see how I was doing and he invited me out for dinner and I thought that was very sweet and so on and I tried to report to him what life was like and take him to the things at the settlement house, but, of course, he had much more important things to do. But, at any rate, he began writing to me and every time he come to Chicago, he would take me out to dinner and this resulted, finally, in his asking me if I would marry him and, by this time, he had become the, he was Director for Religious Education of the American Unitarian Association. So, we were married in, uh, in June of 1928 and I moved to, we had decided we would, he wanted to go on and take more, more studies. He had already gotten his L.L.B. so he was a lawyer from Harvard Law School, but he thought he wanted to go on and get a Ph.D. in philosophy of Religion and so we decided we'd live in Cambridge and he would go back to Harvard and take courses in this, along with his job, which was to travel all over the United States and encourage the religion education in Unitarian churches all over the country. So, we found a tiny apartment in Cambridge, Massachusetts and, uh, I thought I'd like to take a, a course too, and he said, "Well, I think you better take something in which you improve your English because you certainly use words that I don't approve of. You obviously lived in the West side of Chicago for a long time." So, I said, he said, "I don't believe you could do it anyway." He dared me. And, so I said, "I'm going to do it." So, I decided I would take a course in Comparative Literature in three languages, German, French and English and I, therefore, studied under some of the best professors at Harvard University. And, in the meantime, while Waitstill was taking his courses in, in his field, in philosophy, I would very often have to take his notes with the most famous philosophers of the day, like Perry and others, which were often given in their own homes in Cambridge. So, we, we got to know Hawking and all the various other professors of philosophy and I got my masters in June and he got his, he got his Ph.D. By this time, the Unitarians decided he knew enough, he better be called to a church and he decided he was ready. [Telephone rings] Shall I, um, I think we may have to stop a minute. [Tape stops and starts again.] 6 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: Okay, Barbara, I forgot to put in the important fact that I had a child after we moved to Cambridge. We had only been living there for about a year when we decided that we would love to have a child and I became pregnant and we decided and Waitstill decided, since his family lived in Hingham, Massachusetts, that it would be great if we bought an antique house. So, we went house hunting in Hingham and we bought the old household that had belonged to the Cushing family. Actually, it was on the main street in Hingham. It was a gorgeous house that had been the old General Theopolis Cushing Tavern. And, we began going to auctions and buying antiques weekends and dressing up in costumes the way everybody else in our neighborhood did when people came to look at the houses and show them the various kinds of antique paneling and how people did things. And, our house, the kitchen had actually been the old tap room of the General Theopolis Cushing Tavern and everybody named Cushing in this country is descended from this family. BA: Hmm. MSC: And, on our side of the street, we had thirteen families named Cushing and we went to the Unitarian Church on the South side, which was just down the street from us and when, in the morning, you never had to remember anybody's name because you always, "Good morning, Mrs. Cushing. Good morning, Mr. Cushing." And, I'll never forget the first annual meeting of the church I attended­ because this is typically New England at this period - the president of the church was a Cushing and his wife was the secretary of the Board. And, he, the president was making a speech and he suddenly stopped in the middle of it and he said to his wife, "Alice, why is it I never, I never should have said what I said becuase I forgot what I said about it last year." So, he said, "Would you mind repeating what I voted last year?" So, she turned back - she was the secretary - so she turned back the pages and she read, "Last year you voted so and so." So, he said, "Great, I vote the same thing again this year." This is typically old New England in those days. Whatever they did last year, they did the same thing this year. And, actually, after I moved into the old General Theopolis Cushing Tavern, I was asked if I would like to become a member of the Cemetary Association. And, I said, "Well, what do you do?" Why, they said, "We sew and we have a sale every year of what we've sewed and we." And, I said, "Well, what do you do with the money?" "Oh, these help keep up the headstones. And, even though you don't have anybody in the cemetary, maybe - it's the most popular club in town. We think, perhaps, we'd love to have you join." And, I said, I really felt that I was the only person who was at least under fifty who was a member of the Cemetary Association, but there was a great passion for the past in those days. BA: Oh yeah. MSC: And, my father and mother-in-law also lived just about half a mile from us ­ they had a place which, they actually, they and their three sons raised all of their own food, excepting salt during the war years. The father was a professor at Boston University and commuted everyday with his buggy, as I've said, from the station and back. And, they also had a house in, at Exeter Street in Boston and my father~in-law use to give readings to all the old families interested in literature, so it was quite the social thing to go to the Sharp's readings and to belong to this little cotery of people interested in literature in Boston. So, this was this kind of background of the family and it was, it was a family that was most interested in anything that had to do with education or with reading. And, my father-in-law was a delightful man. He finally wrote about twenty-six books. BA: Oh, my word! 7 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: All of it on Natural History, you see. And, they, because he wrote about the things that he knew and, and of the people he knew. And, he really was a delightful person. My mother-in-law was Ph.D. before she was married and, as I said, she came from Ohio, an old revolutionary family that had settled on a part of land given to them by the United States government at the end of the war, all these survivors. [End of Tape 1, Side 1] Tape 1, Side 2. MSC: ... Husband's father and mother and his, I said three brothers before - there were four boys in the family. My mother-in-law was an extremely interesting woman who was, who decided, first of all, when she was married to Professor Sharp, he was at Boston University and had begun to, to study there as a student in the Theological School because he wanted to become a Methodist minister. And, at the end of his first year at Boston University Theological School, his professor was tried for heresy because he had been, Hinkley Gilbert Mitchell had been to Palestine the, uh, the previous summer and had found all kinds of information and background about the Bible which he felt his students should be taught. And, when he came back with this new information, which the Methodist churches at this time had never had researched or believed was true, he was tried by the professors at Boston University Theological School and charged with heresy and dismissed from the University. BA: What year was this? MSC: Well, this was when, well, I'll have to look it up. BA: Oh. In the Thirties though? MSC: This was in the Thirties. BA: In the early Thirties? MSC: In the early Thirties. BA: Yeah, that's all. MSC: And, as a result, President Hunington of Boston University called in my father-in-law who had led the insurgent group of students and said, "Listen, Sharp, you're a very bright boy, but you better not go on in this field." And, uh, in the ministry, because although he had a teaching ministerial job and had to preach on Sundays, the way all the ministerial students had, they decided he would never go anywhere because he was such a left-winger and was interested in real happenings in Palestine. So, President Hunington said, "If you wish it, I will give you a job as a professor of English because you're brilliant in English and, therefore, you and your wife and your children can all come and live in this donnitory sort of room that I have here at the college and you can teach English." So, my father-in-law, as a result of this change, became probably one of the best known and one of the most distinguished professors of early English, middle English, and as electra in all of the United States. And, he would go on Commencement tours across, later on when I was married into the family, and would lecture and he wrote twenty-six books. And, the library at Boston University was named for him. And, my mother-in-law helped him by correcting his papers and being a very real part of everything that he did. And, they traveled abroad and did all kinds of interesting things. So, my husband had grown up in a family in which ideas were very 8 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 important. And, Waitstill, of course, was the second child. His older brother, Gallus Lore Sharp, named for his father, was not, didn't, wasn't quite as interested in intellectual things as Waitstill was and his two younger brothers were still in college. So, actually, our life revolved around a house in Hingham where we, where we had our new baby son, Waitstill Hastings Sharp was born, until a year later, the, uh, they decided, my, Waitstill decided that he really wanted to have a parish and become a minister himself because he felt his father had an interest, everybody was interested and so, he, the American Unitarian Association said, "Okay, you've got your degree now in Theology, as well as a Masters and a Ph., and a graduation from Harvard Law School, so we'll find you a parish." And, so they invited him to become the minister of the Meadville Unitarian Church, out in Meadville, Pennsylvania, where at one time I started to say Meadville Theological because the original training school for Unitarian ministers was started at Meadville and at, for years and even the succeeding schools sometimes carried part of the name of that Meadville Theological Schoo!. So, uh, we were, uh, it was suggested that we go out and we gave up our little apartment in Cambridge and, uh, Waitstill was gi ven this, kind of a, of a, of a job of, of being the Director for Religious Education for all the Unitarian Churches, he gave up that job and in 1931 we went to, to the Meadville, Pennsylvania Unitarian Church. There, we, we had a little, we had a little bit of a, of an apartment because they, the church was renting the, the minister's house. They wanted to make that part of the income of the church. BA: Oh, I see. MSC: And, urn, we both threw ourselves into work in the community. And, there was no Sunday School because everybody was too old and families of middle year hadn't become interested in Unitarianism out there. And, our chief supporter and help, person who helped us was Mrs. Henry P. Kidder, who was the widow of Henry P. Kidder who started the Kidder, Peabody, the national company in which I think has its headquarters in Boston. And, Mrs. Kidder had a servant who had been her brother's servant when he was a general in the war and his name was Lincoln. He was a black servant and Lincoln use to do all kinds of errands for her and he also did them for me. Mrs. Kidder felt that I should, as all the ministers' wives before me, I should accept once a year a length of silk for a new dress and that whenever they cooked, uh, baked bread once a week, she would send me over two hot loaves of bread. And, she took a great deal of interest. I, first, when we first went out there and our apartment was made ready, she took us and our children in and we lived in the great big, old mansion that had been her house and, and her family's house. And it was because her brother, her brother and her father were so, had become Unitarians, that they started, gave money for the Meadville Theological School to be started there, you see. And so, the Kidders were very important people in it. And, although she was a very elderly woman, she insisted on wearing flat-heel shoes and walking down and getting her own milk everyday downtown, and there were certain other things that she made herself do as a matter of discipline. She lived there in the summer and in the winter, she went back to Boston as one of the great social hostesses of Boston, and her diamonds, which were always kept in the safe deposit box, were considered fabulous. But, she was a very practical and a very helpful person and she became one of my best friends. BA: Was it a large parish in Meadville? MSC: It was quite a small parish. As I said, there was no Sunday School, so one of the first things that we had to do was to start calling on all the people who moved to town, the new people who didn't know about Unitarianism or who were Protestants and didn't know what they really felt about Protestantism. And, so we built, started bulding the church and we worked extremely hard at it and, urn. 9 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 [Tape stopped and restarted.] MSC: I had just been in Meadville for about two or three months when I had a telephone call from one of the, urn, from a woman in Meadville who said that they'd like to have me make a speech for them at their next meeting on peace and I said, "Well, I don't know anything about peace." And, she said, "Well, we're sure that you do know enough and I'm going to expect you to arrive on such a date and, and say that you're speaking on peace and it will be at such" - it was one of the other churches - "And our Meadville Peace Society will be gathered to hear you." I said, "But, I can't." And, she said, "Well, you've got to," and hung up the phone. When Waitstill came back from his study that night, he said, "Well, what happened?" I said, "Well, I've been asked to make a speech on peace and you know I don't know anything about it." And, he said, "Well," he said. Uh, I said, "Won't you write a speech for me and I'll read it?" He said, "I will not." He said, "But, I'll give you the stuff to write it about." So, the next night when he came home from his office, he opened his suitcase and out came all the books he had on International Relations. He said, "There's your, your speech and go ahead." So, I made a speech on peace and as a result of it, I became so interested in what I begun, I was invited to go to a meeting, where Frederick Livey of the National Council Against Relation, Religious Discrimination was making a speech and this was on peace. And, he began talking about what should be done by people in this country and how we could organize and help to educate people to what our relationships were and so on. And so, I, he invited me to go to a national meeting they were having in Washington and I did, and I became so excited about it and what we might do that I, by this time, joined the Peace Society in Meadville. And, Livey suggested that I might do - we were very much interested in the United States joining the League of Nations and so he asked me if I could do a house-to-house canvas. So, Waitstill agreed not to go back to Hingham for our vacation in the summer, but to help me and I picked out, uh, a group of people whom I'd already met and asked them if they would go house-to-house. Well, we spent two solid weeks in the summer, going to get people registered. We went to every kind of house. We went to places where people didn't even speak English. We went to the Canalers, we went to the Downtown people and we finally listed, we got registered voters. I was very upset at one point because I talked to some people who belonged to a church and their minister said they didn't know enough to make any answers about peace. BA: Oh dear! MSC: And, I said, well, I thought that was wrong because everybody ought to know about it. And so, at the end of this period, I was able, and we wrote up a story in the local Meadville paper to give the, the numbers of people who had said that, if they had a chance, they would vote for the United States to join the League of Nations. We thought that was success enough. And, then suddenly, I had a telephone call from Erie, Pennsylvania and it was our congressman and he said, "Mrs. Sharp, I read the article about your canvas for the United Nations." He said, "I have decided that I would like to know how you feel about Bill Number so and so, which is coming up in the house." I said, "I don't know anything about Bill Number so and so." He said, "Well, of course you should know about it." Well, then he said, "Well, I'll read it to you." And, he said, I said, "Well, it sounds alright to me," when he got through. He said, "Well, can I say that you were for it?" I said, "What difference does that make?" He said, "You've got the largest registration of voters in my congressional district, all organized for International Relations." And, he said, "From now on, I'm going to ask you about every vote because I want to vote the way you feel your people would like you, like to vote." So, this became my interest also in politics and from then on, we, we, I not only joined, I was made President of the Peace Society the next year, but also, we, we 10 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 organized all kinds of International meetings in Sunday School and the church for people and so on. And, soon after that in 1936, my husband was called to go to a church outside of, near where we had lived before in Boston at WeIIesly RiBs where they had a group of Wellesly professors and their wives as members. BA: Were you happy to be going back to the East? MSC: Oh, it was wonderful because it was being with people that you, that you, your own same kind of background, you see. And, urn, we had learned in the meantime that it was important to do what we call Parish Calling. And, many, many people were coming. New people were moving to Wellesly Hills from Boston for jobs and we had a whole group of college people who were interested in intellectual ideas. And so, almost immediately, we formed the International Relations Group of Young Couples. And, we organized it in such a way that they joined, each taking an aspect of, a certain study about a country and would give their findings, their research, the results of their research at the next meeting. Well, it just happened that Waitstill and I had taken, were asked if we would take, urn, Czechoslovakia. And, this was in 19, this was 1938, just before. And, during that year, there was a great deal of discussion about what was going on in middle Europe. BA: Yes. MSC: And, by 1939, uh, Waitstill and I were so excited about it that when we gave our talk, our joint talk on Czechoslovakia, a member of our group was the Vice President of the American Unitarian Association - Edward Baker. And, Ed Baker and our Internation, uh, representation of the American Unitarian Association, the national group, talked to Ed about the fact that he hadjust made a trip to speak tot he churches, the International churches, but especially the National Church of Czechoslovakia because it was a member of the International Association of Religious Liberals. And, we had had, and the Unitarians were a member of this and he, as our International Director, had just come back from a meeting and began, and began to tellat the beginnings of the Nazi occupation of, that had happened in Czechoslovakia. And, as a result, we had seven churches in the Sudatanland, all of which were really patented on the Unitarian idea. BA: Oh. MSC: You see, when Czechoslovakia became a democracy, uh, all of three million Czechs left the Roman Catholic church and formed a liberal international church. BA: Which was like a Unitarian church. MSC:Which was like a Unitarian church and then they joined our International Association of Religious Liberals. And, therefore, there were seven Unitarian, former Unitarian churches in the Sudatanland and the first thing that the Nazis did was to, was to arrest and imprison all of the ministers because they had leadership, you see. And, also, they began to get all of the imprisoned and, and take the jobs of the various people who were there in Czechoslovakia. And, as a result, it was, it was really chaos, as far as they were concerned. So, he had come back from this, Robert Dexter, the International Relations Director of the American Unitarian Association, came back to the meeting of the Board and said, "We should do something to help our seven churches there in the Sudatanland. BA: And, the Board met in Boston, is that right? 11 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: And, the Board met in Boston and they said, "Okay, let's do it." And, they decided that what they would try to do is to send a Unitarian minister and his wife over to go there and see and do what they could to help as Americans. So, they looked for a Unitarian minister and his wife. And, Ed Baker, who was the Vice President of the Unitarian Association, was a member of our parish in Wellesly Hills and he would keep reporting to us and he had been at this meeting where Waitstill and I had made the speech about Czechoslovakia and he knew that we were more that ordinarily interested. And so, so he said to us finally, he said, "You know, we can't find anybody who has a good parish, who can go and leave and, and afford to pay, if we pay his way." He said, "We'd have tostop paying his salary because anything that we raised in the way of money, we'd have to use for help over there." So, after this, the discussions went on every week with Ed Baker and the Unitarians and they tried all these ministers and nobody would give up his parish to go and go on, go on mostly his own expense. And, they had children. I, by now had, you see, had a son and a baby daughter who was born after we, we went to Wellesly. And, so, Waitstill said at one of these conferences that we were having with, with Dex, Baker, "Oh, how I'd like to go!" And, Baker said, "Would you? Would you be willing to go, even for just three months? You and Martha could go over and get it started and then, maybe we can get someone else to do it, if you would do it as leaders." And, I said, "We couldn't do that." Here I had a child who was just about a year old and, and a little boy and a parish and, uh, but Waitstill was adament. He said, "Well, other people do it. Missionaries do it. I don't know why we can't do it." So, we began to discuss and my aunt and uncle, the Livingston Sebances, who'd always been so supportive, were Unitarians. And, uh, we discussed it with them. And, my aunt Edna, who had no children, lived in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Uncle Livingston had a factory up in New Hampshire and he use to commute there. He was a Harvard man. Aunt Edna said, "You know, if you really want to go, I think I could get Li vingston to come and we could both live in your parsonage and take care of the children and then you can go on a little trip. And, you can start it." BA: Just for three months. MSC: For three months, for the Unitartians. So, uh, Waitstill said, "Okay, let's do it." And, I said, "But, I, can't we possibly, I'll stay here and you go." No, no, they had to have couple. So, finally, with Ed Baker, we agreed to go. And, Fred Elliot, President of the American Association of the Unitarians, called us and said, this would be wonderful, so how soon can we get ready. I said, "Oh, well, it would take about a month or so. We have to get passports and visas. They won't give you a passport unless you go to Washington because it's in a war zone now and all sorts of problems." And, he said, "Never mind, we'll overcome everything." So, my aunt and uncle moved into our house and, uh, and took care, and we went through the routine. We had a maid that we had for some time and she went, she was willing to stay and do everything to take care of the children. And, Hastings was in school, going to school everyday. So, in two weeks, we had been to the, our lawyer and made our wills. We had taken care of the, of getting passports. We'd been down to see Mrs . Shippley down in the State Department. And, we had gotten all of the necessary visas and we'd been to the doctor and had a checkup. And, young Macerik, the son of the great, first president of Czechoslovakia, because he was a New Englander, had come to see us and they had given him, the Unitarians had given him a reception in Boston and he said that he was perfectly delighted that we were going. And, so, and Ed Baker and everybody said they would run the church. Ed was going to run the church and to get preachers, they would use my husband's salary to pay preachers to come and other people to do the work that we had been doing. And, everybody was doing something for Czechoslovakia and the church was all beautifully organized this was with Ed Baker, the Vice President of the American Unitarian Association, 12 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 directing. So, off we went to the South Station in Boston and a group of Unitarians were there. We were quite surprised. And, the Council, the French Council General, because we had to go to France and he had gi ven us a visa, and the other people helping us. And, we had reams and reams of papers and introductions to the Unitarians in, in England, which Waitstill and I had met some on our honeymoon, because we went to England, France, Switzerland, and Holland on our honeymoon, and so had come to meet all the Unitarians abroad. So, we took the train . There was another reception in New York, uh, by the Unitarians. BA: You were the only Americans doing this? MSC: We were the only Americans. No Americans had been sent over. Nobody was helping in any way . And so, then, then we got aboard a boat and had all the books we could find on Czechoslovakia, so that we could learn as much as possible before we got there. Then, when we arrived jn London, we were immediately taken over by the Unitarians in London. And, one of our ministers, a woman from, in England, had been over there doing relief work herself. She'd been, because she felt so greatly the plight of her, the people and she had met a whole group of people, she was personally helping. And, then, they decided that we should meet all the people necessary. This was very interesting because the first person that we met was the member of Parliament and she was a member of our church. And, she said, "Now, I'm going to watch everything you do. I want you to keep in touch." And her name was Eleanor Rathbone. She said, "I will, I will not only follow what you're doing, but if you find anything that you want me to bring up in the House of Commons, I will do it, so that we can get England to help you." Because the Lord Baer of London had already started a fund and was sending money over to a British committee, led by an English girl who was already In. BA: She was in Czechoslovakia? MSC: In Czechoslovakia, she was already in Prague. And, um, the, our churches in England seemed to be much closer to it. Everybody seemed to be excited in England about it, nobody's, compared withthe Americans. It was amazing to find so much personal committment. So, after several, several days in which the second person we met was an, a woman named Gertrude Baer -- B-a-e-r -- and she Was the head of a bureau at, in Geneva at the United Nations, which had the list of professors who were needed in various colleges all over the world. And, they had -- I didn't know this -- but they had a file on intellectual people who were available and looking for jobs. And, she was in charge of this area. And, she said, not only that but she knew all the women who had been involved in various kinds of efforts to help internationally. And, so she said, "I will give you," so she gave me a list. And, I started copying it and she said, "Do you know how to keep materials so they won't be understood by people later on and you may do some harm?" I said, "No." She said, "Oh my." She must of thought I, I was a simpleton. She said, "I will teach you." So, she taught me how to take notes, how to memorize certain individual words that would lead into ideas and give me facts and material. She gave me the background of whatever she could in this field. How to get rid of incriminating papers, what kinds of pens to use, everything that has to be done in order, in case your room is searched and people steal things, you'd be safe. BA: Did you ever. .. MSC: And, they wouldn't get the infonnation. BA: Excuse me, before you left, had you ever thought about these problems? l3 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: It never occurred to me. How would a simple life in Wellesly Hills or in Providence have, have given you information about how to take down - in college we always had to keep every word. BA: Yeah, somebody should have told you though because you were going to a war zone. [Laughs] MSC: Well, I'd never been to a war zone. And, nobody told me. He and Gertrude, but Gertrude Baer said, "Well, my dear, I have to give you a course." So she did. So, I was prepared and then the next thing they decided was, they had already decided I should go to Paris because we should, we should see Malcolm Davis, the head of the Carnegie Endowment. He was a great friend of the Maceriks. He knew more about, he was, he had an association that ran the Carnegie Endowment Fund, which had the prime minister of every country in Europe on it. And so, he had at his fingertips what was actually going on, and if he wanted to know something, he would ask a prime minister about it. So, it was decided that we, the next thing to do was we must go to Paris and meet Malcolm Davis and find out what we could about Czechoslovakia before we went in. So, Malcolm Davis met us with open arms, he put us up at the Docacion Coneci, in their palace and gave us a room of our own and also decided that we ought to meet a couple who were the members of the American Church in Paris. And, so we met the minister of the American Church in Paris, who gave us a room in case we needed a headquarters or anyplace for a person to work about refugees in Paris. And, we met Helen and Donald Lawry. Donald Lawry was the regional director for the International YMCA and his wife, Helen Lawry, had been the regional director for the YWCA and so they were very high in these circles. And, they were the directors of the American Foundacion d'Intercione, in the University of Paris, where the American students stayed when they were going to the University of Paris. And, Don was publishing the most eruditan Russian that were written by Russian emigrees who escaped across and had come to live in Paris and all sorts of other materials that at this time were being collected from these great intellectuals whose work would not have been known. So, we met the Lawry's and they had lived in all kinds of conditions. They had started YMCAs and Don Lawry started the International YMCA in Prague and he knew the Maceriks and he knew a great deal about Prague. He spoke Czech, he spoke Russian. He understood exactly what the attitudes of people would be and so they gave us a sort of short history. BA: Wonderful. MSC: And said, "Now, in case you find any refugees that need to escape, let us know and we will be your office." And, so they opened an office in the, in the American Church in Paris, in headquarters that were given to us, for us to send them information and they became our parish representati ves because they spoke Czech and knew the people in the government. And so, the next, the next step was to fly over to Czechoslovakia and to advise the people that we were coming. And, when this was done, we took a train - not to fly - we took a train to, from Paris across to Prague. BA: This was like January 1939, wasn't it? MSC: Yeah, and, uh, arrived in Prague at the Wilson National Station. I'll never forget. They call it Guilsono Na, Narodne. And, there waiting on the, the platform were the leaders of the Ministry of Social Work; Dr. Sume, our Unitarian minister, who had been educated, and his assistant minister, Carol Hashbull, who had gone to the Meadville Theological School. So, we had two Unitarians there and the representative of the Lord Meyer's fund, the British representative, and the 14 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 representatives of all the other funds that were all working for refugees in Czechoslovakia. BA: So, a lot was really being done. MSC: So, they over there, our Unitarian church over there, had gone to work and collected all the people that would be interested and be willing to help and they met us at the train. They had already hired a suite for us at the Atlantic Hotel, which they had decided we should stay in because refugees wouldn't mind coming to see us in a middle class hotel where they would be overpowered. They said that the trouble was that most, that the Runcemon Commission and all the others had always gone and stayed in the Hotel Paris or the big hotels. And, it was much better, we should have a very middle class hotel. So, we went to the Atlantic in Napocuci, which was the name of the street and settled in and then began our program, what to work out with the people that we knew ... [End of Tape 1, Side 2.] Tape 2, Side 1. MSC: .. .Indicated that we arrived on February 23 in 1939, just so you can get yourself sort of oriented, at the Wilson Station in Prague. And, I've given you a list of all the people who met us there and I shall never forget the first day in Prague because, in the first place, the rudiments of the room were extremely rudiment. BA: And, this was to be your home for three months. MSC: And, this was to be our home for three months. And, there was no, no bureau or drawers of any kind. And, there was a kind of a funny desk, a sort of verneered piece of furniture that had a drop leaf. No place for books, for papers, or anyplace to work. A big double bed with a, uh, uh, puff, a down puff on it which was impossible to cover both your neck and your feet with at the same time. [BA laughs] And, uh, also, and one chair, the chair that you would use up with the desk and no place to put anything, and no closet. BA: Oh my! MSC: So, I remember Waitstill saying, "Well, it's a good thing you brought your trunk with you." Because I had a wonderful wardrobe trunk which we had come along with our luggage and, fortunately, it had arrived and it had drawers in it and it could be locked up. And, therefore, we could leave our stuff hanging in the trunk and put the stuff away in the drawers for at least some kind of security, which wasn't very long in, in being invaded. Actually, the first thing we decided we must do, after we went out for a walk in the city, which we made a map as we went and were, wrote down the names of the streets because they were so strange. We just didn't speak Czech at all and we had decided that we'd just have to use German, which I had had in school and which Waitstill spoke. So, we made a trip around the city and then came back to the hotel and had dinner and had our first meal filled with, urn, uh, Czeck food . And, of course, they always serve lots of beer, which we didn't drink, so that was not attractive to us, but the caraway seeds in everything, including the desserts, were rather a strange and new taste for us. But, we finally learned that that was just a minor thing. MSC: So, that was not attractive to us, but the caraway seeds in everything, including the desserts, were rather a strange and new taste for us. But we finally learned that that was just a minor thing. We got ourselves organized but the first weekend, Carol Hashbow, the junior minister, said, "I want to take you around and 15 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 show you some of the most important things in Prague." And, we, so he came on Sunday morning - we had arrived on Saturday and, and he came on Sunday morning and we started out. This was probably one of the most useful orientation, personal orientations we had. He said, "First, I'll take you to the most sacred place in Prague. And, that is the place where John Houss was hanged and because of his belief in democracy and of, of the country." And, we saw the great monument, we saw the old national, the castle which had originally been the office for the kinds of Czechoslovakia to use - it wasn't Czechoslovakia then, when it was, in the early days, King George of Poogobaradie, who was the kind of the, one of the middle kings of the Czechosloks, had later built a palace up on top of this beautiful mound which rises in the middle of the city, but, actually, the old government house was built with this wondetful horological clock in which the twelve, the twelve apostles would process at every time the clock struck the hour and then would boom the time afterwards and at which day and night people stood and watched. It was, it was so impressive to see this marvelous procession and also to see this beautiful clock which had so many different horological aspects and had been, was actually, it was built in the Middle Ages. And, after he showed us where Houss had been tried and was killed, then we walked along the main street, along the river, the Vultava, and down to the powder tower where, when they would, had battles with the Hungarians especially, they had built this place to store arms and powder so they could blow up people. And, then came to the oldest bridge, one of the oldest in Europe, a stone bridge which crossed the river at that point. It was called the Charles bridge, it had beautiful statues of all of the meeting saints and, urn, kings and also nuns of Prague, of Czechoslovakia. And, was especially interesting to us because he showed us the statue of St. John of Nepamuk because the Catholic church always despaired of trying to interest people in, in the fact that there was no real Catholic saint that was a parallel to John Houss. And, John Houss' tradition of democracy and freedom in religion, which Georgia Progibrodie, the kind, had written about and begged all of the Catholic churches in Europe to take on as their belief, so as to free religion, had been promogated in the buildings there and, so the Catholic church had designed a statue of a so-called monk who was suppose to have been like John Houss and was a preacher and had the same little beard and the same moustache, only he had a crown of stars around his head because, evidently, when they knew, it was said that he became a martyr because he listened to the queen's confessions and then was taken by those dreadful hausights and thrown into the river and had drowned in the Vultava, but when his body was brought out, it was crowned with the stars. And, so he is always shown in picture or in ephidies of any kind to be crowned with stars. At any rate, we saw his statue and all the others and then went into the Old City, which was very, very interesting. And, then he took us up to see the castle and where the early days St. Bidas church had been built and all of the beauties of the, of the most beautiful buildings of the university and of the, actually, of the kind were today crowning the beauty of this unusual sort of hill or mountain and he said, "I'm going to take you up the, the Rider's Steps." And, I said, "What are the Rider's Steps?" When you go up from the lower city to the upper city because, so, so that the knights could ride horseback up these steps, they were made at such a distance, each step from the other, that a horse could also find security and use his fore legs to go up to the castle on the hill. Right, the king had his castle. So, we went up the Rider's Steps and we did, and then he took us across the city and took us to his club. The club is a very important aspect of Czech society because a man, many men that we met have on their visiting cards, not only their business office and business telephone and address, but they also have the name of their club because at noon time they go to their club for lunch - and no matter where it is across the city - and there they have all of the international magazines and newspapers and information and they meet and discuss until about four o'clock in the afternoon and then they go back to their office and work from four until nine or ten. 16 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 BA: Oh. MSC: And, then they have dinner at about ten o'clock at night. So, it, so a man's club was extremely important to know. The other things that Carol showed us in that first trip was how to get around the city on the street cars. They had marvelous street car lines and he said he wanted to show us the difference between the medieval and the baroque buildings and what we would see and different kinds of architecture so that as we moved about the city, going on errands from one office to another, we would have some appreciation of the history of the city itself, which of course is one of the oldest cities in Europe. So, this was a very wonderful orientation. Then we came back to the church that afternoon afterwards and they had prepared a sort of an after dinner, a sort of supper for us and a number of the leading people in the church met us and we had a chance to talk with them and then went back to our hotel that night. BA: Did you, what did you speak by the way? English or German? MSC: Well, I, most of them spoke English and Hashbow, who had been to the Meadville Theological School, spoke both English and Czech, so he would translate anything that one needed. I spoke German rather fluently then because I had been using it in my graduate work at Radcliffe, but Waitstill didn't speak any, spoke very little French and English, so he had to be translated. But, therefore, but we did meet people who offered to take us to museums, offered to introduce us to things, wanted us to come to their homes and see how they ate and what they did. I found that most of them were better educated about child welfare and the early ideas about what you should do with your children and educate, how you should educate them than I ever found in any groups in the United States. It's because we just took things for granted at home and over here they read all of the international magazines on the psychology of children and how you must develop them this way. I had never seen this kind of thing in the United States. And, then, of course, they wanted to show us it, in case we wanted to buy things for our family or, they wanted to, us to let them give us the time to take us, to come to understand the culture. So, then comes Monday morning and we decided we should put on ­ of course, Waitstill wore his regular street clothes for the city - and we went immediately, we were invited to go the Ministry of Social Welfare because the Offices of the Care for the Refugees were in two places. One, at the University of Prague, at the Charles University or at the Ministry of Social Welfare. So, the Minister of Social Welfare had his staff meet us and he offered us a whole series of, of rooms for offices and for help. He told us what the schedule of work would be, brought us up to see our offices and introduced us to his staff and told them what, that they must do everything they could to help us. At that time, we also met Dr. Antoinine Soon who was in charge of the refugees. And, what he did was, he kept the numbers; he devised the places where they could stay. All the new things that happened, he had to organize. He had a whole committee and they'd get - students at the university were not at the university, they were all busy working on refugee committees. Cooking, making beds, fixing up the dormitories in the college so that people could live there and the thousands of people who were refugees were all being helped as, by individual people in the government who had organized themselves to divide and share and help because they felt it was important. BA: That's amazing. MSC: So, this was a very interesting experience, and Dr. Soon told us all about what was happening. And, then, actually, in the Ministry of Social Welfare, we opened up our office and we immediately went to call on the Mayor of Prague, who was a brilliant man, and we met his Chief Assistant, Madame Perlamtoba, who was a social worker and she said, "I have already fixed the first project that we want to 17 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 help with. And, I will call for you tomorrow morning with a car and we will go to the country." So, on March 1, we went to, Perlam, Perlamtoba took us to a castle at Lisanobloben. Now, on the way, we drove out there, and they showed us how in the old days the roads in Czechoslovakia had been built for farmers not to live in individual houses alone in the country. They all lived in towns and they went out with the wagon and their horse in the morning - and because the land was so fertile, they couldn't, they didn't want to build a house on it and have it - and, also because they would be so divided from each other. So, what they did was they all lived in villages and then you went out from the village to wherever your land was and cultivated it, the farmers did. And, therefore, and the villages were also at a crossroads so that when, for instance, when the Germans came in the early years and tried to take the Czechs, they could fight them at these crossroads and all the people were all there together in the houses. And, they met, they had a custom, every Sunday, everybody went to church wearing their beautiful, embroidered costumes, men and women and then they left church and went home and made a big dinner. And, after that, everybody went in their costumes to the cafe in the middle area where the four roads met and there they listened to music. They had a, they had family orchestras or individuals would play. BA: What a wonderful day. MSC: And, you would have music and you'd have, they'd serve beer or wine, if you wanted it, or, and there wasn't anything like Coca Cola or stuff like that. We didn't even have it in America at this time. And, anybody, and there in the afternoons there'd be folk dancing. BA: Did you ever go to any of these? MSC: Oh, sure. Every Sunday we were invited to go and see these things going on. BA: Oh. MSC: And, urn, this was a, so off we went to this town, called Lisanobloben, where there was a great castle that belonged to a baron and the baron was not able to sell. By law, they would not allow a baron to sell his castle unless he could sell all the land with it and nobody could afford to buy the land and the castle too. And, so the landowners were absolutely stuck. They couldn't afford to run the land, they had to pay high taxes, and, therefore, the kind of life they once lived, they would live in some comer of their castle, the part that they could keep warm. And, Madame Perlamtoba had a, a, a, actually, be, 800,000 Czecks were part of the two million , eight-hundred thousand population, you know, Sudaton-Austrians and Czecks and the, and the occupied area Sudatonland was eleven thousand square miles of territory and all of the industries had been, were immediately taken by the Nazis. Eighty percent were textiles, seventy percent electric power, eighty percent lignite, forty percent lumber. The railroad systems, electricity, power lines, telephone, telegraph, everything was disrupted. And, so here we were left with thousands of homeless people and the first thing was to house them, feed them, and help them get free and do whatever you could for them. So, what they had done was to tell all of the children who were away at camp to stay in the camps. Anybody who had a bed who didn't have to leave it was left where they were and then they came to soup kitchens in the city. They were manned by the college boys and girls and arranged to double up in the bedding and everything else. So, you can imagine these thousands of refugees everywhere now who had come out of, of the Sudatonland. BA: Yeah. 18 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: And, Dr. Soon immediately told us about it. So, but what they wanted us to do was to oversee what some of the programs that they had figured out. So, Perlamtoba had taken us to Lisanodloben and we met the baron who owned this gorgeous castle, which was like one of the beautiful castles of any country in Europe and was furnished, of course, in the castle style, and, but had no heat in it. But, had great inside gardens and, and beautiful paintings on the walls of, of, I remember the library had, had pictures, had wonderful paintings of France. And, the bookshelves were filled with beautiful books and the fireplaces were not used as fireplaces. They had great, huge stoves, porcelain stoves in every room so that the room could be heated by stoves if you didn't want, in some places there were open fireplaces, but you can think of this building with perhaps a hundred rooms. BA: Oh, my word! MSC: And, Perlamtoba had decided that she could probably house a, a whole group of people in this if, if we could somehow organize it. So ... BA: Convince the baron to give it to you? MSC: We, uh, no. The first thing was, could we afford to pay for the conversion? And, they wouldn't, they would let the baron go on living there. BA: Oh, I see. MSC: And, it would be his property but he would not have to pay taxes on it. And, then, he would free the house and they would bring, among the refugees, painters, plasterers, uh, carpenters, and, and be able to make over the rooms so that out of one great library, they could make a nursery. And, out of another great room and they could get women who were trained nursery leaders and people to divide up this and then they could work on the gardens and grow their own vegetables. So, she had a, she had a plan to take this great Lisanodloben castle and make it into a place where, oh, several thousand refugees could come to live. And, we met a man who came to see her at the village. He was a man who made, who had dresses and had factories making dresses in the Sudatonland. He had a factory also in Lisanodloben, in the city part of the town. BA: He had always had this? MSC: He'd always had this. And, he was a, and so he came to Madame Perlamtoba while we were there, and he said, "Is it safe? I'm a Jew. Can I live here?" And, she said, "I think so, you Jews are citizens. Everybody else is." He said, "But, the Nazis have been against the Jews." Well, she said, "We're going to do everything we can to have every citizen treated as a human being and as a voter and a resident and have nothing to do with this religious business." So, he said, "Well, I'd rather stay," but he said, "My brother has already opened up a business in New York of making dresses," and he said, "I have orders from all over this area to make the dresses and if you get enough seamstresses to come and live in the castle, I can run the factory here and they can make enough money so that you, they can pay for their own expenses and so on and we can have a doctor here and we can run it as a whole village. And, it can operate on its own." BA: What a wonderful idea! MSC: And, I thought it was great and so we figured out how many people could live there and the people came from that - right, this is right beside the Sudaton area, you see, and there were refugees already there with relatives and living or in 19 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 temporary houses. And, so we figured out that if we could contribute fifty thousand dollars of our American money, it could pay for the materials that would be used to transform this castle into a living area for all these hundreds of people. And, we could start, give them the tools and the women could make dresses and they could selJ them to other areas and it would be a way to get back and take care of these refugees in the Sudatonland. Well, this was the first of, or the first of the projects and we thought that was great. So, we said, "Alright, we have to go back now and just as soon as we get a cable telling us how much money they have from Boston, why this is, this is about the first thing that we'll do." Then, we went to, we had our offices now in the Ministry of Social Welfare and people immediately began to line up for jobs and we met the head of the YMCA and there we found a man who was harassed because any man who was in Hitout political danger didn't dare to stay more than twenty-four hours or else the Nazis would find out and would arrest him and send him to a concentrate camp. BA: Twenty-four hours in Prague? MSC: Yeah. BA: Huh. MSC: So, it was dangerous to walk the streets, and so people, and so these people who had been members of very democratic agencies or were people who were known to be leaders, all were in a certain amount of danger, that they're not still running their businesses or their programs as they had before. And, urn, so they would be, they would come to line up in front of our doors at the Ministry of Social Welfare and we decided that the best thing we could do was to, was to take their names and addresses and find out where they were and give them specific appointments so they wouldn't wait in line because the Nazis would come and ask them who they were and what they were doing. And, the Gestapo would make lists of them and so of them would disappear afterwards. So, we decided, everything had to be done with a feeling that it, you weren't sure how long it was going to last, but, I mean, you did the best you could at the time. BA: Were there rumors flying around Prague now about an imminence takeover by the Nazis? MSC: WE heard, you see, rumors that they had masked on the frontier. That they, not only had taken all these Sudaton areas, but you couldn't tell how long the situation was going to last. But, in the meantime, you had people to feed and people to cover and to have sleep and try to do what you could. And, some people didn't even dare to go to their offices and work and so everything was almost pulverized, you see, but the Minister of Social Welfare went there regularly and we went to our office, we learned how to go there in two street cars. To Boslovstenomyeste, which is the main town, the main interchange and then go up to the, up to the place where - and to really make a, sort of a program of, background for our work, work, job we were doing in the city. In the meantime, practically every night, we were meeting with people who had ideas and had, were important and could be helpful. I began to feel, we were staying at this miserable little hotel, we were very uncomfortable and when I would go back, when we'd go back from the office at six or seven or eight o'clock at night, after working all day, one of the places we would keep touch, in touch with everyday was the office that we all maintained together. The British, the Scotch, the Irish, I think, and actually French and Dutch, all had people who'd been sent there to help the refugees and we all had an office together. And, the girl who was representing the Lord Meyer's Fund of London was making up groups of people who could be sent to London, over land, on the train and go, and be employed immediately by the Lord Meyer's 20 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 committee in London. And, she was operating out of, out of friends . She was, urn, I'll think of her name, Contessa Roundtree of the Chocolate family. BA: Now, how did she, how did she get, how'd she compile her lists? MSC: From the people who came in, everyday, the people would come to see her, were lining up in front of... BA: Was she looking for certain skills, though? MSC: No, she would take anybody. BA: Anybody . Okay, I see. MSC: She'd take the skill and she'd try to fit it. And, so then, then, if they could make preparations, she would see to it that she would, she made up groups of forty to fifty people. She bought the train tickets, she got the visas, she got the, the exit visas from the Gestapo - and this is even beforehand you had to get certain permissions from the government to let them get out. And, then, she would take them down to the train and put them on board the train and they'd travel for two days and go to London. And, then, in London, she'd of, she sent with them the list, and then the British committee in London would immediately find them jobs and house and take care of them and so on. So, Tessa was really, she was the most active and she became one of our very closest friends. So, after, after, coming back to our hotel at night and finding that the, but that the messages were so garbled we couldn't understand what they were sometimes. Or being shouted at by the man at the end of the counter because he wanted to prove, show you how smart he was in speaking English ... BA: Shouting out secret messages. [Laughs] MSC: Absolutely, and so we were afraid that people would be, would be hurt by this. So, we said, "Well, maybe if we could hire a room somewhere instead of being in a hotel and have a secretary there or use our office for those messages, we wouldn't be endangering people." Because he'd have the name and address and where the person was, "He's staying in one bed at a night, first at the Almataspazi or he's going to so and so and he's in great danger." Well, this shouted out. BA: Oh dear. MSC: With all these spies all through the city, which he knew had happened. So, we thought it would be fun. And, in the meantime, one of the refugees who had come to us - a man named Hans Vertimer - came to see us and he said, "Well, I have an apartment in the old Valdenstein palace. All these apartments, parts of the palace were made into small apartments and I would love to have you hire mine. Mine, I have a Russian, a Russian resident who's living in it and he hasn't paid his rent for six months and I simply got to have the money and I need the apartment and it'd be just right for you. And, it has a telephone and everything in it and it's in a lovely place. It's right beside, near the castle and it's in a beautiful part and it has gardens all around it that are maintained by inside this great wall." So, he said, "I'd be glad to get rid of these people if I can get rid of them and have you move into my apartment." So, we thought that was great and we wouldn't have to live in this hotel and have this impossible person doing, taking our messages. And, then, the next day, Hans Vertimer came to us, "Well, I'm very sorry, but I can't let you have my apartment because the man won't get out. He says he can't get out until next week." So, he said, "I know you're going to be free this weekend because you were going to move in," but he said, "So, I want you to come with me and spend 21 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 the weekend with my sister at her place in the country." So, we said, "Well, no, we really can't do that." "Oh, yes," he said, "My sister's expecting you and she's inviting you. So, I will pick you up at such a time in the car and we'll go out to see, out to my sister's house." So, in the meantime, that day, urn, we had been invited to go and see and give some messages to a man named Chadwick, who had been organizing groups of boys, fourteen to something like sixteen or seventeen, to go to school in England on scholarships. And, this was also under the Lord Meyer's fund and he had already taken three hundred Czeck boys to England to safety and to life and to school and to be educated there. And, he was going anyway and we had all sorts of things we had written about what we had been doing and what we found in Prague and the messages we wanted to get, share with the people in England. So, uh, we had gone to say goodbye to Chadwick and a group of boys that were going off from the airfield and here we saw the parents of these boys were saying goodbye, tearfully, in the enclosure. And, then, the boys running out, getting on board the plane. And, Chadwick, with him, he took our messages, turned around, he said to me, "Martha be careful. You know who's a spy? Right beside you." [End of Tape 2, Side 1] Tape 2, Side 2. MSC: Actually, I hadn't, I had seen this woman going around in the circular, the circular doorway and I hadn't noticed, but I watched that she was watching every person there and obviously trying to get, find out anything she could about the children. And, so, I was careful from then on. The other thing that [unable to understand] me most about this was the fact that the families had given the last family keepsakes to each child to take with them to England. Wedding rings, jewelry, anything that they didn't want confiscated in case they were invaded by the Nazis. Anyway, we saw them all off and it was a very emotional thing when the, the pilot flew the plane in front of us and we saw the boys on one side of the plane. And, then turning it around and flew the other way so that the boys on the other side could say goodbye to their parents and then off they went into the black sky. That was the last group of boys that was taken out because it was not safe from then on. This was the day before the, uh, the occupation. BA: Were these boys all nationalities? MSC: They were Czechs, al I Czechs. BA: All Czechs, but I mean some Jews too. MSC: Yes, oh, well, nationality is anybody that's happened to be a Czechoslovack. But, actually, they were not picked for any reason excepting they were youngsters whose family, families were willing to let them go to England to school. And, if the families were in danger, by then they gave Chadwick the permission to take them and he had promised to be responsible for them and the Lord Meyer'S fund was paying for it and so, actually, three hundred boys were finally saved by this and kept for the future. And, of course, we don't know what happened to their parents. Anyway, we went, we got into a taxi and went back into town and this was, uh, we got a call from Hans because as I indicated before, he had asked us if we would like to go out for the weekend to spend Saturday and Sunday with his sister in the country because he knew that the Russian was not, the Russian inhabitant of his apartment in the gardens would not leave until Monday. So, uh, he picked us up later on that afternoon and we drove out together to, urn, to Rusduchie. I'll never forget, I hadn't met Peter Busch before. His brother-in-law was the most important, the largest glass manufacturer in all of Czechoslovakia, which is a lot. And, he had tremendous plants in the Sudatonland and also in 22 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 Czecho, in the rest of the country. And, Peter - his name was Peter Busch, B-U-S­ C-H - Peter was married to, urn, this beautiful woman, Lydia Vertimer Busch, who was one, became even in her youth, one of the msot favorite actresses. She was as important as anybody you can think of in history who was an actress in the Vienna theater. And, he had married her and all through the marriage he had encouraged to be an actress, to do things and to entertain. And, they had this little house in, in ­ she was a Czech, you see - and they had this little house in, outside of Prague where they spent their weekends and he would come from the Sudatonland and join her. Or they would, they, they were very, uh, a very international couple. So, Peter and, and Lydia were there and we went, we went to the house and met them both and then. And, the house was charming, I will never forget it because it was, uh, Lydia had fires going in all the rooms, so there were fireplaces, or in the wonderful China stoves that they had. And, first of all, we had a wonderful dinner, but every, over, the, the light motif over everything that was said or done was the fact that the radio was on and we were listening to what was happening in Slovakia and whether or not the Nazis were coming. And, of course, Peter would keep - when, when Lydia served us cocktails in front of the fire and she, she sang and she played the piano and she tried to entertain us and tried to be a gay evening, but Peter would keep sl, sliding out of the room and listening to the radio. And, then when he would come back, Hans would say, "What's happening?" And, Lydia would ask. BA: Now, who was Hans? MSC: Hans was, Hans Vertimer, her brother who had the apartment that he was going to rent to us. So, he, they'd come back and Hans was Jewish and Lydia was Jewish too. Peter wasn't, but he was a, a person that they wanted. And, Hans told, and, urn, Peter told us that the Nazis had come to him in the Sudatonland and had asked him to make glass for all of their military vehicles and he had said no, he wouldn't do it. And, of course, therefore, he was proscribed immediately. They said they'd put him in prison if he didn't go ahead and get his plants to make this kind of shatter-proof glass that they wanted for the military vehicles, in the German military vehicles that they intended to use. Well, of course, you can imagine how tense it was. And, Lydia tried to, urn, uh, she entertained us and we enjoyed her house and the food was so good and then, and she had made polacheken for us for dessert. She cooked well and, urn, uh, she inveigled us into talking about ourselves and how we lived in America. I said, tell you this only because, urn, uh, the next morning we went, we found, we were having a guest room on the ground floor and when we went to bed, we could see that - and it was illuminated from the outside so you could see this garden that was out there. And, when we woke up in the morning in our downstairs bedroom, we saw a whole flock of little chickens picking up corn that someone had scattered from above so that as you looked out of bed, you could see the chickens all in the yard. And, it was so cute, I, so, as soon as we got dressed and I went upstairs to breakfast, I said, "Lydia, who put the corn out there for the chickens?" And, she said, "I thought you'd enjoy them." And, I said, "What kind are they? You know, are they Rhode Island Reds or. .. ? There's a little red one there that looks that way." She said, "I don't know, but we call him Yudeliv." And, I said, "Yes." Yudeliv means "little Jew." He was the only red one, all the rest were white and it was a joke. And, then, she served us breakfast and, uh, her maid had brought down to our room the food for breakfast and she had duplicated what she lured us into telling about breakfast in America. And, it was, and it was, you know, the whole figgling was so lovely and then she entertained us and then she said to me, "I think you'd like to come out to the kitchen and let me show you how to make the polacheken because you liked it." So, but, Peter was back and forth to the radio and Hans was asking him about what was happening and we, we had to go back on Sunday to a meeting at Dr. Alice Macerick's house because we had all planned to meet there and decide what we 23 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 would do next to protect all the agencies that she was involved in and the Red Cross and to see what was happening because we knew that, we were quite sure that something was going to happen on this, after this weekend. So, then we heard that the Slovack government had declared it's independence and it was put under Marshall law on Sunday. And, that the primotiso was arrested, the monsegnior pritoso, and Sedor was named to be premier and Seiz Encart, the Nazi governor of Austria and Joseph Berkel and five Gennan generals were brought up into, into, uh, the Slovack area. And,then, on Sunday, Tito escaped from the monastery and called a meeting of the cabinet and Bradaslava was occupied by Nazi stonn troopers and so we decided that we must get back to Prague by four o'clock. So, uh, we, we got, Hans got us ready in the car and we drove back into, into Prague and went to Dr. Alice's house. And, when we got there, we noticed some Nazi Gestapo agents all over the place and that there, we couldn't find where our politicals that we had been looking after were, and there was a low ceiling and we, uh, and, at Dr. Alice's house, uh, "We," she said, "We know that the Nazis are coming." And, she set up to us, "Would you arrange with the American ambassador to invite me to go and stay at the embassy." So, we called up Mr. Carr, who was our American ambassador, and said, "Would you mind inviting Dr. Alice Macerick to come and stay with you during this time?" And, he said, "I'm terribly sorry, but, you see, I wrote a paper when I was in the State Department saying that no, uh, United States representatives, heads of offices of our government abroad should ever harbor potentially difficult people because it might redound against Czech, against the United States. And, therefore," he said, "I can't do it." And, I said, "How could you?" He said, "Because I wrote it and I, I stood behind this at the State Department. There were a lot of people who didn't agree and so now I can't tum around and invited Alice, Dr. Alice." So, I said, "Well, what do you want me to do? Shall I go and stay with her?" And, he said, "Well, if you wish, my dear." BA: Oh boy! MSC: So, then, uh, I called Dr. Alice and I said, "I'm terribly sorry that we, we're not allowed, but would you like to come and stay with us?" And, urn, then, at, I had a call from the British Museum, I mean, for the British Committee, and, uh, our friends there called and said, "What are you planning to do?" And, "Shall we get together?" They told us that flags are flying outside was because an order had gone out to everybody who had a house in Prague that they must hang the flags up because the Gennans were coming to rescue them from their, from the occ, from what they were going through. And, urn, so, what we did was, we took the list, we took a taxi to the office, the International Office and we took a list of the people that we knew who were refugees and the greatest problem. And, we divided up who should try to save so and so. And, uh, Dr. Alice, I finally got the British to say that they would put her up, but they, but she said that she wouldn't go to the British. If she couldn't go to the United States embassy, she wasn't going to go. BA: So, she just waited it out in her home. MSC: So, she waited it out. She stayed at home. And, urn, then, I, we were able to, urn, one of the people that, I was asked if I would try to get out. It was a Dr. Kosack who had been invited to go to a, a University in the United States to become a professor. And, so, I went to his house and when I, you know, in Prague, when you push the button downstairs for the lights, light in the hall and they only stay on until you get up to the next floor and then they all go out again. And, so, I was scared because I had to go up to the fifth floor and keep pushing these buttons. And, I finally I got to the fifth floor alone and when I got - Waitstill, in the meantime, had taken, had gone to get somebody else that was endangered and we thought the Nazis would catch, so I went to get this Dr. Kosack. We had an invitation from Oberlin College to, for him to go there and become a professor. 24 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 BA: Was he a musician? MSC: No, he was a professor. BA: Oh. MSC: So, I rang the doorbell of his house on the fifth floor and a woman came to the door and just barely opened it and she said, "What do you want?" And, I said, "Well, I'm Martha, uh, Sharp, from the American Committee." And, we heard the sounds of a violin being played in the background. I said, "Could I see him?" "Oh no," she said, "He's not here. He doesn't live here." And, she slammed the door. So, then I rang the bell again and she opened the door and I said, "You want to see?" - and, she said, "How do I know you're who you say you are?" So, I said, "Here's my passport." So, she grabbed the passport and shut the door and here I am outside. BA: What a risk! MSC: And, I had no passport. And, I thought, "My gosh, if she doesn't bring back my passport, what am I going to do? This was stupid thing for me to do." Anyway, she came back and she said, "Here is your passport." And, shut the door again and, then, suddenly, the man, the violin playing just stopped and the man came to the door and he said, "Mrs. Sharp, I'm Prof. Kosack, what do you want?" I said, "Prof. Kosack, I want you to go with me and, and go up to the United States embassy." And, he said, "I can't do that. They'll never allow me." He said, "They want me now." I said, "Well, will you try?" He said, "I don't believe it can happen." And, I said, "Well, please, let's, please, try because it's getting dark every minute and we have to be off the streets by eight o'clock or the curfew comes and they shoot everybody on sight." So, he said, "Alright, I'll take your word for it, but I don't believe you're right." Anyway, he went and got his coat and his hat and came back and we started walking in the snow. It was already, we had already seen the troops beginning to occupy all of the parts of the city. BA: This was in mid-February now? MSC: This was in March. BA: Oh, we're already in March. MSC: The fourteenth, the fifteenth of March. BA: Okay. MSC: And, uh, it was the fifteenth they occupied, but they really came in the night before. And, so, urn, he walked with me and we finally got, we had to cross the river and there were armed Nazi soldiers on both sides of the river and they held us up and we said, "We're Americans going to the American embassy." We got to the American embassy and there was someone standing there and I said, "I'm Martha, uh, Martha Sharp, and I'd like to go into our embassy." And, the man said, "Who is this man with you?" I said, "That's my husband, uh, Rev. Waitstill Sharp." And, the man said, "You're sure?" I said, "Yes, of course, I am. You look like my husband." So, he said, "Okay, go ahead." He said, "After all, I don't belong with the Czech embassy. I'm only a protector." So, we got inside and we got to the doorway and the American, the American ambassador was there and other people had been bringing in people. And, I said, "Will you please take care of Dr. Kosack? We have an invitation for him to come to the United States to Oberlin 25 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 College and if you'll give him safety that would be fine. And, Carr said, "Okay, he can come to the embassy." So, he went to the embassy and, then, I started back, cause Waitstill had been taking somebody else there and we didn't meet, we didn't find each other. And, finally, we rushed back and when we got back to the hotel, we found that there were, the hotel, the whole dining room was filled with Nazi officers in full-uniform having their dinner. And, one of them got up and bowed and said, "Would you two people like to sit at our table? We'd like to have you ." A sea of German officers. And, I said, "No, thank you very much, you know, we want to be alone." And, he said, "I know." And, he winked. And, anyway, so then we waited and, urn, we couldn't do anything about this . We had, on the way back, we'd gone past the Busslowski-Nonyusdi, which is the great square in Prague where the museum is, way at the head of it. And, we had seen the storm troopers marching down the square. This was before, on my way up, before I went to get Dr. Kosack and I had said to Waitstill in German something and a man turned around and he said to me, "Damn you, Nazis! What are you doing here?" I said, "I'm not a Nazi." And, he said, "If you're not, well, then why don't you speak Czech?" I said, "Because I'm an American and I can't speak Czech." And, he said, "Then, speak American, but don't speak that filthy language." So then we decided that... BA: Answering would be dangerous. MSC: Everybody was, this was a Czech and they were furious, you see. And, all of the stores were closed and everything was in great chaos. You couldn't tell what was happening next. And, so, finally, we got back and we did get back to our hotel and spent the night. And, then, all night long, we looked out the windows and we saw the Czechs backing up to all of the Customs houses, all of the lofts, all of the places where all the goods were and packing German trucks with food and material and everything else and then surrowing away in the night and taking all these things back and disrupting the city. And, when we woke up in the morning, they announced over the radio that "we were now occupied by our dear friends, the Nazis and that from now on life is going to be a ball." So, as soon as breakfast was over, we hurried down to the office and we decided we, we'd have to get together and decide what we should do. And, the curfew was at eight o'clock, was from then on. You couldn't be out after eight o'clock at night or you would be arrested. And, so, then, we began to work through the occupation period and that was a very different kind of experience for us. So, then, uh, I had, first of all, I had a, urn ... [Tape recorder shut off and on.] MSC: Uh, in the first few days in our office, we had a very good meeting and decided on what each of us should do and what, what, whether we could go on with work. BA: This was just, just in your office? Not? MSC: All the international committees. BA: All the international offices, yeah. MSC: And, first of all, I went to see the Assistant to the Mayor of Prague and she said that she had been visited by the Gestapo and they had said that they were going to take over all of the cases that had formally, were taken care of. The feeding and the housing and all the rest of it. All social welfare programs and all they should do is to give them the names of these people. And, she said, "And, who will pay for this?" And, they said, "Why, it will come out of the government, of course, 26 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 because, after all, we are the government." And, then we, then we learned how they had taken every, every kind of organization, every kind of street, every kind of place was already, they had organized for months in advance so that they knew just exactly how to, how to takeover the administration of the city itself and of the country and of what should be done next. And, of course, our hotel was filled with German officers. There wasn't any room for us to stay there anymore. They asked us to please leave because the place, they needed the room for the Nazis to live in. So, then, we married, we decided also that because of this, uh, man we had downstairs who met the guests who really couldn't remember anything and did everything wrong, it was better for us to be somewhere else where we didn't have anybody shouting out our messages who called ... BA: Especially now. MSC: In front of them. So, we, we packed up the next day and moved up to the, another one of the hotels in the city. Actually, it was, uh, a very nice and very simple hotel and ... BA: They let you do that, the Nazis let you do that? MSC: They didn't have any say about our moving. We just went ahead. We were Americans then and they also tried to tread very gently as far as foreigners were concerned. BA: For Americans, oh, did they? Oh. MSC: In the beginning, they didn't have any orders, you see, and so, therefore, they were, they were fairly decent to us. And, urn, we, we decided we met everybody. We went to see Dr. Krackash and we went to see all of the people and we had - and on Thursday morning, the next day, we had a meeting and Dr. Shatova and Dr. Albert and Dr. Soon at the Red Cross decided, we all decided what we could do without being arrested ourselves and without being, and having the work continue and go on. And, so, we tried to organize the work so it could continue, but, of course, urn, uh, it, it, from now on, it was a little difficult. You had to be quite sure about what you did. And, in the meantime, urn, Waitstill went up to, to look out for a camp full of children that we'd been supporting and getting food for them and, uh, they were all children of refugees who's, who were being taken care of. And, I will never forget this one woman - there were fifty children at the camp and she did all of the washing and all the cooking and all, all, uh, the program for these fifty children during - in fact, this was only one person of this kind. But, in the meantime, the Nazis at first were so busy trying to take everything that was valuable in the county that they decided that they would go to work. And, they emptied the warehouses and they, and we went to the embassy and they said to us, "Don't worry." By this time, we had received a draft of all of our money for our programs. And, the Counsel General had suggested that we put it in their private safe, which we did so that it wasn't in a bank, so it couldn't be taken. And, we had the cash to go ahead with certain programs, you see. So, then, I had a, then, Waitstill was up in the country and suddenly I had a telephone call from Tessa Roundtree and she said, she said, "Martha" - ten, this is ten days after the occupation and the first train ran out of the country to, to, through the Sudatonland and up through, up through Poland and up to the border in Kadinia and then you took a boat across to England. And, so, Tessa had, had been sending her refugees that she got organized, groups of forty to fifty at a time for the Lord Meyer's fund and she had a group of eighty ready to go - and this was just ten days after the occupation. So, she called me and she said, "Martha, I'm going to try to take the first half of these people myself. I've got the visas. They have fourth class tickets and I will lead the group and take them up through Holland and, then, if I 27 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 get, if I am able to get off, will you take the other half." And, I said, "I can't do that, you know." And, she said, "Yes, you can. You better do it, because it is necessary." And, I said, "Well, Waitstill isn't here and I can't even tell him where I'm going." And, so she said, "Well, maybe you can get a message to him." BA: How much time did you have to get this out? MSC: This was in the morning of the day they were leaving in the afternoon. BA: Oh, my word! MSC: And, she had just heard that the train was going to run for the first time out of Prague and so she had decided that we better get some people off if we could. And, there were a hundred people going, now, in this group and she was going to take the first fifty. And, they were all in hiding and so that when the train left, I think it left about three o'clock in the afternoon. If my train would leave at three, her's was going to leave at noon. If she got off, she said, to me, "Keep in touch with my people and then, will you come down at three and take the other half and we'll keep in touch with each other, trying to get through to England with these?" So, uh, she left at twelve o'clock, the train went out. The first train to run after the occupation, out of Czechoslovakia. And, so, I called her assistant and her assistant said, "We're waiting for you." And, she said, "We're making up the list. As the people came out of hiding, we wrote their names on this list." And, they, so they, and she gave me the block of tickets and we still didn't hear and Tessa said she would telephone us from the frontier if they, if they didn't arrive safely and tell us not to come. We didn't hear from Tessa, so then the people began to come out of hiding and the girl gave me the fifty tickets and we began writing the names on the list and then, finally, uh, I noticed that some of the last names, we, I borrowed a pen from someone and it had purple ink in it and I wrote the last names in purple ink. And, finally, the train was moving when the last group got aboard and I checked the names off and we started. Well, we got to the first - I will never forget because it was fourth class, there was no water running in the little, little toilet room and we had no food and we were allowed to take $2.80 in money. BA: And no luggage. MSC: And no luggage and nothing in our hands. BA: Hmm. MSC: And, here we are sitting on this train, going for two days, possibly, or more, to travel and no chance to buy food because we didn't have any money. BA: Oh. MSC: And, one woman, fortunately, had brought a piece of ham and somebody else had brought a loaf of bread. We got aboard the train, I'll never forget, and the conductor came up - he's a Czech - and he said, "Where are you going?" And, we, and we said, "To England." He said, "Oh, my god! How wonderful! Take me with you." We said, "We can't." So, the train moved and, finally, the last people came and we got to the border of Holland, passing with everybody and handing up all of the tickets. In the meantime, just before I left, I had seen Lydia and she had said, "Martha" - I had called her to tell her I was going - and she said, "Will you take that bag of jewels I gave you? Because if you could give them to one of our relatives in Paris, they could, my mother could have an operation for cancer and these would pay for the operation." 28 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 BA: Hmm. MSC: So, she said, "Can you take them along with your luggage?" And, I said, "Well, goodness, a bunch of jewels?" "Yeah," she said, "They're mostly diamonds. But," she said, "put them in your bag and ... " So, I put the diamonds in my bag. So, we got to the border and then I noticed that the Nazis went through every single thing and everything and I thought, "My goodness, I better put those diamonds on or. .. " Because they took the rings out of people's ears. They took their rings off their fingers. They took everything of any value - a silver spoon - or anything that anyone of the refugees had in their luggage. They stripped the luggage. As we were leaving Czechoslovakia and my luggage, they said, "It's alright. You're an American." BA: Oh! MSC: And, here I was with diamond earrings, diamond necklace and diamond bracelet. BA: Diamonds everything. [Laughs] MSC: And, we went on. And, then we got to the border of Holland. And, when we got to Holland, we got out then because we were already out of the, out of Czechoslovakia and the Dutch went through the list and they said, "My." And, there were two newspaper men that had come on so late that I hadn't put their names on the list and so, and so the people called me and they said, "Mrs. Sharp, the newspapermen have been taken off the train. They're gonna have to go back to Czechoslovakia." So, I ran up and I said to them, I said, "Who's got, who's got the pen with the purple ink?" And, they found the pen with the purple ink and I said, "Give me their names." And, I wrote the names on and the passport officer said to me, "I'm sure those names were not on there when you gave me the list before." I said, "Well, I'm sorry you're not very thorough, but you see they were on the back of the sheet." And, so he finally put the newspaper, they were off with their bags pleading to go on because newspapermen, of course, were - I said, "These people have helped me." In fact, I went through, I saw there was a letter with a United States government seal on it on one of their things. And, I said, "You see this letter?" And, I said, "Can anybody here read English?" "No." I said, "Well, then I'll translate it for you." It says that I am in charge of this man as an American citizen. [Laughs] BA: Oh, you see, that's why I can't get over how many times you thought about doing these things. MSC: And, they said, "Well, we don't think that's ... " I said, "Alright, read it yourself. Here it is, but there's the United States government seal." And, they said, "Oh, go ahead, go ahead." So, we got on the train and the two men got back on it. The United News and another one - two of the most important men who had been in, doing newspaper work in Czechoslovakia. So, they both got back on the train. Then, we finally got to, then they put us on a siding and for eight hours our train didn't move. BA: Oh! MSC: It was just on a siding and we couldn't, we weren't sure we could get anything to eat. We had eaten up the $2.80 worth of food we had. We had no idea how we could get anything to drink or anything. And, there was no water running in the little faucet. And, finally, and finally the train started up again. And, urn, I decided that we have to do something, so we, we, then, we had been across the 29 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 border now into Holland and we still had to go through Holland, in order to get up to this port city because the whole train had been moved because of the fact we'd been held up eight hours and it wasn't going on the same tracks it was before. And, so, by this time, by the time we were, we were shunted around to this other place, everything was alright and I knew we were going to make it. So, I went through the train and on the front of the train, there were first class passengers. And, so I went into the ... BA: Czechoslovakians? Were they Czechs? MSC: All from Czech, different people but they were private people traveling on the train, who happened to have reservations that day, so, I saw a couple - I sat down at a table and I asked if I could, I said, "Can I pay you American dollars?" And, they said, "No." And, I said, "Well, I don't have any, any Czech money and I don't have any Dutch money, what can I do?" So, the people at this table heard me and they said, "Are you with those, all those refugees we saw getting on the train?" And, I said, "Yes." And, they said, "Well, can we help you? Let us, let us take care of it." So, they paid for my meal and then I said, "Would there be any chance that I could borrow some money from you because I'm on my way to London, are you going?" Yes, they were going to London. I said, "Well, could I borrow fifty dollars and I'll give it to you when I get to London?" And, they said, "Sure." So, they gave me fifty dollars in cash. And, so then we, then we continued on and we finally got to the, Flushing, where the boat was to take off from. And, as it was night, it was nine o'clock at night. And, we'd been suppose to arrive there in the late, early afternoon. Suddenly, someone - the boat was at the pier - and I heard a man shouting and he said, "Has anyone seen Mrs. Sharp? Is Mrs. Sharp here with her people?" And, someone said, "Yes, she's back here." And, they, they said, "Thank God!" And, this was the captain, who was holding the boat, although, it had suppose to have gone, he had waited for the train to come in to see whether we'd make it. And, he said, "How many?" - and then, when I came up, he was waiting there, and he said, "How many, how many did you get through?" I said, "Everyone of them." And, he said, "Thank God!" And, uh, oh, we all went to get on the boat and then I said, "But, you know, we've got four or five tickets. We can't sleep on the boat tonight." And, he said, "Listen, wait a minute, let me look at my reservations." So, he came back and he said, "Everybody is going to have a bed. Don't worry about it." BA: Oh. MSC: And, he said, he's charge it to the committee or anybody else but never mind about the cost. [End of Tape 2, Side 2.] Tape 3, Side l. MSC: On that journey. Some of them were quite interesting. The leading, uh, surgeon of all of Slovakia, of all of Sudatonland, uh, who had been arrested by the Nazis and put in prison and made to stand in sub-freezing weather with his hands and feet bare and outstretched so that they would freeze and he could never operate again, was with the group. The children of the owner of the biggest 5 and 10 store in Czechoslovakia, whose father and mother were, were Jewish and who had committed suicide in the past week. There were also, there was a girl who was the leading soybean expert at the university who was Jewish and who had been imprisoned and somehow had been gotten out just in time. This was a whole group of people who really needed to escape. 30 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 BA: Oh, I should say. MSC: And, so, finally, uh, I took the children on board - they'd never seen the ocean before and we looked at the stars and we saw everyone and we finally went to bed. And, the next morning we came up, up the river to disembark and I will never forget because the head of the Unitarian Women's Group, who was a great friend of mine, said it was terribly funny. She said, "Here was Martha standing there with a dirty face [laughs] with very gorgeous diamonds around her neck and everything." [laughs] And, she said, "And, and, and here all these wild people she had with her and hadn't washed in two days." And, they finally got off and she had come down - the Unitarian Committee had sent a, a bus and the Lord Meyer's Committee had sent a bus and we all got aboard the bus. BA: Oh, that must have been funny. MSC: And, we drove from South hampton - this, we came in at Southhampton ­ we drove up to London and then everybody got fed and then I said, "Now, look, I want to take them on a trip around London and show them London before they take off because the Soy Bean girl was going to Canada - she would have been invited to become a, a professor at the University. BA: Oh, how wonderful! MSC: And, these other people were going to have, and I was seeing Lydia's family be given the diamonds and we had all sorts of things that we want to do, but, so. Uh, they, they got us a bus and we made a whole trip of London and then, we went to the Lord Meyer's Committee and they were all sent off to the places that were waiting for them and they came safely through the war and out of Czechoslovakia to England. So, that was one transport that really got safely out. And, then, of course, I had to go back again. BA: Yes, I was going to say, how did you get back? MSC: Well, it wasn't too bad. I went, uh, I went to England. Uh, in London, I was able to report exactly what had happened to all of us, how, what we needed most of all were Uni versity and other positions all over the United States to be offered to us and to be and the authority to be sent our Counsel in, in, um, Prague so that we could go to him and say, "Here's Mr. So and So, who's available for this job and so on," and, all kinds of assistance that they would need. The diamonds got off to, uh, uh, Lydia's family to see that her mother's operation was done in Paris. And, we were able to be resuscitated and have good food and I missed it, the Lord Meyer's Committee asked me to come and talk to them about what had happened, of course, and my friend was there from the Lord Meyer's Committee, and so, we had a chance to talk, but she said that she didn't think that she dared to go back. One of the things which did happen was that as I arrived in Southhampton, there were many, many people standing on the dock who said, "Did you see our relatives? They were caught in Holland on the border and they can't get through because they didn't have the visas." And, I had taken the names when we stopped - remember when, when they said that they wouldn't let the men go and I was busy writing. I had taken the names of all the people who were stuck there by families. There would be two and three and four children. BA: How had they gotten that far? MSC: They had gotten that far because they had visas to get out of Czechoslovakia. 31 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 BA: Oh, so they took another train? On another train? MSC: They were on another train before us and they'd been staying, sitting in the station, trying to visit, to get in touch with their relatives in London or anywhere else in the world and they didn't have money enough to last very long. And, so, but I had taken all the names of all the people who were there and how to get them, what the telephone was there at the station and how they could be helped. So, Tessa decided that if she couldn't go back to Prague, what she could do was to open an office on the frontier and as people came and could get just that far, she could get the visas for them and, and the transportation and send them onto London. So, that began the opening of another office for refugees and I had the telephone numbers of the station and how they could talk to them and people telephoned from South hampton at the arrival dock to their relatives there and talked to them ... BA: Hrnm. MSC: Whom I had just left the night before there in Holland, you see. So, we were able to make a bridge of a certain kind. And, then, when I got back into England and I wrote back the report of what we, of what had happened, the occupation, what was going on, what we should continue. They gave me a choice of whether I should go back or whether I should stay or not. And, of course, Waitstill was not, was inside. He, he ... BA: Did you know where, you didn't know where he was at this point, did you? MSC: No, I didn't know where he was. I had just left word that I was going on this train and that I'd come, I'd get in touch with him as soon as I could. So, urn, what we did was we made all these plans from, from England, then I went to France - on the way back I went to Paris. And, Malcolm Davis arranged for me to speak to a group of American women on, about what was happening in Czechoslovakia and we raised a lot of money. And, then, I was, and then I went to see various counsels and, for instance, I went to the Pennel Club of France. And, they gave, they went to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and they got visas for me for any member of the Pen Club in Czechoslovakia to come to France and, which otherwise they couldn't have done and, uh, uh, all sorts of preparations were made. And, also we got papers from, uh, from, uh, uh, actually from Switzerland and we were able to make all kinds of contacts and then we organized people in London and in Paris to do whatever they could when we would get back to Boston. So, then, I, I got myself, urn, I didn't have any clothes or anything, except just one set of stuff. I got back on the, on the train and went back to, to Prague, and, urn, and went right on with the work, and, continued with the work until, for another month or two. And, of course, it got more and more difficult because the Nazis, I then began to realize when I came back that a man was following me everywhere I went and, uh, I have a, uh, I had made certain plans and we, and one day, I got word that the head of the British Office now - Tessa wasn't able to get back in. BA: She wasn't. MSC: So, she stayed, she, she organized the other things for the Lord Meyer's Committee, but a Miss Standish, she had left in charge, and Standish disappeared and then I went... BA: You must have been very worried about yourself at that point when a British woman was .. . 32 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: Well, I don't know, somehow, uh, but when they took Standish, I, uh, tried to get in touch with her and, uh, finally, I was able to find her and she said, "Martha, you've got to be careful because," she said, "They really got everything." They'd stolen the papers, you see, and when they, when they'd go to the office, they'd collect everything, so they could put the stuff together. And, she said, "They're getting tougher all the time." They still don't want to get in trouble with the British government or with the American government, especially, if you're an AMErican. But, it really is, really very difficult. And, so, they said, "We better be particularly careful." And, so, she said, and they she told me what they'd done to her - they made her stand in a room and they made her undress and then they, oh, they humiliated her in a great many kinds of ways and, finally, they, when they thought they had gotten everything they could out of her, they beat her and then she, she left. And, she went back to the office. BA: Oh, boy! MSC: So, when you, when you have that kind of experience, you, you realize that they mean business. Urn, so, then, then we sort of organized a way to, to do as much as we possibly could with the people who were there and, urn, then, and then, actually, we went on, urn. I had a call from the Women's Party in Czechoslovakia. They have a special Women's Party. BA: Was it a strong, a strong party? MSC: Yeah. BA: Did they have power? MSC: Yeah . And, there was a, uh, a, there was a woman who was the president of it, her name was Pleminkoba and they said to me, "Pleminkoba has been to an International Women's Congress in, in Amsterdam and she has just cabled us, she's coming back. And, we don't want her to come back because she will refuse to do what the Nazis tell her to do and then they're going to kill her." And, so they said, "Would you be, since you're the only one we know who has able to get exit. pennissions from the Gestapo and so on and get back in, would you be willing to go and meet her in Germany on the border and then try to persuade her not to come back into Czechoslovakia?" So, I said, "Well, if you think I can do any good, I wilL" So, I took an early morning train one morning and went to the border and, urn, I have the name of it. I should tell you what the, uh, the name of the place. But, anyway, I went to the border and I got off the train, just in the, in the zone, the transit zone and in the station and, urn, I was, I had my camera and I started taking pictures and they, a German officer came up to me and he said, "How," he said, "Are you enjoying our part of the country?" I said, "Yes, this is very picturesque." I'm taking a lot of pictures. He said, "Yeah, I noticed you had a camera." He said, urn, or I said, "Uh, how would you like to stand over there by those, what happened to those buildings over there?" He said, "Oh, we burnt them up because they had a bunch of, of, uh, anti-German people that were meeting there and we just want to show them what happens if they do this kind of thing." And, he, I, "How would you like to stand in front of it and let me take a picture?" "No," he said, "I don't like the composition." Uh, so he said, "Well, let me, come over here and I'll show you some other things we've done." So, he showed me all these places they'd burnt up and blown up and done things with. And, he said, "What are you here for?" And, I said, "Well, you know, I am meeting an old lady, named Pleminkoba, and she's coming in and she's not very well and the people thought, she's been at a conference, an international conference and they thought it would be a good idea if I met her and traveled with her because they thought she might, you know, it might be good because she's much older than I am." And, he said, "Oh," 33 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 he said, "I'll help you." And, he said, "Because 1," he said, "On the passport I've seen." He said, "Don't you remember I checked your passport when you got off the plane, train. And, I wondered why you were going back. You were the only passenger who got off, so I thought I'd better come over and find out." "So," he said, "I'll tell you what you do, I will get on the train when it comes in from Germany and I will check, uh, the people and when I find her, I'll wave out the window and you can come and get on the train and talk to her and stay with her while we go through the customs and go back into Czechoslovakia." And, I said, "Well, that's awfully sweet of you, but I don't think I should take your time." "Oh," he said, "That will be a pleasure." He said, "What's the old lady's name?" I said, "I can't remember." I thought he'd have it on a list, you see, and that, therefore, if he had it on the list, he'd know that this was something put up. I said, "You know, it's very hard for me to remember these Czech names." "Oh," he said, "They're crazy aren't they!" I said, "Yes." I said, "It's something like Pleminkoba." He said, "Oh, sure," he said, "I can remember that alright." He said, "Now you, you just stand down here" - the train was coming in and out ­ "And, I will wave out the window when I see, when I find her and I check the passports." So, I said, "That's awfully sweet of you. I can't understand why you're being so nice to me." So, he got on the train and the first thing I know, I look and here he is waving out the window and so, and going like this, so I jumped aboard the train and got on and, you could imagine, what Pleminkoba was thinking. Here she is all alone on the train just leaving Germany and going into Czechoslovakia and she, and so I went to her and I said, "Look, I'm an American citizen, a friend of so-and-so and so-and-so and I understood you're coming back and I came to beg you not to come." I said, "We want you to get off the train here and take the next train back to Germany because a girL" So, I told her all the things, all the messages, all the people's names, all the rest of it, and she said, "Do I insist, you insist that I go around with my mouth shut the rest of my life?" I said, "No, it's not that, but you, women are in real trouble and they really can't make it and they're afraid for your life and they're afraid that you won't keep quiet and they don't want you to be massacred. A loving president whom they use to talk about." "No," she said, "I will not go there. I will go and fight." I said, "Well, we don't want you to fight. We want you just to make believe that you, you're a loving Czechoslovak and returning from a trip and don't get the rest of the gals into trouble." "No," she said, "But, I'll let you sit with me." BA: Oh! MSC: So, I couldn't persuade her. BA: No. MSC: I did my very best. BA: Right. MSC: And, so I sat down beside her and our passports were checked and the Gestapo permissions to go back into Czechoslovakia and we arrived safely, you know, the whole Women's Party had turned out. They were all in the station. BA: So, they all knew that she wouldn't. MSC: Well, they decided they didn't think that she would, but they hoped that I would be successful. And, I was not a member of her group and I, I was, actually, it was very difficult for me to try not to, to, uh, to get her to go because I couldn't bring to bear all the things that I'd like to have said. So, uh, we came over the board, they checked, and the women all rose up and cheered and they waved 34 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 banners and the whole thing was great. I didn't, I didn't notice where my man was that I talked to before, but he didn't, evidently associate me with this at all. And, we got off the cuff, the train and they had a decorated car for her and they put her in the car and they went off with her to her home and that was that. And, I never Pleminkoba again. BA: And, you don't know what happened to her? MSC: She was asked to gather fur coats, the women's fur coats of Czechoslovakia so that they could be used to line the, the clothes of the soldiers, the German soldiers to keep them warm in the winter when they're fighting and she refused to do it. That was one of them, and that, as welJ as other refusals of hers, to cooperate with them and to standfast for her women, finally meant that she was arrested, she was tortured. The last I heard, she was asked to take her exercise on up flinted pieces of glass and, and, and, urn, razor-like pieces of metal on the, on a floor in a prison. And, she cut her hands and, and knees and she suffered tenibly and she insisted on being a martyr and became a martyr and she died. And, so that was the end of Pleminkoba. BA: How old was she? MSC: I really don't know. I think she must have been a woman around fifty, but she was a marvelously forceful speaker, evidently, and she had been the bull-work of the whole Czech women's group and, uh, she felt that she had to be a martyr for them and she went on and did it. But, I did my best not to let her go. BA: Yeah, right. MSC: So, things began to get - I'll tell you one or two last stories and then I think that will be all people can stand. Urn, things began to get more and more difficult. Urn, we, we found it was - well, one of the things might interest you is that we were able to take Peter Busch that night, that night of fourteenth, we were able to take him up to the French Embassy. They put him in a packing case and shipped him in a, in the Diplomatic pouch to France. BA: Oh, my gosh! Oh! [laughs] And, what happened to Lydia? MSC: And, Lydia, Lydia and, and her husband got out because they knew the French Embassy very well. I think they probably had French passports too. But, Hans Vertimer lost his wife because they finally traced him down and he was Jewish, so they arrested him. Uh, Lydia, Lydia, I think, survived, but I never heard from her afterwards. I don't know where she went to live or what she did, but, at any rate, she was a valiant person and if she, and if anybody was smart, she was and she was able to do what she could. So, then, the British office decided they couldn't work anymore and, uh, Waitstill went outside to do another and really, I should be telling you more about his program because he was doing valiant projects to help other people, individuals and we were both working with the same idea and Dr. Alice, uh, in, in mind and looking out for her. She was a, they didn't touch anymore at this point. BA: They didn't? MSC: And, we, urn, uh, but a number of the people, one of the things - Dr. Alice had arranged with us to transfer the Red Cross money that was sent by the International Red Cross to be used on, for the refugees and she had asked one of the leading doctors in Czechoslovakia to see us as if we were patients and to transfer, whenever the funds came, and transfer them as funds to this doctor. And, 35 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 he was able to, by keeping the money in certain accounts and we were able, of course, to use our own money in the, in the Counsel General's office because we used it in cash. And, one of our great problems was that, uh, we would, we had given money, cash, to, for instance, a number of people, who would be, somehow go through the mines in Poland and north to Gadinia and you could, there was only one boat that went from Gadinia to London to Southhampton and refugees could take it only if they had ten dollars in American cash or the same amount in British pounds. And, we gave people ten dollar bills and British pounds and they went through, underground, with, with, through the mines in Poland and up through and went, but someone was caught and someone gave our names, that's where they got American dollars. BA: Oh! MSC: And, an these little things that we tried to do to aviate the laws which we were really breaking, uh, finally began to be added up together. And, finally, our, the last time that Waitstill went out, he was asked to make a speech to young people's groups and international young people's groups in Holland, and, then, he was also asked to go to an international meeting in Switzerland. And, so, he went to both of them and he had an exit visa to return to Prague and they took it away from him, and said, "You can not return, you've been back and forth too many times." And, then, I was warned, I was told, I was lookout and then I heard that one of the British, and, uh, none of the other British workers finally were able to get back in and so their office had temporarily to be closed. They didn't stop the Swiss and they didn't stop some of the other people, but very little was, uh, able to be done to help many of these people. And, finally, urn, I had been asked by the British Committee to go to Moravia, up to Brineau, because the man who was, uh, uh, who had British citizenship, who was also a Czech and had been helping many people and was a multi-millionaire and had a beautiful house up in Brineau had the lists of all the cases that they would, very, very anxious to help and get out. So, uh, I, uh, I asked two of the girls fonn the British office - they were the younger members of the staff - if they would like to go up with me and they said they would. And, so, we decided to and this was after Waitstill couldn't come back in. BA: So, where was he? MSC: He was in, he was in London, and mostly in Switzerland because now we were about to have our international youth meetings and he was asked to speak at them and he kept writing to me and saying, "I think. .. " BA: So, you were in touch. MSC: Yeah, and he said, "I think you better get out if you can." So, I said, "Well, I'll come out when I do this one last trip to Moravia and take the lists, uh, that they want to have, uh, that can be used if people want to help them, you see." BA: I'm sorry, I know, I know my ... [Tape recorder shut off and turned back on.] MSC: Because Wellington, the second girl in the British Committee had, was missing and nobody knew where she was and one or two of the others were gone and I took two of the girls with me and we went up to this lovely house in Brineau. Urn, I could add others, but I think there are enough stories here. So, I went up for the weekend and I, I had no, I had found that the same man's boots were outside the hotel room next door every night. And, whenever I went anywhere, I would just check it out and see he was watching me everywhere I went and at night, I was 36 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 quite sure that he always was there. And, I knew that I was being shadowed and I knew, uh, and I was in close contact with all the people we had known - the head of the Quakers group, Dr. Yaroslav Kose, who was the, a marvelous man and a Quaker and he was the ExportlImport Minister of Czechoslovakia. And, we had lots of contact with people in the country and everybody was sort of looking out for you. Urn, I finally said, "Well, I will go to, I will go to Moravia and get this list because if we have the list of people and we know what the un, unfinished British list is that they want to get out from there, the people that are endangered. So, I'd like to spend a weekend." And, we went up by train and I went up alone and the British girls had already gone ahead in the afternoon. And, I looked out of my second class door on the train and I could see, I saw him, the same Gestapo man that had been following me for a month, looking inside. BA: The same man? Oh! It must have been frightening. MSC: And, I thought, "Well, I'll do what I can to give you the slip." So, I went to, uh, I got off the train and I thought, I said, "You know, my protector is here on the train and this, I think the fellow over there is the one." And, they were very sweet. They had invited a whole group of people in Brineau and they had a modem house - I'd never seen anything so beautiful. And, the side of the house opened up and it was a day like today, sunny and lovely, and they had cherry trees in the garden, loaded with chenies. And, all the guests came and ate chenies off the trees and had their, and had their drinks outdoors and this beautiful, beautiful house that, one end of which was all glass and we were all entertained. And, then, they brought us little, uh, little plaid wool, uh, little shawls and things to sit on. So, what you did was you sat in a chair with it and you put them over your knees and you put them around your shoulders so you could sit outdoors and you wouldn't mind the temperature changing very much . So, it was one of those elegant and beautiful and formal dinner parties, you can imagine, with people who have loads of servants and the place is beautiful and everybody is having a wonderful time, but they're scared to death. BA: Yes, a [unintelligible] convalesce. MSC: And, the two British girls with me, so I said to - his name was Noiemarc, Mr. Noiemarc, I was, I think he owned a lot of stores, he was very rich - and I said, "Mr. Noiemarc, we have to make the such and such, the last train back to Prague tonight, so will you be quite sure that we are, we get there in plenty of time for it." "Oh," he said, "Don't worry, Mrs. Sharp. I will hire an absolutely safe driver for you, to take you back to Prague." And, I said, "But, we'd rather not, we'd really rather take the train." "No," he said, "I absolutely assure you that this man will take care of you properly. And, so, when you're ready to go, he will come here and bring his car and drive the three of you back to Prague." Well, I couldn't, I couldn't inSist. So, after dinner, we said our goodbyes and I got all of the lists of all the people that were wanted, that wanted to get out and what the contacts were and what they needed to do to get out - sheets of papers! We, we got into this car and started out and I thought everything was alright, and everybody else did and we felt quite safe, because I was sure that Noiemarc, if anybody, could get us a safe dri ver. And, uh, one of the girls had to take an insulin shot at a certain amount of time before she had her dinner. So, we planned on where, we planned about where, what time we'd like dinner, and so, then, I told the driver that we wanted to stop at about six o'clock or whatever at some place that he knew that was a good place to have dinner. And, we must stop at, I guess it was an hour before, it was five o'clock we ought to stop because she had to take an insulin shot and he said to me, "I will not stop at five o'clock. I will stop when I am ready." BA: Uh oh, and then you knew. 37 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: And, I realized he had been switched on us. BA: How did you think that happened? Oh, he'd had been switched, oh. MSC: He'd been switched and, and Noiemarc would never had let it happen. He didn't know. Noiemarc had arranged for it to be safe, but. So, five o'clock came and we were worried to death because I thought she might have some kind of a reaction if he didn't her, her insulin. So, finally, at half past five. [Telephone rings. Tape recorder shut off and turned back on.] MSC: So, the girl took her shot and, uh, at this point we noticed that as we slowed down, an officer's car with two German officers in it, with the top down, very rakish, passed us on the road. And, they all bowed to us as they went by. Then, we kept on driving and I said, "Well, we'd like to stop at the next so-and-so because it would be better for her to eat something." He said, "You'll eat, you will stop where I take you." Well, we kept on following and they kept passing us and then we kept passing them. And, finally, we, and finally he slowed down and the officers went past us and up the drive of the beautiful place which was actually a very famous restaurant and they bowed and they got out of the car and we got out. And, with great dignity, we went in, ordered our own table, paid for our own dinner and they just sat at the side and they were very pleasant. And, we had our dinner, and then we got into the car, and drove back and they waited until we left and then they followed us and they kept going into, uh, anyplace where we stopped, they'd stop too. And, then, when, as we were taken home, everybody, I had everybody delivered before I was delivered because I wanted to be the last one. And, they delivered me to my hotel and I went into the hotel and the men, uh, saluted me when I got out. I mean, these officers as, they were just playing like cat and mouse. And, so the next morning, I, at breakfast, they had at the Quakers, Dr. Yaroslav Kose was waiting for me. He said, "Martha, they are intending to arrest you on Wednesday." BA: Oh, my gosh! MSC: He said, "You had better get out tomorrow morning and don't let anyone know you are gone. There is an international train at such and such, so you can get aboard the train and don't bother if you can't take everything with you, because it won't be important." "But," he said, "You must be on that train because they're coming on Wednesday and you've got to get out on Tuesday and don't let anyone know I told you." He said, "I heard it through our underground." So, Tuesday, I packed up very hurriedly, took all our papers, that was what I wanted with me. BA: Yeah, no clothes, just the papers. MSC: I didn't bother about the clothes. BA: Were you frightened? Were you absolutely frightened at this point? MSC: What could I do? I just had to be wise as I could be. So, I just threw everything into the bags and went to the station, just before it arrived. I had the ticket. I went there just before the train left, got a bit, I was the only women in the whole compartment and the only woman in that part of the train that was going through Czechoslovakia because nobody had exit. But, I did have in my passport that one last exit visa. BA: Uh huh, oh, thank goodness! 38 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 MSC: So, I didn't have to go and get an exit visa. We always tried to keep one that was fresh. BA: Oh yeah, you wouldn't have had time to get an exit visa. MSC: No, I would have had to wait and possibly they would have held me up and arrested me right then and there. BA: Oh. MSC: So, I got... [End of Tape 3, Side 1.] Tape 3, Side 2. MSC: I had forgotten where it was, but we took a whole, uh, two car loads of soldiers on and, uh, before we got to the border that night we had a, uh, we had a, uh, you know, an assistant, a fellow who - what am I trying to say? A guard who looked out for our welfare. And, he took care of me and so on and then I went to bed and I locked the door of my cabin. I was still the only person in this whole car - and I locked the door of it and, the first thing you know, I heard the door being rattled as someone's trying, and then a bunch of soldiers who are, uh, drunk as lords, tried to open the door. BA: Oh, right, oh. MSC: And, I kept ringing the bell for the porter and I couldn't get any help from anyone and they kept doing it and I kept - fortunately, the locks held and finally we came to the border and all the soldiers were taken and the car, their car was shunted off and so they didn't make it. And, fortunately, I arrived the next morning back in, in, I have forgotten whether we, we went, we didn't take the boat, but fortunately, I got back and I was able, I guess I went back to Paris and, then, I went from Paris back to London and we finished it. We went to all the offices and, uh, made all of the lists and put all the people down that need to be helped and all the other things that needed to be done and went to see everybody in our Paris office and then everybody in our office in London. And, uh, by this time, Waitstill had made his speeches in Arsanio, Switzerland and he had been to all of the youth meetings, the Unitarian youth meetings and, uh, we were ready to fly back to the United States and we did that. So, that was the end of our Czechoslovak, uh, experience. BA: What an experience! MSC: Well, there were a lot of other things that happened. BA: Too many close calls, I would think. MSC: Well, there were a lot of other things that happened too and very wonderful things. I came to know a great deal about the Czech culture and some of my best friends, one of the, uh, some of the best friends were the artists and the decorators and, for instance, Dr. Yarslov Kose had given us some beautiful glass, Czechoslovak glass that some of the finest made that was exhibited at the, at, at various exhibitions in Europe, and as presents to leave, to take with us and so on and I was able to take some of those things along. But, on the whole, it was, it was a very important experience because then we were able to go to our office in 39 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 London and work, and get the Refugee committees organized to help and continue. And, Malcolm Davis could keep right on from, as far as he was concerned, in, uh, in, urn, France, to help from the French end and everything else was, uh, was continued as long as there were any people that they could get in touch with over there and send things to. So, that, the, the Czech experience was a very, a very interesting one and I came back to the United States and picked up my household duties and, uh, went to the women's meetings and took care of my two little children and had a perfectly wonderful winter. But, now, I have to introduce the fact that, in the meantime, Unitarians got so excited by what they had done in Czechoslovaki. BA: What you had done. [laughs] MSC: Well, they, they felt they did it too - that they decided to start a Unitarian Service Committee and come next May, at the annual May meetings, Dr. Dexter, with the help of my husband and other people, had drawn up a program of how to go to Europe, to France, right now, because it was partly occupied. By this time, you see, the Nazis ... BA: That's where the need was now. MSC: The Nazis had moved over to, into France and everybody was saying, "We've got to help the French now. We can't do anything with the Czechs, but we can help the French." And, so, without even speaking to me, the President of the American Unitarian Association announced at the annual meeting that "Waitstill and Martha Sharp ... " BA: Oh dear! MSC: "Were going to go, were going to fly to France and they couldn't got here directly because you couldn't get into France. There was no transportation you could ride and that, that in, within a few weeks, we hope that they would be leaving and we will all get behind them and their parish is going to be run by Everett Baker and that the church committee that's been doing all these things will continue and Mr. and Mrs. Stebbins, uh, Martha's aunt and uncle will still live in the house and take care of the children and see they go to camp and the Sharps will just go over for the summer and get the Unitarian Service Committee started." BA: And, nobody told you? MSC: Nobody told me, but he announced this at the annual meetings and I burst into tears because no one has said a word to me. I knew that Waitstill had gone to a meeting suddenly with Dr. Elliot the day before and he hadn't had time to talk to me because he had come back late and he'd gone to bed and then he got up early to go to the meetings. And, so we went straight, he went straight to Boston in the morning and then I went to the meetings and Elliot announced he was delighted to tell us that Waisttill and Martha Sharp would now go over to, to France. So, uh, they organized the Unitarian Service Committee. They said with all of the contacts they have, they have the, these people, Donald Lawry and Helen Lawry in France. They've got an officer in the Uni, in the United States, the American Church. BA: Well, they were right. You were the logical ones. MSC: And, theere's a, there's a whole program and they're known to people all over the world because they've been working there and they can begin right where they left off before. So, urn, uh, I, I, Dr. Elliot came down from the pulpit and kissed me and said, "Martha, darling, we're so glad you're going." And, I burst 40 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 into tears. And, then he left the church and I said, "Waitstill, why didn't you tell me that you had agreed to go?" He said, "Well, he threatened me. He said, 'If you don't go' ... " BA: Elliot threatened? MSC: "He said, 'If you don't go, we might make it difficult for you to get another church .'" BA: Oh! And, he really could follow through with that? MSC: He was the head of the Unitarian Association. BA: Oh, boy! Hm. MSC: So, so, Waitstill said ... BA: Well, Waitstill took him seriously, took it very seriously then, obviously, this threat. MSC: Oh, yes . So, what happened then was that we immediately - we had another two weeks - we immediately had to reorganize our household. This was now in the May meetings, you see, in the summer. So ... BA: And, you had come home from Prague, when? MSC: We came home from Prague in December. BA: December, so this was five months later. MSC: Yeah, and we'd adjust the children every time we left the house, the children were sure we were going for good. And, they were too young to understand what was going on. BA: Yes. MSC: And, it was really very Marty, really, Marty missed us terribly and so did [unintelligible]. But, I have lovely letters from my aunt who wrote me regularly abut the children and what they were doing and how they changing and developing and so on, but that's not the same as being there when you have little children. BA: Mmhm. MSC: So, what happened was that the Unitarian Service Committee was formed and, urn, they were, we were asked to be the Overseas Directors with our expenses paid. Uh, that meant travel and whatever the expense was there. And, it was decided that we should begin in France, but that we should decide, since we were now experienced administrators, where they should work in France. And, so, urn, we went back to the State Department, of course, had to get all the permits, all the other things done. We had, again, get the legal things organized in case anything happened to us and the children were left alone. And, urn, and, so therefore, this time, we decided that we were to take off and go by way, we were going to go by way of, we were going to fly by clipper to Lisbon because that was the only open port. Now, do you think we ought to go on with this or shall I? [Tape recorder shut off and on.] 41 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 BA: Okay, you can talk now. MSC: Alright, start now. [Tape recorder shut off and on.] BA: Okay. MSC: In a very short time, we had been to Washington, we established our passports for our trip to, uh, France, and gotten some idea of how to get there. There were no ports open, and, uh, it was decided that the only way that anybody could get into Europe at this time was by way of Lisbon, Portugal. So, uh, we had decided to take a plane and go to Lisbon and then drive up from Lisbon to France since it was France who we're suppose to be helping. We, uh, were able to obtain clipper passages to Lisbon, which were very hard to get, excepting for diplomats and very important people because our committee chairman, Percivel Brundage in New York City was able to make the arrangements. And, we got ourselves ready and, uh, after a delightful meeting of the Service Committee people in New York, uh, we said goodbyes, we took the clipper and started out to go to France. The clipper was quite a new experience. It had great pontoons underneath and, and, it was suppose to rise from the water and with a great rush and only very important people were aboard, of course. And, the first thing that happened was that I was introduced to Mr. and Mrs. Myron Taylor, who were aboard the clipper with Mr. Taylor's secretary and his doctor. Taylor was going to the, uh, Vatican to be the representative of the President and he was in very bad health and they felt that he should go there as soon as possible and be well-attended by his wife and by his entourage. Uh, the clipper seats were few and, uh, they were mostly like double­ club seats. And, Waitstill and I sat in one of these double seats and across from us was this young, uh, well, I call him, he looked like a Yalie, I don't know whether he went to Harvard or not, but, at any rate, he introduced himself as Wyetla Reed, and we introduced ourselves to him. And, the other man said, "Nerusta Kopf Ration." There were also four other people aboard the clipper. BA: That's all, just. .. MSC: That's all. Just the Taylors, these two young men, ourselves and four Englishmen, two of whom were members of, were members of Parliament and had just returned from a trip raising money to help Great Britain over the United States. And, the other two were antique dealers, who had been trying to claim, uh, English antiques in the United States and bring them back. Uh, it looked as though it was going to be sort of fun and we expected to arrive the next, I think, the next morning in, uh, in Lisbon. And, we started off gaily and had almost just, uh, attained our top speed when the cabin attendant came through and told us that we were terribly sorry, but the weather had changed and was so bad that the plane would not fly directly to Europe, that we would have to go to Bermuda on the way. And, at this point, I noticed that the man, Nerusta Kopf Ration, president, who had announced himself began to perspire and the perspiration ran down his head and his neck and he got as red as a beet and I thought, well, something's up. And, they said that it was too bad that the weather had changed so swiftly, but we would be landing in Bermuda. So, we thought, that's great, I mean, we were going to Europe, but now instead we were going to Bermuda [BA laughs]. And, we arrived in Bermuda and immediately we were asked to give up our pocketbooks, everything, all our luggage, everything we had, and, uh, people were sear, told they would be searched personally if they didn't give up everything in it they had and give it to the authorities. And, then, our friend with the Yalie announced, young Wyetla Reed said, he thought that - and the weather was perfect - and he thought that there was something up, the fact that we couldn't even keep our own pocketbooks. They 42 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 took everything we had, excepting they didn't ad, they didn't really frisk us to find out if we had anything hidden under our clothes. BA: Now, which guy, this was a British? MSC: And, this was the British authorities. They said, "We are at war with the Nazis and you are going now into a war zone and we have to be sure that you're not bringing anything that will be of value to the enemy." BA: I see. MSC: So, uh, we were all taken by a bus to the loveliest hotel on the island. And, we were told that we could go out riding, if we wanted to, in a, a cabriolet or anything else. We were free to do whatever we wanted to do and at sup, dinner would be served in the dining room and that as soon as the weather cleared, we would be allowed to leave. So, we went out for a ride in a, a carriage, behind horses, and drove around the island. And, it was very interesting because you could see convoys of ships that were about to sail out with, uh, American, uh, uh, ships attending them to protect them in case they were sunk on way. So, that reminded us that the war was on. BA: Yes. MSC: And, at about, uh, in, early in the afternoon, our pocketbooks were brought back. Obviously, everything - our passports, our money, everything - had been examined and we were told that probably the weather would clear in the morning. BA: Mm hm, miraculously [laughs]. MSC: We had a delightful dinner. The Taylors didn't eat with us, they ate in their room. And, the next morning at ten o'clock, we were told that everything was clear and the weather had changed miraculously and now we could fly to Portugal. In the meantime, Wyetla Reed had gone to call up his mother in New York and find out about the weather change and thought something was funny about it and he wasn't able to reach her, so he said, "Well, I'll call her when we, when I get to Jorga, to, to Portugal." We arrived in Portugal and everything was fine and, uh, then we took off again and came into the port at Lisbon. Lisbon was delightful. The weather was gorgeous. Uh, we were all, we went through the customs very easily and then we were all put into a bus and we were told we'd have to go out to Esta Rio, which is some twenty-fi ve or thirty miles outside of Lisbon because there was no housing available. All the refugees from Europe were coming down from the North and were crowding every available bed anywhere in Spain and Portugal, hoping to get away from the war in the upper parts, in the occupied areas by the Nazis. So, uh, finally, we stopped at a hotel and, uh, Hotel de Italia. Well, the British were sure that the de Italia must be owned by the British or paid for by the British and they refused to stay in an enemies hotel. BA: By the Italians. MSC: Owned by the Italians. BA: Yeah, yeah. MSC: So, they called up, they called on the administrator of the hotel and they made him bring out the proof of the fact that it was not owned by Italian interests. And, not until they were completely sure were they willing to accept rooms in this hotel. And, but before this, when as, when we arrived on the, on the pier, Mr. and 43 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 Mrs. Taylor were met by the ambassador, actually, the Minister to Portugal, Minister Hebert Pell - was Clayborn Pell's father. And, he had welcomed them wannly for the United States and said he would like them to come to his home and he was taking them in his car out to stay at his house. And, uh, that he, uh, uh, he was very happy that they were able to, to stay in Portugal. And, they explained they were going on to the Vatican because he was the new representative of the United States at the Vatican. And, however, Mrs., by this time, uh, uh, Mrs. Taylor was so incensed that we, she was not, she and her husband were not being given the honors they were due, uh, because young Wyetla Reed had held the plane up while he got back, when he was always trying to find out from the weather people what really had held up the plane. And, was telegraphing back to New York to find out if we had really had a bad storm because he was quite sure we were being held up for diplomatic reasons and he was quite right, of course. And, she admonished him in front of all of us before we were allowed to leave in the bus and go and look for our room at the de Italia. And, we're all embarrassed by her. And, so, she said she'd hope that he'd behave better later and so on. And, poor Mr. Reed, who was just doing a newspaperman's job, that's all. So, we arr, so finally they decided, the British, uh, the four members of Parliament and the two British antique dealers decided that it was okay to stay in the de Italia. So, we all arrived, were taken into the dining room, placed at one table. We all sat together all the time we were there, and had a delightful dinner. Gorgeous weather, beautiful place, no idea war or anything going on. BA: Oh, no refugees there? MSC: No refugees, no, except, at the table next to us, there was a beautiful blond woman with two children and her husband. And, she came over and, and we said, "How do you do?" Everybody spoke to everybody. She said, "My husband was the Minister of Poland, the Minister to Poland, and these are my children and we are going to the United States for the war because the office is closed. The, it has been occupied by the Nazis." So, urn, uh, we had pleasantries and everybody was talking to everybody else. And, the next day, we went to see, we went to the American, urn, Ligation and the American Consulate and advised them. They said they'd been waiting, expecting us and they hoped and they had already made, uh, uh, plans for us to stay in a hotel there in Lisbon because they knew we were coming and they could get it. A normal, ordinary traveling person couldn't. So, we transferred our stuff and went to stay in Lisbon itself. And, then, uh, showed the Minister our credentials and said that, uh, and he, and we told him that the Service Committee had decided that since France was in the greatest need, we should go and try to do what we could to help. And, he said, "Well, you know, Morris Troper's here, the Head of the Joint Distribution Committee, from the United States." And, he said, "And, we just say Malcolm Davis who just arrived, who just been here from Geneva, I mean, from, from, uh, from Paris. And, he said, and he said, "I'll give you their addresses because I know they'd be thrilled to see you." So, we took the addresses, went into the hotel, called up Troper and Troper said, "Great, and let's have cocktails and now I want to talk to you tomorrow about what the situation with the Jews is in Europe right now." And, then, we called Malcolm Davis and he said, "Let's have dinner together and then I want to talk with you this evening. I'm off tonight, I'm flying back tonight to Paris, but I'm so delighted that you're here and we can go to work right away." So, we had these conferences immediately with the head of the Jewish community and the head of the, of the, uh, the American, well, the International Peace area, and, urn, heard about where all the people that we knew jointly were. So, uh, they, we said to them, "What do you think the greatest need is for us to help with." And, they said, "By all means, milk for the children because the Nazis have butchered all the cows in the North of France." 44 Martha Sharp Cogan '26 BA: Oh, that's what happened. MSC: "And, there was no milk and they're the ones who use to provide the milk. The cows in the south were kept for, to be used for meat and they still have some there, but everything is disorganized. People have been fleeing from, to go from the North, all over the world. Everybody has lost everybody, the trains have been bombed, the, uh, living is almost impossible and people are starving. There's no distribution of food, it's, it's really awful, so anything you can do, but especially, if you want to help the children, the children are starving for lack of milk." So, uh, we went to see Malcolm Davis the next day, that night, and the next day and Malcolm said, "By all means, if you can get your hands on any powdered or condensed mild, do so." So, uh, we, so, uh, in the meantime, we, we met the, the Minister of the American Church in Paris, where we had our office for the Czechs. And, we said, to him, "What's you situation?" "Oh," he said, "I just brought a train load of people, a whole car load of people down. I have my, a car given to me by Diogenes Balsam, who's a member of our, of our Board of Trustess, and he gave me this car to bring all the Americans I could get into it and bring them down to go back to the United States because," he said, "The situation in Paris is awful." And, he said, "By the way, if you want the care I'll give it to you because I can't have any use for it and I'm sure he doesn't want it anymore and it's a very good American car." So, he gave us all of the word about it and said, "If you want it, just call me up and he told me, told us where he was." So, uh, the next day, we decided that, well, if we had a car and we had to make a survey and we had to get to France, how should we go? We went to see the French, uh, the French Ambassador in Portugal and said that we were, and told him, and brought him our credentials and said we were on route to France to do what we could to help. He was, uh, he spoke beautiful English but would use it because he insisted on speaking perfect. His wife spoke English and, uh, and we had a wonderful conference. They invited us not only to come to his office, but also to have lunch with them, and they told us all they know of the conditions in France. And, she came from a very famous, old Spanish family and she was very emotional and so she said, "Now, we are having a tombola." - do you know what a tombola is? BA: No. MSC: A tombola is a, is a kind of a, a sort of a sale that, for charitable reasons of things people make or they give - "And, we're having a tombola this weekend to aid our French Relief Funds and we'd love to have you come." And, then they, uh, uh, we said, "Well, we've gotten a car and we understand they need milk in France." They said, "That's the thing they need the most and anything we can do to help you, we'll help you to." "In fact," said Madam, "I have already a car loaf of clothes for our demobilized French soldiers to wear because they've worn through the prison stuff they've had and they don't have anything to hide their nakedness. So, we've got a whole car load of pants and all sorts of discarded clothes and food, which has already been given, waiting to go on the railroad tracks up, back to France." Well, uh, so they told us more about the French and how they organize, what they do there and so on, so we made great friends of these people, the Ambassador and his wife, Madam de Sant, uh, Renee. So, they said to us, "Come tomorrow to lunch." We went to see the Roman Catholic priest who's in charge of Catholic relief. He said, uh, "If you're good Catholics and you go to church and you will give us all your time, we'd be very happy to have your services, but we don't want anybody else and we don't want to have to work with anybody else because we got all we can do to do our work for our parishioners." So, we said, "Fine, thank you, just let us know if you need any other help." So, we, uh, after, and Malcolm Davis said, gave us the picture of where everybody was and the Lawrys were, he'd heard from them in Paris, and that probably, they, they had a place, he thought somewhere south of Paris where they use to go in the summer 45 Track 6 27:18 MD: …and probably they'd gone to their place—anybody who would, got out of Paris. So having made all of these things, we made all these contacts…the next day, we decided we'd better get a driving license for the car, since we had a car now, and we might fill it full of stuff and take it. So we went to…we asked how we could get a license, and they said, "You should go to the American Automobile…you should go to the…to the Portuguese Automobile Club. And so we went to the Portuguese Automobile Club. Well, nobody there spoke English… BA: I was going to say! MD: And they only spoke French, we didn't speak Portuguese. So as we were sitting, trying to get somebody we could talk to, an American woman—you've read this part of it—an American woman came in and she said, "Why, you look like Americans. What are you doing here?" And we explained that we were representing the Unitarian Service Committee and that we were trying to find out if we could get a license to drive a car we had up in France. And she said, "Oh!" she said, "That's very simple. Let me just help you." So she said, "Why do you want to go to France?" So we told her about the Service Committee and she was delighted. Because, she said, "I'm an American. My name is Orlena Scoville. I come from Connecticut, and I have a lovely house here in Portugal, and I would love to entertain you and help in any way I can as an American." And she said, "I know the people in the Rockefeller Board of Directors who are doing relief work for children here, and we might be able to get supplies from them, and there are other reasons why we tau…I can probably help you." So she said, "Just a minute, now, let me see what I can do about the…your driving license." So she went and knocked on the director's door and she said…she asked the director in Portuguese if the director would please come out and meet some of her close friends from America. So he came out, and she introduced us, and she told him that we were on our way up to France, and who we were, and that she would personally vouch for us, but that we first of all had to get driving licenses. And he said, "Oh, that's very simple." All I have to do is join the American Automobile Club. I mean, the Portuguese Automobile Club. So he immediately…so he said, "Where is your car?" "Well," we said, "let us call up and find out where it is, and see if we can get it brought here." By the time…"Well," he said, "the minute you have your car here I will get the person who will give you your license test." So we filled out all the forms and he called and got someone and we got aboard the car and—with a driver—and we took the license, but I can't tell you what a terrible experience it was, driving in Portugal, and the fact we couldn't understand anything the man said to us… BA: Yeah. MD: … because he talked only in Portuguese… BA: Boy. MD: …we couldn't understand what it said in the book because that was all in Portuguese, we could only speak English and French, and nobody could do that. And so we…everything that he told me do, he had to do by gestures. BA: Mm-hmm. MD: And when he told me to go left, or he told me to go right, it would be so late that I would go to the wrong side. So I was quite sure, when I went down one street the wrong way, and when I nearly ran over two or three pedestrians, and I did all kinds of terrible things, I was sure he would flunk me on my test. But lo! Lo and behold! We came back to the club, he…kissed my hand, thanked me for the privilege of taking me out, and Mrs. Scoville was waiting, and the director had our…our licenses all ready. They were signed. We paid our little bill, and we were the drivers of an American automobile and had the license to drive. So we put the…took the car and put it in a garage, called up the friend from Paris, and said that we were now able to drive and we'd be happy to take the car tomorrow if it was alright with him and so on. But he was…he was traveling back the United States and sailing that night. So he cou…we couldn't see him anymore anyway, and we didn't need to. Well, we began then talking to Orlena Scoville about supplies. And they had told us we must take milk. Track 7 We were told that it would be better to take condensed or powdered or Nestogen or some kinds…different kinds of milk because of the babies' different needs. BA: Right. MD: So we made up a list of what we thought would be right, we talked to a doctor at the Rockefeller Foundation about what kinds of powdered milks were best for children and in what quantity, and we decided that if we could probably go overseas…overboard, and buy $5000 worth of milk to get started. So we cabled back to our committee in New York and said that having discussed this matter with all of the available people interested in relief in France, they felt that milk was the most urgent need and that we would to have them pay for a…5000 dollars' worth of powdered and condensed milk which we were getting at a tremendous discount because of Mrs. Scoville. BA: Right. MD: And also we were helped with because our…we understood that she had also arranged for free transportation to France, across Spain and Portugal. BA: What a lucky meeting that was! MD: Which was a tremendous help, and we were th…we were sure the committee would be thrilled. Well, we got a cable back immediately from Dexter, saying, "Don't feed. Why isn't the United States using the milk from the boat that is in the harbor, full of milk, instead of your spending our money to buy milk? You should be helping people who are fleeing." Well, we hadn't been given any such…we had been told to use our…our own experience to indicate what we thought was the greatest need on the spot, and I…and we told them that everybody else felt this way. So, Dexter cabled back that, alright, he would…he would pay for the milk, but he didn't want us to buy any more milk. And in the meantime, we had to get…arrange for the papers, the passage of the milk, and the transportation, and…and the rest of it. And we were entertained by Mrs. Scoville at her quinta, which was a fabulous fifteenth century palace which had belonged to one of the kings of Portugal, and which was called the Quinta de Bacalhôa. Bacalhôa means codfish. And it was taken by...the...it was taken by the time of the early voyages in the ocean to prevent scurvy. And every good trip, especially the Portuguese sailors, would take a load of bacalhôa for the captains and officers to take, but they couldn't afford to get it for just the general seamen. BA: Hmm. MD: And it happened that at one of these great voyages…that the…the voyage would have been ruined, because everybody was sick on the trip…the seamen. And only the fact that the officers gave up their bacalhôa to the…for the seamen made it possible for them to end the voyage and bring back gold and silver and jewels for the king of Portugal. And so he gave the captain of that ship, because of his ingenuity, a…not only an honor, but he gave him the quinta. And it was always called the Quinta de Bacalhôa because it was the quinta of the codfish boys. And it…and therefore, we learned a little bit about…about the area. We also discussed the feeding program and other things with them there. We found that there were loads and loads of Americans who were fleeing now, trying to get out as the…as Clayton Williams, the Minister of the American Church in Paris, was trying to get out, on the boats. And there was only the export line that was coming regularly, every week, a new export ship going back and forth to the United States. And it was the only way you could get out if you wanted to go to America, there were no other ships going in any other directions, because the Nazis (inaudible) were roaming the seas. So we…we started to work on getting the supplies that we needed and…and Orlena Scoville was…was able to talk to the presidents of the railroads, and got the free passage for the milk, and we got the…we got Madam Amelia Waugh's load of stuff from the Consulate hitched to the…the…the cars… BA: These were the clothes and stuff. MD: …the clothes, and all the things she'd been given, and so we deci…we made a trainload of…of food and gifts and so on, and they decided that probably it should come, and then we decided that it should come into a…we would let them know where it would come later, but we'd go up and find out what the problems were. So we decided we would drive across Spain, across Portugal and Spain, and up into France. And in the meantime, they gave us the address where Donald Lawry and his wife were staying in Pau, in the south of France, and we got in touch with them and told them we were coming and that we were going to cross the border at…at an…in the eastern end of France. And we started on this trip in which we drove across…all the way across seven mountain…mountains in one day. And across devastated Spain, which was really horrible…they had just withdrawn, after the war, the Franco war, there was no place to stay, the food was dreadful, it was awfully hard to…to find any…the roads had been blown up in such a way that you had to go way around sometimes, because there wasn't any road through. And the situation was really very bad, and when we…when we were able to get to the first big city, to Madrid, you couldn't find a restaurant, you couldn't find a place to put your car. Fortunately, there we found one place where there was a good repairman and—we had developed a kind of a knock in the car in the meantime—and he was able to fix it. BA: Well, that was luck. [6:34] MD: And we able to spend the night, but we noticed that when you pay for anything, they never gave you any change. They gave it to you in the…kind of stubs. Either a ticket on the…on the…on the… BA: [Book?] MD: …a ticket either to take a tram, or a…transportation on the train, or something that was the value of the money, but you never got anything but a piece of paper. BA: Yeah. MD: And you never could…could ever get those redeemed anywhere afterwards, we found, because there was no small change money. I'll never forget [driving?] through Madrid, the city had been demolished; the university was in shambles; and everybody was living from hand to mouth, and they said it was worse as you went north. So finally we went up and crossed the border and…and…and we had told Don Lawry where we would meet him. And we got to the frontier and our…we got to the frontier of Portugal and we're in Spain, and we're delighted because it was the day before we thought we were going to get there, and we asked to go across because we had visas for France. And the guard at the frontier said, "I'm…we're sorry. The frontier is closed. You can't go across." And we said, "Why can't we cross?" And they said, "Because it's been closed indefinitely. And it's been closed for two or three weeks. And we don't know whether it will ever open again." BA: Oh, dear. MD: And I said…I remember that Don Lawry once had said to me that the French are more logical than legal. And so after we had finished talking with the border guards, I said to one of the border guards, "Would you mind if I talked to the captain of your guard group?" and he said, "No, I'll be glad to do that." So he brought the captain down and so I explained in French—fortunately, I had enough French to do it—that we were Americans, and that we had heard about the plight of the French children, and that we were bringing milk to feed the babies in France. And it would seem such a pity for us to be kept out, because it was delaying the children of not getting fed. And he said, "Well does sound [sad?]." And he said, "I am a parent. And I feel that you are absolutely right in what you're trying to do." And he said, "Although I'm supposed to keep this border closed, it's quite alright, I'm going to let you go through." BA: There you came through again! MD: We opened up the barriers, and everybody stood there, who was still waiting to go through, and had been staying there for two weeks and living hand to mouth in this little village, and we went right through. And we didn't realize that France was blacked out. And we had all the lights of the car on. And suddenly, we began to see that everybody was scared to death when we came with the lights on, then we realized that we better turn the lights off and keep on going until we could get to the Belvedere in this border town, where we knew Don Lawry said that he would meet us. BA: Mm. MD: So we arrived that night, and we got there, and we couldn't find any director for the hotel. But the man who took care of the cars, covered with grease, came out and said he would take us into the garage, and give us a room. And…which he did, and he lighted a candle, and he led us into the garage to leave the car, and then we told…we gave him a message to give to Mr. Lawry, if he was in the hotel. He said he couldn't look it up 'til tomorrow. He didn't read anyway. So, and then he took us to our…what he said was our room, and the next morning, when we woke up, Don was knocking at our door. BA: Oh. MD: He was in the hotel, and he said the hotel was run by a man who made his money from…from the gun smuggling across the frontier, and that he didn't have the slightest idea about anything. He built the whole hotel…it was so…it was so easily violated in one way or another and that there was…there was no night guard, and that all the rooms entered the other rooms from the terraces, so that you could go in and out of (inaudible); none of it was safe! And he said and all the strangest people stay here. So Don said, "It's not a very good place to be, but I'm glad I stayed until you got here!" So we talked with him about what we should do, but we felt that…and we said to him, since Dr. Dexter had said we had to go and get permission from the American Red Cross, who had a shipload full of food… BA: Including milk? MD: …including milk that wasn't distributed yet. And they didn't have permission to distribute it. Which was on the way from the United States, and was coming to Marseilles, and that we should go and talk to Richard…we should go and talk to the head of the…of the…wait a minute; I've got to get his name. BA: Say it again. MD: We were…had told by Dr. Dexter that there was a ship, which had been sent full of food and that Richard Allen was the head of the American Red Cross in Europe and that he was to take that ship and use it in the places where it was necessary. And that he didn't feel that we had any right to take in (inaudible) against our taking in…to buying milk. So we said to Don Lawry, then we'll all have to go up to Marseilles, and talk to Dick Allen and get his permission to do anything about feeding the children with the 5000 dollars' worth of powdered and condensed milk that we bought. So we went to the Red Cross, and he said the ship had arrived, but had…they did not yet have permission to unload it. Nobody had been given anything up 'til now, and that the reason that they hadn't was that because they had to get guarantees from the Nazis that they would not confiscate any of the American goods, that they would be given entirely to the French, and would not be allowed to be administered or used by the Germans. And therefore, the Germans had not answered their request, and therefore nothing could be done about it. "But," he said, "you have no such requirement. And the places that are worst off are the ones which are semi-occupied, where a département has part of it run by the Germans, and the other part is run by the French people who were there before. And therefore, what I can do is give you permission to distribute your milk supplies, because I can't even go there." So he said, "What you do is, you are really extending our United States shipment, because you're able to go into areas that I can't go." BA: Mm. MD: And so he gave us a Carte d'Identité; he gave us permission; he gave us letters authorizing us as representatives of the American Red Cross, and asking the French officials to give us every courtesy that was due to American workers in France. And so off we went to talk with the people…other people about what should be done about…but also to arrange for the milk shipment, then, to come through, into France. And after talking with many different people, we went to see the head of the French Red Cross, Madame Saint-René Taillandier, who…I don't know whether you know, but the French Red Cross is divided into three different groups. It's…first of all…the top group is run by the people who have…who are of the noble society. The middle group is a sort of a middle class group, and the third group is the general public. And Mme. Saint-René Taillandier was the president of the top group, the one that…the nobility. And she was only 80 years old, something like that, and she was not well. She was at Carcassonne, and staying at her petit château. And we should talk to her about anything, before we did any distributing. So we went with Don…we went with Don Lawry up to Carcassonne, and we were…we were invited by Mme. Saint-René Taillandier, who was really quite ill, and in bed, wearing the most beautiful lace cap and dressed in almost robe…noble robes, and she told us that she was delighted that we'd been asked to come and she hoped that we would see that her shipment should go to Colonel Cros of the French army, who was in charge of assistance to people, and she would see to it that it was properly administered by him and by the French who were his…working along with him. And we…then she clapped her hands, and the maid brought in two beautiful silver sets of tea and coffee, and it looked as though she hadn't had tea and coffee for a long, long time, because she was so thrilled about it. She served us tea and coffee, and then we…and then we left her and said would keep her in touch with what we were doing (inaudible). So now we have permission from the head of the French Red Cross; everybody knew her. BA: Mm-hmm. MD: And she was the national president of the Red Cross, and then we decided that we'd better find out what was happening to certain other groups in the south of France before we went up to…to…to…to Pau. In the meantime, Don Lawry arrived in Marseilles and Don said, "In Pau, we have the worst starvation you can imagine. We know all the people there. We ourselves are now have…we have a hou…a place there, so you can stay with us, and I will help you get…do the distribution. So…but he wanted to go and see what was happening with the Czechs, because Don had been working with us and the Czechs the year before, you see. BA: Right. MD: So, we drove together to a camp on the east…east of Marseilles, which was entirely Czech soldiers who had all of them escaped from the German army at the first time…when the mobilization took place, and joined the Czech army. BA: Oh, my. MD: And if they were caught by the Germans, they would all be killed. Because they were deserters from the German army, you see. And there was a whole camp of them in the eastern part of southern France. And…and the general who was…who was in command of that group went with us to see them at the camp, and we talked to all…a great many of them. BA: Did they have food and…? MD: They were now under the jurisdiction of the French army. They were paid something like six cents a day in the way of pay, and they had nothing for their dependents. And we found that many of them had either gone off to England to fight with…in the British divisions where the Czech army fought, or otherwise, and their wives had let…sent all the money or the clothes or all the stuff they had with them, and the women who'd been left behind had nothing. And all around this camp are these poor, starving Czech women and children. I had been given some money when I left to use for any Czech cases I found the year before. So we had gone down to the camp with General [Cassigny?] to see the Czechs, and he was the commander of them, but we had taken with us the Czech Consul from…from Marseilles, who still kept his consulate open, although it was quite illegal. He called it "Le Consulat de la France en Liquidation." And he kept giving passports, and visas, and people getting out, and helping everybody, and running the Czech consulate. It was completely illegal! BA: (laughter) Yeah. MD: So what we did was we…together, we went around and I found all of the women that were starving, children starving, the rest of it, and we arranged either to get in touch…in one case, for instance, they had just received word that an American visa was waiting for this man and his wife, and they couldn't…didn't have enough money to even make the trip down to the consulate to get the American visas. And [there were?] all kinds of things that we could do. So I went around to see all these sick people, we saw to it that they were taken care of at the hospital, all the wives and children…one girl had tried to commit suicide, and she said, "What can I do? My brother is fighting in England and…and he has everything that belongs to the family, and we can't do anything." And so anyway…so what I did was I took on these Czechoslovaks and took the Czech money that I had been given before I had left to either get them jobs at the consulate, or jobs teaching, or various kinds of things that they could do in the eastern part France until something could be done by their own relatives to help them. And so then we moved on, and then in the meantime, General Cassigny wanted us to see if we could possibly get the British to send boats to the…to the port, and let them get aboard boats because he said if only I could get this whole army in the north of Africa, then they…then the Nazis can't get a hold of them and kill them and they can…and we can take them by boat, then, to England, and they can fight with the British. BA: Hmm. MD: And so part of that journey was to try to…to find transportation. BA: Imaginative people! (Tape recorder stopped and restarted) MD: …with everything we could down there, and we made all of the arrangements and I went to see the American Consulate, an American consul said, "If you'll pay their transportation, I'll see that they get it, I'll advise their relatives in America that they can come, but they have to send the money for a trip, and so on. So we…we took care of all those cases, and then we got…then we decided that since we hadn't heard where the milk was. Here we'd bought the milk, and nothing we knew was happening… BA: You didn't know where it was. MD: So we called…we talked to Paris…to France…to Lisbon to find out where the milk was, and so on, and…and the CB problems, and Madame Saint…I mean Madame [Amélioroix?] and was…didn't know, but she would work and Orlena Scoville would try to do something in Portugal, and so on. So we decided the only thing was for…for Waitstill to go back to the south of France and find out where it was, or…and I would go on and start organizing the distribution, you see, to divide. So…and Don Lawry, whose wife was in Pau, and I would make the distribution of milk, and he and I would go there, to join Helen. BA: In Pau. MD: In Pau. So, Waitstill took off for Portugal, to try to see where the milk was, and if he could (inaudible) BA: Did he take your car? MD: No, no, I had the car. BA: Oh. MD: And Don couldn't drive. So Don said to me, "You don't mind driving, so you and I can drive across the whole…" We drove the whole length of the Pyrenees, you see, along the south of France. So, Don said, "I know the way," and so we said goodbye to Waitstill, divided our luggage. He went south to find the milk and Don and I drove to Pau. Well, to make a long story short, it was a delightful trip; there was nothing unexpected. We spent one night on the way and it was gorgeous scenery along by Andorra and all those areas, and finally, when we got to Pau, Helen had been able to find an extra room for me, so that I'd have a…a room to sleep in, and they were…they had not only their own room and living quarters, but they had brought Don's secretary, [Irina Elkuniev?], her mother, an elderly madame, the widow of General Elkuniev, and her son, and they were all living with her. And her husband. So these three adults and a boy living in the quarters that they…the extra room they had, and so that was our…I was to have a separate bedroom for my own. So Helen and I then began to organize the milk distribution. And on the way, we stopped to see Mme. Taillandier's General Cros and he was in Nîmes, and we had to go through Nîmes anyway. It's a wonderful town. And Don knew where his headquarters was. So we went and told General Cros that his…that the milk was coming through for him, and he was delighted. And then…and that Mme. Saint-René Taillandier had asked us to let him know that her shipment of clothes and extra stuff as well as some milk would be coming to him, and he was delighted. And so he let Madame know that he knew that it was coming, and so on. So Don and I drove to…up to Pau and so then…then Helen and I…then Helen said, "Well I think we had better do the Basque Pyrénées because it is semi-occupied, and because we know the Préfet and all the French administrative people, and we will go ahead and organize it with all the sages-femmes [midwives] et infirmières visiteuses [visiting nurses]. So we started out and the two of us, but on the way of course, it was necessary to have gasoline. There was very little gasoline. BA: Mm. MD: So Don and I would stop and see the mayor of every town we went through, and we would tell them about our mi…mission, and he would, "And now of course, I'm sure you would like a bon [voucher] to get your essence [gas], and we said, "Yes." And so he would give us a bon, and we would be allowed to go and get ten gallons of gas and then go on to the next town. And we went to see Saint-Gaudens, we went to see all sorts of things on the way, 'cause Don knew France, he'd been living there all his life. And it was wonderful. He's a delightful man. And so Helen and I then took the car, and Don went back to Nîmes because he was run…he was now elected by all the American relief societies in the area to coordinate what was going on. 'Cause he was the wisest person, and he'd lived all his life in France and in Europe. And so Helen and I then when to every…to see every infirmière visiteuse and every sagefemme in the whole Basque Pyrénées. It's like going to see the head of every children's organization in…in a whole state, you see. So then we…we told them that…what was coming, and one day…I'll tell you, something happened. One day we drove into a town and in this town, they didn't have any newspaper. What they had once a fifer who played his little fife and beat his drum and then when everybody came together, he'd say, "Mesdames et Messieurs!" [Ladies and Gentlemen] and then he would give them the news. BA: Oh! Isn't that fascinating! MD: And it was in the middle of the…the park. He would do it at noon, and at three, and at five, and he did the news. So we would stand…so we drove in to this park, and we wanted to ask where Madame the infirmière visiteuse was, and while we stopped our car, suddenly Helen said, "Quick, Martha, you've never seen one of these." This…they have them only in these very rural towns. So we got out of the car, and stood beside it and listened while he told in French, he said, "Mesdames et Messieurs, the Americans have heard about our starving children. And some American ladies are going to see that through Mademoiselle Peugeot, who is your infirmière visiteuse, you will receive milk for those of you who cannot nurse your babies." Everybody turned…they said, "Why, there they are! And there's the car! And this must be the…this must be the milk!" Well, they came around and crowded around us, and we had to explain that unfortunately we didn't have any the milk with us, but that we were coming, and Mlle. Peugeot waved from her place and we went up to see her. And so she made us…so. We did this with every midwife in the whole area. BA: Were you sure that you were going to have enough milk? For all these babies? MD: Well, it was all powdered and condensed, and so on, it wasn't bad. What we…so, what we had to do was make a list of how old the children were, how much milk they needed, whether they were ill because they needed milk, and exactly what other kinds of substantive foods they could have. This we had to do for…and we gave every woman a…we finally made out, Helen and I made out these sheets…we had them distributed, I went to see the préfet, he was like a governor, and his wife, and the mayor of the town, Monsieur [Verdomal?], and we…and…of Pau itself, and so everybody…and I went to see all the heads of all of the oeuvres, all the little groups that were organized to help children, for instance there were…there were children's home for illegitimate children, too, you see. Who had nobody that cared about whether they got milk or didn't have milk. BA: Mm-hmm. MD: So, we all those down on paper, and I've got all those papers. And all of the cards that they sent back of how many…they filled out all of the slots, told us what they needed, and they sent to us. In the meantime, we sent Irina's husband—the ration secretary's husband—down to the border to meet the car…the milk when it came, and come through. And…and the préfet and everybody else were all excited, so we organized a welcome. BA: Did you know…had you heard from Waitstill, and so you…? MD: No, we hadn't heard from Waitstill yet, but we wanted to be ready in case we got word, what we should do. So, we had the whole thing organized, and a lot of stuff we did by bicycle. And one other funny little trip…I made…we went to one town and we went to the local…what do you call it? I suppose, an inn, to have some lunch. And we went in, and we were ushered to a table, and we sat down and started to talk. And suddenly there was an elderly gentleman and an elderly lady, beautifully dressed, sitting at a table nearby. And the gentleman got up and came over and he bowed from the hips, and he said, "Mesdames, I am Count de Coy. My…a Belgian. My wife is an American, and she loves her native land…tongue. And we know that you've been talking English, and we wonder if you would come and join us in our table and have lunch with us. And I said, "How did you happen to come here?" He said, "Our chauffeur kept driving away from the bombing. And every time we went into an area that was being bombed, we'd go in another direction. Finally, we ended up in this town." And he said, "We have eaten parts of animals we didn't even know were edible. And we are living here because there isn't any other place we can go." And he said, "And we would…we are delighted to see you and we will welcome you to our home in Belgium anytime you would like to come. And was the uncle of the King of Belgium. BA: Oh my goodness. MD: And so we invited him to our parsonage in…in New Yo…in Boston, and said we'd be delighted to have him and then told him why we were there…we had a lovely, lovely visit and she [Tape stops.] Track 8 The milk finally arrived. BA: Mm-hmm. MD: And we made a committee, and the committee…the…the infirmière visiteuse and the head of the…the préfet, and the mayor came down, and they all made speeches, and the mayor agreed to have milk go out as it was distributed in…in…on (inaudible) wagons. They were the only things…transportation that they had available. They were spending gas on, and so we began, and we were able to feed 600 babies who otherwise were unable to drink or have their mothers' milk. Because at this town, [Peg Town?] was telling the women that they should nurse the children 'til they were two years old, because there was no chance of getting any milk. And so our milk fed them, and then when I…later on when I went back to Malcolm Davis and the other people, they went to the International Red Cross and begged them to send it from Switzerland when we couldn't get it any other way, and they agreed. And for the entire war, 600 children were fed in the Basque Pyrénées, and were well taken care of. Because of the Unitarian milk shipment. BA: That must have been one of the most satisfying experiences of your life. MD: It really was. Because they really got it and we knew it was okay. Well, as soon as we had that under control, I was…André Philip came to see me about trying to get his children to America. And other people kept saying, "Is there any chance you could get our children out?" And then I…so I cabled to the United States to find out whether or not they would like to see if we could refugee children, or whether we could do anything to assist the others. Because now we had taken care of the babies, and we were doing exactly what Dexter wanted, we were not giving them any more milk, that was being done through the International Red Cross. And so immediately, Percival Brundidge in New York went to see Marshall Field. And it happened to be just the time when the British were rethinking whether they should allow the British children to leave England during the war and go to the United States because their families, their fathers who were fighting in the army, said, "What's the use of our fighting if our child…if we're not protecting our own families?" And they began to feel that they did not want the children to go…they did not want them to grow up as Americans; they wanted them to stay in England and so the numbers of available children had fallen off. And there was a large fund in the United States ready, including families ready to take the children and other potentials if we could bring children over. And here were in these camps—I went around to see the children in the camps—starving, covered with terrible kinds of blotches and things because of their diseases that they caught and the…and the conditions were simply dreadful in the camps. And so what we did was we decided that we would try to bring as many children to the United States as we could, and then they…they…in the meantime, Waitstill had been down in Portugal, got the milk started up, and had opened a Unitarian Service Committee office for emigration of people to get them out of the country and help them with their papers and go to the United States consul and do things so that we now had a…an oeuvre going on down in Portugal, in Lisbon. BA: And who was going to run that, though? MD: He was running it, you see. As long as he stayed there, and we didn't need him up there, we'd done the milk job, now we were starting on taking the children out. So this next thing appealed very much to…to the…to the committee, and they said we…please go ahead with it and organize and get the children. So I began…I had…I had come to know quite well the head of the Protestant women in France, because she had helped me first of all with the milk distribution and her own…I helped her with her own family who wanted to go to the United States, and she said she would work with me on this project, so she…which she did. So, we had the other, this emigration project going at the same time and we began to organize…children who were in concentration camps or in internment camps or living under frightful conditions to be taken out and helped to get away. In the meantime, Waitstill had come north and said, "Now I've got to go back. I really can't stay here anymore, I've got to go back to my church, and let's try to wind this thing up, and see what we can do." And he had…in the meantime, he'd been appealed to, first of all, this was…before this, the head of the Joint Distribution Committee came to him…cabled him and said there were seven carloads of Jewish Poles that have been dumped in the desert in Poland and we need someone to go and take care of them and get them emigrated outs…out of Poland, and would you be available to go and do it? This was from Paris. And so fortunately, another friend of ours who is a Unitarian minister was abroad, and we were able to get hold of him, he was in Paris, so we got hold of him and we gave him that job. And so he went to Poland and he took care of this whole thing and he got all these Jews out of Poland. BA: He got them out. MD: He got them out, and with the help of…the Joint had lots of money, of course, so they could…they could do practically anything, but anyway, we did that, and that was really the Unitarian committee job. It was amazing how many things you can pick up to do… BA: Well, it's a…yeah. MD: One emergency after another. Then I was asked by…Malcolm Davis came to see us and said…let's see, where…? At that time…when we were both…before we left on our trip, Malcolm had said…no, I guess we had a cable from Malcolm. He said that a friend of his who was the head of Schauspiegelhaus in Zurich had…was unable to get a bed anywhere and come down to…come down to him and…on his way back to Zurich, to Switzerland. They were Swiss citizens. So, he said, "Would you…would you get them a room?" So on the way back from where…where they were staying, they came to see us, in Pau, or they came to see me. And this…the woman was Alma—no, wait a minute—the woman was…was…Marianne Rieser, and she was Franz Werfel's sister. Werfel who wrote The Song of Bernadette and all these books, and she said, "Martha, we have a real problem in our family. Franzy has been asked by the United Artists to make a moving picture of The Song of Bernadette, and he's lost somewhere, and he's in the southwestern part of France, near you, where you are…near Pau. And could you possibly find him and help him and his wife? Well, while I was distributing the milk, and going to see the midwives, I went to the place where they told me he was staying with his wife, in Lourdes. And I sent a telegram and said that I was a friend of Marianne Rieser, and would like to meet them. So I went to this hotel in Lourdes, and this big, fat guy came to the door and I said, "I'm Martha Sharp." He said, "I am Franz Werfel." And I said, "Well your sister is worried to death about you and she wanted me to come." So he said, "Come in and meet my wife." His wife was Alma Mahler, the widow of Gustave Mahler, the composer. So, of course we had to sit down and have something to drink. And then he said to me, "Have you ever been to Lourdes before?" And I said, "No." "Well," he said, "I'd like to take you and show you Lourdes." He said, "I've been reading everything about it and I think it's wonderful." This was before that he wrote The Song of Bernadette. So, he said, so we walked along the street, Helen walked with Alma Mahler Werfel and I walked with him and he told me the song of Bernadette and then he showed me…and he said, "Now sit here," seated us on benches. "Now," he said, "I will bring you the water." So he went and they drew a spigot…little cups of water, he bought a water from one of the little guys selling cups and brought it to me and he said, "Now drink. And anything that is wrong with you will be cured." I said, "How wonderful!" So I drank it down, it tasted awful, but anyway…now he said, "I want to tell you. Here's where they bring the invalids, up this place, and here is where they give them the blessing and they become whole." And I said, "You don't even…you're…aren't you a Jew?" He said, "Yes." I said, "You believe this?" He said, "Yes. I know it happened." BA: Had he been coming here all the time? MD: He'd been living in Lourdes and reading everything about it, he was a refugee in Lourdes, and he had been told that the Nazis were trying to catch him. Because they wanted to use him as bait for some other things, and therefore he must be quiet. So he and his wife had been living in this hotel in Lourdes in hiding. And so, here he was, filled with the thought of Bernadette. So I said, "Well, maybe we could find a way to get you out. Because we know the Czech consul down in Marseilles, and we can get you a visa and a passport as a Czech." He was a Czech originally, you see. So we arranged for the Werfels, one of the things we used to… we arranged for the Werfels to come down to live and you had to get transportation to (inaudible), from Vichy, and I was able to…to work it so that I got them transportation permission to go from…from where they were in…at…in Lourdes, to Marseilles and live in more comfort in a good big hotel and so on in Marseilles. And so we got this organized, and in the meantime, there were some other very important refugees around and don't know that you read the story about…about Feuchwanger. You didn't know about him. BA: No. MD: Lion Feuchtwanger was the…probably one of the leading writers, if not the leading writer in the last century in…who was…Jewish and was also German. And he had been writing pamphlets against Nazism, which were reprinted by the Czechs and by all of the countries as they were occupied and dropped in…as leaflets, to make the people object and…and…and to…to try to fight against the Nazis. The most…and therefore, he was the number one wanted man… BA: I can imagine! MD: …as far as the Nazis were concerned. And we had heard in the meantime, we'd been working with (inaudible), we'd been going to camps, and we'd been seeing the people that were in these terrible camps, so, and we were talking to the American consul up there in…in…near…when I went to Lourdes, I talked to the American consul about him, and in the meantime, Waitstill, down in Lisbon, had met…the…had met Erika Mann, Thomas Mann's daughter, because her brother Gottfried was caught in France and…and...various other people that she was interested in and there were several people who were international doctors and people who were down…who were in around Marseilles who were all trying to get out at the same time. And Werfel, of course, was one of these people, too. So what we did was move Werfel to Marseilles and then we decided we must try to get them out of France if we possibly could, in spite of the fact the Nazis were trying to catch them, and kill them. And so, this was…it was…we talked to the American consul about this, and our American consul in Marseilles said to us…because after I'd finished the feeding there, we decided to move our office, because the emigration was much easier to run from Marseilles than it was to run in Pau, because that was off the beat. Now we wanted to see what we could do to move these children out for the United States Committee for the Care of European Children. So we went to see the American consul, who was a friend of ours through Connecticut. And we said, "We understand that the Manns are here, and Werfel is here, and he's at such-and-such a hotel, and Lion Feuchtwanger, we understand is somewhere and nobody knows where he is." And this consul said to us, "Can you do anything to help?" We said, well, we'd do everything we could. Well, consul said, "I tell you, I…I need to." He said, "I have had wires from the State Department asking me if anybody knows where Lion Feuchtwanger is. He is the most wanted person that the Nazis want to get hold of, and we understand he's still alive and I am going to try to find him." So after about a wee…after a few days, he called us and said would we come and talk to him. And it seems that he ma…he decided to make a search, he was asked by the State Department to make the search. And he went to a camp called "Les Milles" which was north of Marseilles, and he said to the director of the camp, "I'm looking for Lion Feuchtwanger. Do you have any idea whether he might be here?" And the camp director said, "Nobody really knows, but there's a man who looks just like him." And "See that fellow sitting over there naked on the edge of that water hole? I think that's Feuchtwanger. But he…we've never asked him. He goes by another name. He goes by the name of Lion [Wetczech?] Wetczech means "town" in Czech when translated. [Tape stops.] BA: Yeah, you got it. It's all set now. MD: So the United States consul went over to the naked man, Lion Wetczech, and said to him, "Mr. Wetczech, I am Consul Bingham of the United States, and I am looking for Lion Feuchtwanger. Are you Lion Feuchtwanger?" And Feuchtwanger said, "Yes." He said, "Would you like to leave this camp?" And Feuchtwanger said, "I would love to." He said then, "See that car over there flying the flag of the United States and of Portugal?—I mean, of France?" He said, "Go over and get into it, in the back seat. There is a uniform for a maid and you could put that on, and I will rejoin you soon and we will drive out together. So, Bingham went on, telling us the story. Feuchtwanger did exactly that, put on the maid's uniform, and Bingham drove out of the camp with the Director smiling broadly, having identified one of his charges, and took him to his home. Now Bingham went on with the story with us. He said, "He's been my houseguest for two weeks! And I don't have any idea how I can get him out safely to the United States. And I keep getting messages from the United States government asking me to make it possible, but no one tells me how to do it." And Waitstill said, "Well maybe I could take him out. We're…we're planning to have a group of refugees go, but…they're coming down here to…together. And…but…he said, "I could take him…it would be more important to have Feuchtwanger saved than anybody else, and the other people can take care of themselves, and very and fry is on anyway, trying to organize along with us for the Emergency Rescue Committee in New York. So I'll be glad to take Feuchtwanger anytime you say." So, he said, "How about meeting me at…for the six o'clock train tomorrow morning, ask Feuchtwanger to come to the station, to the buffet du gare, [station café] because as you know, the buffet opens right on to the track and none of the passengers who go on the train are allowed to…go without identification and having their passports checked by the guard at the entrance to the station, but access to the train tracks directly from the gare does not require that you show your passport. So I will meet Feuchtwanger there, tomorrow morning, and we'll go on from there." So the next morning, Waitstill was very excited, he was all packed, ready to go down to Lisbon, instead of going with the rest of the group, he went…we went directly to the station, to the buffet de gare, sat down and had a cup of coffee, and in the meantime, [Hupi?], the young theological Czechoslovak arrived, because Waitstill said that he could travel with them…with us. And we all had coffee, and then in came Mr. Feuchtwanger. Sat down at the table, and Waitstill said, "Do you have any tickets to take the train?" And he said, "No." "Any money?" "No." He said, "See that blonde lady over there? That's my wife." And Waitstill said, "Okay. I'll get the tickets and we'll get…is she going with us?" He said, "She will go in the train but stay a long way from us and not speak to us during the journey. She wants to be there as long as she can be with me." So Waitstill went out, bought the tickets, brought them back to me, gave his tickets to Hupi and also to Feuchtwanger and then gave me the tickets for Madame Feuchwanger, and I took them out to her, and greeted her, "Good morning," and said we understand that you're going to get aboard the same train, and God bless you all. And safe transit! And the train came in with a roar. Waitstill took Hupi and Feuchtwanger on ar…on his arm, into the train, and they sat down and went off. That was the last I saw of Feuchtwanger for a long time. Waitstill was advised, between the first and the second stop, that the Gestapo were coming aboard the train to check everybody's passports and luggage, to see if anyone was illegally aboard. And he…I don't think he ever knew exactly who it was who warned him, but they were evidently looking out, to help people…people from the underground, and so he and Feuchtwanger rode as far as the second stop, and because it was a great stop for sightseers, a lot of people got off. And Waitstill and he went and bought tickets to go to the park, the amusement park and the gardens nearby, and spent the next two or three hours until the next train would come through, looking at the flowers, having lunch, and…and being entertained by each other in the park. And talking, because they had lots of important things to tell each other about what had been going on. And to make a long story short, when that train pulled in that night, into the station at…at Lisbon, Waitstill and Feuchtwanger went straight to the terminus hotel where they had made reservations. And next morning, Waitstill went right down to the consulate to be sure that Feuchtwanger would be allowed to go aboard the boat which was sailing that next…that next morning for America. And my b…and my berth had been reserved in advance in same stateroom with Waitstill's. He found out from the line that the director said…the boat…commissar said, "No. Nobody can ride in your wife's berth unless he or she is an American. Because that…your…her berth is reserved for an American. So David…I mean, Waitstill went back to the…to the consul and explained to the consul about Feuchtwanger's escape, and that it had been at the hands of the United States government, Cordell Howell had cabled to them and asked that they…that he be helped, and that unless he could come with them back on the boat, no one knew what would become of him in Lisbon. So finally, after a great deal of pressure, and a number of telegrams talking into…across the ocean, they finally agreed to let Feuchtwanger come on my…in my berth, and off they went. I understand it was quite an uneventful voyage, they got a lot of rest, but they were…the boat was stopped before they entered New York Harbor, for a…to…to…allow a…a man who was the…who was the chief of the Viking Press, [Houpst?], to come aboard and see Feuchtwanger. And then Feucht…he took Feuchtwanger with him, off in the launch that they had, so that the publicity would not get out in the United States that Feuchtwanger had actually escaped, and the Viking Press decided to take over and to take care of him from that time on. And of course, Mrs. Feuchtwanger made it on that…that trip, too. BA: I was going to ask you what happened to her. MD: Waitstill insisted that they find room for her and they did. BA: On the same boat. MD: So she went on that same boat, and although she didn't get off with Mr. Feuchtwanger in the…in the little launch, because he had special permission, she waited and Waitstill saw that she was safely taken care of. They were all going to the St. Moritz in New York, and that was the end of that successful journey. In the meantime, I was waiting down in at the Belvedere for the crowd to arrive, because I had come that far with Waitstill and with Feuchtwanger. The rest of the crowd that were going to the United States arrived with Varian Fry who had been associated in helping to find the Werfels…this…this included… BA: These were very important people. MD: They were Heinrich Mann and his wife, Thomas Mann's brother, and his son, Gottfried Mann, and Franz Werfel and Mrs. Werfel, and O…Irina Ok…and Okuniev…and of course, [Frubi?, previously Hupi?], the young theological student. And so what happened was that we had talked to Ball…George Ball, this young man who had been an ambulance driver and saved hundreds of British officers during the war by carrying them over the lines to safe places. Ball had organized the…the trip illegally out of France into Spain and had already taken care of the people that were on…the officers that were guarding the French side and the Spanish side, by giving them a certain…certain amount that they expected, of bribes. BA: Bribes. MD: He gathered the group, Ball told me, afterwards because he came back up to Marseilles that evening after this had all happened. He gathered the group together, and he said to them, "Now I want you to wear inconspicuous clothes, because every part of the mountain can be seen from the village below and if anybody wears anything white, or anything light, or is dressed unusually and doesn't look like a mountain climber is apt to be…to identify the whole group as being somehow irregular." So they arrived assembled and Mrs. Feuchwanger decided to dress for the occasion. She wore a long white dress, a large white… BA: Mrs. Werfel, you mean? MD: Mrs. Franz Werfel. BA: Yeah. MD: A long white dress and a large white picture hat, and she had a little dog on the leash. And a very large pocketbook. You can imagine her problems in climbing the rocks and scrambling up the mountain. She stepped into her dress…this was…was very minutely described to me by Mr. Ball when he got back that night. She finally tore off the hem of her dress, but the rest of them somehow scrambled and poor Mr. Mann, Thomas Mann's brother was elderly, and not well at all, so he had to be helped over all the hard places. And once they came to the frontier line and the two French officer who were in charge came out behind bushes…it was a miracle they didn't all roll back down the mountain because they were scared to death, and…he got them across, and then they went through the cemetery, made a back-turn, and climbed down the other side. In the meantime, a young Varian Fry had taken all their luggage in the train that ran in the tunnel under that mountain, and so he met them as soon as they arrived in Spain at that frontier town, and had arranged…he'd found it possible to get two plane tickets for two of the people who were…who were traveling. I don't remember which ones took those, but it may have been the Manns. And then he took the rest of them by train, and with their luggage, back down to Lisbon, where he met Waitstill and heard about his and Feuchtwanger's trip, and then they all sailed on that export line together later on. It was a…it was a very exciting thing for all of us who were back in…in France to hear that they'd come through safely, because one was never sure, and there were so many guards and so many Nazis among the French police that it was very difficult to be sure that anybody would be saved. So I went back to my office in Marseilles, and we…we had the reports of how everything was going and I continued with my work to get 29 children, finally, and 11 adults out to the United States for safety. And after another month, we finally were able to get all of the visas, and all of the passports and the transportation arranged, and with the help of Irina Okuniev who had been Don Lawry's secretary in Paris for many years, spoke marvelous English, and Russian, of course, because her mother was the widow of a Russian General, who also was with us, and her husband, who wasn't allowed to work, because the laws in France, after the war began, indicated that anyone was a French citizen but not born in France couldn't get a job. So her husband was out of work, and so he came along, and her little son, and besides that we had the other 28 children beside the little boy. So we…unfortunately the tracks of the railroad between…between France and Spain had washed out several places in northern Spain, and we had a very difficult time getting buses to go around those wash-outs and finally get there, but finally we reached Portugal, just in time to get word that our committee had just heard that all of our reservations which we had been planning to put the children in a chil…in a garden center, which was were children would stay in Portugal indefinitely and enjoy the zoo and the animals, as well as the plants…we just learned that they had canceled all our reservations. So there were 29 and 11 of us all waiting to get some help, so I cabled to New York to Percival Brundage, member of our committee, that we thought might help the most. Evidently, he called the president of the export lines immediately, and we had cabled back that we couldn't all come together, but they would put two of their…their drawing rooms on the boat, I don't know what you call them, they're special centers for pleasure. They put them aside for us and they would be filled with beds so that the 29 children and 11 adults and I could all go back to the United States… BA: Good! MD: …which we did that…that next week. And when we came back home, you can imagine that it was a great reunion for me because my own two children were there and we had a lot to talk about. Track 9 MD: …Christmas activities in the church, and he said, "I’m so glad you got here because we have a final rehearsal for the Christmas pageant tomorrow, and so I…I entered the world of being a minister's wife once again. BA: Abruptly. MD: And with lots of memories of what had happened, and also a great deal to…to think about and to consider for the next years to come. BA: I should say. MD: Now… [Tape clicks off.] BA: We are now in our second day of interview; it is September 29th, 1987. Excuse me, September 30th. I thought it might be a good idea if we…if I quickly reviewed some of your activities in your life since you and Waitstill were chosen as representatives of the Unitarian Church to work in overseas relief, because so much happened, there is so much packed into these tapes, and so much more could have been included because of all the…things that happened to you and Waitstill. So, from February 1939 to December 1939, you were in Prague aiding refugees from the Sudetenland, and then Czech in Prague, after the Nazi occupation of Czechoslovakia. MD: On…on…March 15th, 1939. BA: On March 15th, yes, right. 1939. Right after you arrived. Then December to May, 1940, you were home again in Wellesley as a minister's wife, and taking care of your two children. In May 1940, you were again selected by the Unitarian Service Committee to go back to Europe, this time to Portugal and then France, to help with…resolve one of the most pressing problems, getting milk to babies in non-occupied areas of France. Also during this time, you organized programs to send orphans and French children to the United States to be cared for for the duration of the war. And the last story which you told of the 29 children and 11 adults, that was your final activity, bringing you back into the United States in time for Christmas 1939 [1940]. So, now we are in January 1940 [1941], you have returned to the United States, you are back in Wellesley, Mass. as a church mouse, as you call yourself, and mother. MD: And Barbara, actually, it didn't end then. The fact that we came back to the United States…because immediately we had all kinds of…for instance, I had been asked if I would bring the children of André Philip, when I was organizing the…the way to get visas for the children to get out and in Vichy, and I talked to President…the president of France and to some man who actually the…the foreign minister, Laval, and M. Pétain, the premier…actually, when I was…I was making these arrangements, I came to…I met André Philip, who was the head of the socialist division of the French government. BA: Mm-hmm. MD: And he had made…he made a special trip to see me in Vichy because he heard about my children to the United States…because he said to me, "I have just received word from de Gaulle, he wants me to leave France and go immediately to assist him in his work in England, arranging for the French to assist the British in the war." And he said, "I can't go. If I leave my five children alone with my wife, either in…at our home, or in the country, where we have spent the summer. And so I wondered if I could ask you to take my five children, somehow, to the United States." Well, of course, this was too late. During the…because we had been working for months on this other group of children and this was a very special thing. However, I cabled the Marshall Field committee, the United States Committee for the Care of European Children, and they continued even after I left to work on the visas for the five Philip children, and when they arrived in New York, I met them, took them by train to New York City, they were identified and two boys placed in the homes of two United States presidents of colleges, one was Brooklyn College, and the three younger children I took with me to Chicago to stay with Clifton Utley, who was a well-known newspaper man, who was a great friend of André Philip. And there they stayed during the entire war. BA: Mm. MD: And I thought the Utleys were…were terrific to take in these three because all three of them were ill. One had a runny nose, another one had a running ear, and the other one had an infection of some kind…and certainly he…he put some very sick children into excellent and beautiful health, and I have heard that one of them, the boy…of those…there were two girls and a boy…the boy is now the Mayor of Lyon, in France. They all went back to France, but I think André Philip was very disappointed, because we made Americans out of them. Anyway, that's what happens when you get back. So as a result of…of some of the work and people we had met, and the names of those we knew, we were constantly appealed to to help people. And the first thing that happened was that my husband had already accepted a schedule for me to go and speak at meetings all over the United States and so as much as we could, we decided we had…I should do this, because it was a way to raise money to help the cause, to make…get people to contribute and be aware of the Unitarian Service Committee and to do what they could. So I began a speaking schedule which never ended. And actually, one of the most interesting of the experiences was that I had a classmate from Pembroke who was living near me in Boston, and she asked me if I'd speak to her Pembroke club about the problem of the Jews, because she was terribly interested. She was Jewish. She was terribly interested in Youth Aliyah, which was a program saving refugee and orphan children and sending them to Palestine, which was one of the great programs of Hadassah which were initiated by Henrietta Szold, who was an American woman who went over to start relief work for the refugees arriving in Czecho…in…in Israel. At that time, it was in Palestine. So, I spoke at this meeting, and as a result, I had immediately a call from national Hadassah, and they said that they would be very grateful if I would be willing to speak a few of their largest Hadassah groups in the big cities in the United States. This began a most tumultuous…travel schedule, to go to these Hadassah meetings, and it finally ended up, two years later, by my doing whole areas, like the southwest, and doing three and four speeches a day. I'd arrive in the morning and speak on…at a…at some kind of a…early radio program, and then speak to a group of women at lunch, and then speak to a group of men in the evening, at a cocktail and dinner party and then move on to the next town. So I became a fundraiser instead of a refugee worker, and as a result, I came…to know the Jewish community. Then I felt it was wrong, that we should just have Jews helping the Jewish children. And so I went to my old friend, Dr. Sam Eliot, who is the son of President Eliot of Harvard, and who himself was a Unitarian minister, one of our closest friends, and a man interested in interfaith relations. And I said, "Do you know, Sam, it would be wonderful if we could start an organization called…we'd decide to call…'Children to Palestine,' and raise money from both gentiles and Jews to help save these refugee children," which is exactly what we did. Sam Eliot became the chairman and I was the secretary, and as I made a speech in places, they…they decided to start these organizations in the local communities and they became a…one of the great sources of money that was sent to Henrietta Szold. As a result of this, Henrietta Szold wrote to me and said it…she couldn't wait until I came to Israel, to see the children myself. And so two summers later, I was able to take the time, and unfortunately it was just she died. She died while I was en route. I made my first to Israel. That finally…finally became three trips to Israel. Every summer, Hadassah would ask me to go over and they would see that I went to all of the receptions centers, and I got to know their…I met the directors of their schools, like Dr. Siegfried Lehman, who ran one of the most interesting, progressive schools in all of Palestine in those days. In fact, he had a balance of so many children of diplomats, and so many children of…of simple backgrounds, to be the children that made up the body of the school, because he didn't want it all to be children of educated, foreign-born parents, you see. And it was very interesting because most of the diplomats sent their children to his school. And there they learned a great deal about…not only the normal activities, but a great deal…they had a children's orchestra, and they…they used to make and they learned the local dances and they…they did a great deal to develop all of the assets of art as well as education in the school. Therefore, I was very happy to be a part of it and every year when I went back, I would stay with the Lehmans at the Ben Sheman school, which was quite near the old airfield in those days. So that's how I got so involved in this whole interfaith program, and the next time…the first three years that I could, I went over to Israel and I also had wonderful experiences in working with the members of the Israeli government. I knew the Prime Minister and all of the people in charge and then…then when I got back, I would tie things together and try to do whatever I could to help the Youth Aliyah program, as well as the Unitarian Service Committee. So I was busy asking for money, for both gentiles and Jews, from then on. BA: So this was like a three year—a three or four year—span here, that you were traveling all, most of the time you were traveling. MD: It wasn't very good for my children. But they grew…they somehow grew up to be very dependable and very much interested in everything and participants in all of these activities that…I wasn't gone all the time, and Waitstill was back, preaching as usual, taking care of the parish. BA: Well they had support, too, with your relatives, with your aunt and uncle, who they knew. MD: My aunt and uncle were wonderful, of course, yes. And of course the whole parish had now become so involved to working with us in these various rescue programs, they themselves couldn't go, and so they felt that we were sort of, on the front line, doing the kinds of things they would have liked to have done. BA: Right. MD: And so that that's how the rest of the living time was spent, and finally in 1945, I had been to see so many people, especially…I lived in Wellesley Hills…that I was asked if I would be interested to run for Congress by the mayor of Fall River. This was the biggest city in my area, that stretched all the way from Wellesley Hills in the north down to Fall River in the south in Massachusetts. It was…you're puzzled. Why? It was gerrymandered. BA: Aha. MD: To make it safe on one side, for a Republican to always be elected and on the other side for a Democrat. And this was the area that had been made safe for Joe Martin to be the representative. And I was asked if I would run against Joe Martin because they felt that he had very limited ability. BA: He had been…how long had he been in office? MD: I don't remember how many years he had been in office. BA: Many, many years. MD: But anyway, there was…they got up a petition and signed it, and it went to the Secretary of State, and the first thing you knew, I was a candidate on the Democratic ticket. And then I had the fun of campaigning with John Kennedy, because he was running from the next district, which had been made safe for his grandfather, and which was a Democratic district. He didn't even live in it. What he was doing was using the residence as his authoritative home so that he could run in that district by himself. And it was very funny, but the two of us were often asked to come and sit together on platforms. So we got to know each other very well and to exchange all kinds of information about what might and might not be going on. But unfortunately, I was not very smart about saying that it was a good idea to run, because Joe Martin was a Roman Catholic, and he went to the Catholic Bishop in Fall River and he said to him, "You know that I've helped you all my life. I don't want this woman to win, because if I win this time, I will be the Speaker of the House in Massachusetts. And I…you have got to help me. I helped you and got you a lot of mortgages for your new churches and I expect you to do the same for me." BA: You were a real threat, then, do you think you were the first threat he'd ever had? MD: I…I…I really didn't…I…they…people said that I was the first threat he ever had, and you know, I was…for me, it wasn't a life and death matter, but for Joe Martin, it was. And so the first thing I knew, I…every member of my committee of any importance…the Mayor, for instance, of Fall River, called me and said, "Martha, the Archbishop has told me that I…that he will see that I am excommunicated from the Catholic Church if I continue to work for you. And therefore, I have to resign." Then it went right down the list. Anybody who feared was threatened by the Archbishop. Then I had a notice from the Fall River…from the daily paper. I had bought space for the two weeks before the election, and…becau…I won the nomination; I didn't have any trouble until I won the nomination, but after that was when a real fur began to fly because apparently Martin thought I might even make it. And so what happened then was that they can…they called me and said very sweetly, "We're terribly sorry, but we oversold the space, so we won't be able to give you any space for the two weeks before the election." And I had paid for it, and they…they didn't…I don’t ever remember that they returned the money, but it was…it…I think it was illegal to do that. BA: Oh, yes. MD: The other thing was, I had found a perfectly delightful public relations man named Jack Stenbuck who wrote wonderful scenarios of questions and answers. And we ran them on…on…not on tapes, because they didn't use tapes then…on platters, every…at a certain time every afternoon. And they really caused a lot of fun, and it was on…on Joe Martin's voting record. And we made a lot of fun of it. And the first thing I know, the radio station called and they said they were very sorry they had sold me the space, they wouldn't be able to give me any more space. They the Archbishop went to the women's organizations and said that if any of them found them entering the city of Fall River, he would appreciate it if they would tar and feather me. And all kinds of pleasant little things happened. So, by the time I had…I had one of the leading Democratic organizers and members of…real pros in the party…as my advisor. And finally he said, "Martha, I give up. I don't think we can make it, because actually, we got too much." And I…Martin lost by the smallest…I mean, Martin won. I really lost by a really quite…I had a high vote, say. But actually, I decided that politics was not my beat. BA: Not that kind of politics anyhow. MD: Well, I mean, what else can you do? People use whatever they have. So I never…first of all, when I lost, I thought, "Well, I ought to sue." Because it seemed to me, it was illegal. BA: Oh, yes. MD: Then I decided that unless I really wanted to run again, it would be a good idea not to…not to bother with this. But in…meanwhile, I had come to know all of the national Democratic leadership in Washington. And in…especially in my own area. And India Edwards, the head of the women's division of the party, had been a tremendous help. A few years later, I suddenly had a call, I had just come back from Israel one of these trips to go see all of the children that had recently arrived, and…and…visit with their teachers…I'd just got back on the boat, was about to drive up to my house in New Hampshire, and I had a call from India Edwards. And she said, "Martha, there's a very important job that I have recommended you for in Washington, and I hope you will take it. And she said, "Some of the top women in the country would like it. But," she said, "I’d like you to go there if you can." And I said, "Well, what is it?" She said, "Oh, it's being the special advisor in the national security resources board in the office of the President, and the chairman of it is Stuart Symington, and he is looking for a woman to be co-director of the United States Civil Defense. And they want a woman who's married, and has children, and who can speak, and who knows some parts of the United States as well as where she has lived. And they'd like to have…they…he'd like to talk to you." And I said, "Well, I…" She said that they wanted to see you right away. "Anyway, can you go down to Washington?" So I said, "Alright, instead of going straight up to New Hampshire, I'll go down to Washington." I drove through Washington and went to see Mr. Symington. He was charm itself, and he said, "I don't know anything about you, but India says you're good." And he said, "And therefore I'm offering you the job as co-director of the federal civil defense." I said, "What would I have to do?" "Well," he said, "I don't know what people do." He said, "We just got Lettie Reading over here from England, and we…and she's been fighting the war in England and she might give you some good pointers." But he said, "Actually, what you have to do is to first of all write all the books about what to do in air raids. And then try to organize the Federal Government to be aware of the problems that we face as potentially going to war, and whatever else you can think of that we can do." He said, "You've been living under this." BA: I would…I'd like to get some time perspective here about what…what was going on in the United States. Somebody who may be listening to this tape in the future who may not…I mean, like, who was President, and why did they suddenly have all this…why this sudden civil defense activity? MD: Well, of course, this…by this time, it was…just let me look at… BA: 1946. [Tape stops.] MD: Barbara, you were curious about when this was. It was 1950, and Truman was President. And we were…and he was very, very worried about the…well, about the Koreans, and the Chinese, and what might be happening because they were arming very swiftly and there were a lot of bad signs, and he was worried. And they decided that they needed to consider the women and children in the United States, and they wanted someone who'd lived under war conditions. And actually, I think some of the women who had top decisions in the United States government were considered, but they wanted someone new and they wanted someone also who had lived under war conditions. BA: Yeah. You had had your experiences… MD: And I had enough experience under the Nazis and…and various other regimes that they thought…at least India had faith. And so, she said, she knew I could do the job. Anyway, I went to see Stu Symington, and he was charm itself, and he said, "I don't know what you're going to have to do." I said, "Well, when would I have to begin?" He said, "Yesterday." And I said, "But I just arrived yesterday from France! I mean, I just arrived from Europe yesterday. And I haven't had any time at home, I was just going on my way to New Hampshire to our summer place to take my children up, spend a week, and rest." He said, "Oh!" He said, "You can't do that." And I said, "But we have family problems, too." "Well," he said…I said, "How much would I be paid? Would I have enough money out of this so that I'd have enough to take care of my expenses?" He said, "I don't know what you'd be paid." He said, "We might scrape the barrel and see what we've got in it. But," he said, "I don't have any idea about that sort of thing." And I said, "Well, what would I have to do?" He said, " You'd have to organize the whole office, and we've got a man to be the Director of Civil Defense, and you would be his associate. But I want you to do more things to help us in the National Security Resources Board." So he said, "Can you begin tomorrow?" And I said, "Well, I have to make a lot of plans." He said, "Alright. I'll expect you the day after tomorrow to come and start." Well by this time, Waitstill had moved out to Chicago, and was running the Commission Against Racial and Religious Discrimination. BA: Oh, he resigned from… MD: He resigned from the Unitarian Church, he'd been doing other jobs with UNRA [United Nations Refugee Agency] and other international jobs, and we decided to settle down and live in Chicago and would take this marvelous job to fight discrimination, and also we felt the problem…the black problem was very serious and that maybe we could help with some of our own American people and their…their problems…their living together. So I called him and talked to him and he said, "Well, if India thinks you should do it, and they want you to do the job…" He said, "After all, we've always been at the…tried to help our own country, and we believe in democracy and so you go ahead and do it, and then take the plane and come home for the weekend in Chicago and we'll take it from there." So I went back, so I called Mr. Symington and said, "Alright, I'll report for duty the day after tomorrow, as I said." And he said, "I still don't know what you'll be paid, but never mind, we'll take care of it." And so I began the day after tomorrow, and I'll never forget because India was so delighted. She was happy that I did it. She took me down to the Democratic National Committee and introduced me to all the people there, then she…then she took me for lunch, and then she came in to see my office. And so she looked around, and she said, "I don't think this office is commensurate in size or shape or in…with the importance of your job." So she called up Stu, and she said, "Martha doesn't have the proper office." And Stu said, "Well, you find something that you like for her." So she found me a marvelous office and then of course I had to have a…a private secretary, who was well known, and she had to be a government employee. And so we…we…I went back home to Chicago that weekend, and organized the family, and my husband said, "Well, you can come home Friday nights, the way a lot of men do, and leave on Monday morning by plane, and…and commute to Washington," which is what I did for the next three years. BA: And how old were you children now, at this point? MD: Well, now, they were both in…Marty was at the Latin School in Chicago and preparing for college, and Hastings was already now at Pem…at Brown University. And so he was away from home, and she was at home and I had a very good housekeeper who took care of our house and took care of Marty, and so on. So I thought the best thing would be to see if I could get her to…entered in the Friends' School in Washington, and I immediately got in touch with them and asked them if they would let Marty come there. She had very good marks in school, and she…I had started her in public school when we first went to Chicago, because I felt that it was very important to know all different kinds of people and to go to a public school, rather than a prep…a private school. But when I began reviewing her work with her, I found that she wasn't learning anything. She was…she had the same things at school that she'd had the year before, or the year before that in Wellesley. BA: Right. MD: And therefore the public schools in Chicago were at a very low ebb and couldn't allow this bright little girl to continue there. So I decided…we found that the school which was called the Latin School…it had a real, another name…but, at any rate, that they would take her, they were very happy to have her because she came from the East and she was different from the other children. And the…our housekeeper who was willing to take her to school in the morning and pick her and bring her home and we…I could work out the schedules for the family while I was gone, and do the commuting back and forth to Washington. And of course, this was a very interesting experience, because as soon as I became the director of the committee, I was invited, by Lady Reading, because she was in the United States, to go back to England with her when she went back, and she would tell me all about what the women's organizations did in England to fight the war. And so I…the next…practically the first two weeks after I was in office, I spent in England, with Lady Reading, meeting all the women who had been using stirrup pumps and fighting fires and taking in orphan children, and doing all kinds of things to fight the Battle of Britain. And I went to a meeting which they had at which everybody…all the speakers were women who had had important jobs in defending Britain and in taking care of the rural population when the bombs struck. So that I had a wonderful introduction to the problems of war as far as the British were concerned. And Lady Reading became a very great friend. I stayed with her in her house in the country, and then we had Thanksgiving at her apartment in London where she had always lived with Lord Reading. And she really was, of course, she was the first woman who was allowed to…she was invited to become a woman…a member of the House of Lords. She was an extraordinary person and everybody knew her, and anything she asked for she'd get. I remember—the first weekend I was there, she said, "I'm going antiquing; do you want to come?" So, we got in the car, and we drove and went to all these antique places, and I found something, I said, "Oh, that's lovely. I'd love to have that for my house." She said, "Well, go ahead and buy it!" I said, "But I have to go back by plane." She said, "Don't worry." So I bought this beautiful wig stand…this antique wig stand, in spite of everything and a beautiful clock, which was a fifteenth century clock, and when I said, "Now, you got me into this!" She said, "Don't worry." So she had Sir John Hodsell, who was head of the women's activities in fighting the battle, she had Sir John take us to the plane and then she…when we go to the airport, she said, "Now, Sir John, I want you to talk to the pilot of the plane that Martha's going in, and see that we get the wig stand in the coat room." And do you know, he carried it on board, and the pilot allowed me to carry this antique wig stand in the place where they hung the coats. Can you imagine that kind of thing happening now? Anyway, she waved and said, "I'm glad we did it! I'm glad we did it!" She was a wonderful woman, and of course, we kept in very close contact from then on. But actually, the years at the…later, I was asked by President Truman to be the sort of executive. He had a named a new committee of the three top industries, three top farm, three top labor, and three people at large to be his committee to help him with the problems, international and national problems, and these were all men, but each was the head of his group. And of course the most interesting person was the secretary [Tape ends] Track 10 MD: …it was extremely interesting, because everything fed through it to the President. And they advised the President, of course, on what would happen with the farm areas and what would happen in the industry areas, and all the other things that were going on in the government. So, I was very busy. First of all, I wrote books on all kinds of medical care, and how you looked out for populations and moved them in case of bombing and what happened to people, and so on and so forth. BA: And these were distributed nationally? MD: They were distributed nationally. And the head of the Red Cross worked very closely with me. Everybody…every part of the government that anything to do with protection would. It was perfectly wonderful, the cooperation that we had, and how each of them took certain responsibilities. So that…those three years, while I can't tell you exact things that were done because one doesn't do that, I mean, you can't report on the internal workings of the President's office. I came to know everyone directing the nation's ups and downs, and I also to have great privilege in…of long talks with all kinds of people that were involved. In fact, one day, after I'd been executive director of this committee for two years, Anna Rosenberg called me and she said, "Martha, I'd like you to come over and help me open the Department of Defense." And I said, "Oh, I can't help you, Anna, you know all about it." And she said, "Well, I want you to come. Come and have lunch with me next Thursday." And I said, "Fine." And she said, "I'll send the car for you." So, on Thursday, I was ready, and this gorgeous limousine drove up with gorgeous men in uniform came and picked me up, and we went to the Department of Defense. And I was ushered down an aisle on a red carpet to a table with flags on both sides, and here is Anna, ready to greet me. I said, "Anna! What are you doing this for?" "Well," she said, "I need you." She said, "I'm having trouble with the women and the armed services." She said, "I'm having trouble with the ones that are married to our servicemen, I'm having trouble with the ones that are in the jobs in the Service." And she said, "I…" she said, "You know? I never have agreed with you. You always thought women were different from men. And they had to be treated differently and you kept trying to push this with them on us in your committee…" And she said, "And now, I've realized you were right." And so she said, "I want you to resign from the President's office and come over and be my special assistant." Well, I thought that would be fun! So, I went back to my [clears throat]…with the chauffeur, and the limousine, and everything back to my office and the minute I got in, the phone rang and it was Stu Symington. He said, "What did Anna want?" BA: Ohh. MD: I said…he said, "Come down to my office. I want to hear what she's trying to do now." So I went down to Stu's office, and I told him what she said. He said, "The nerve of her!" He said, "I’m not going to let you go; you're doing too many things that we need you to do here in the Executive Office." And so I said, "But you know, I think it would be quite creative to try to do something to get things that I…I asked her a lot of questions about what they were doing in different areas, and nobody seems to be looking out for certain things that…they're going to along and make progress, are going to be successful. He said, "Well, that may be so." I said, "Why don't you loan me? And I'll still be a member of your staff and still have my office over here, and I can work there and here, too." He said, "Okay, I'm willing." So then I became a special assistant to her, and the first thing I did was, I found out that they didn't have any women's advisory committees for any of the women's services or for anything else. And I said, "Well, how can you expect the men to carry out the suggestions that we're making about women?" So she gave me a carte blanche, and I picked out leading women in the United States to become the members of her special advisory committee. And then we did a great many other things like that. And when I felt that I'd done all I could to help her, I said, "Now, I think I'd better go back to the resources board," because at this time, Truman was very upset about the mobilizing of the Chinese, and he was afraid that if we did certain things, we might really…they might try to bomb the eastern part of the United States. BA: Oh! MD: So, we had enough problems in the resources board, also for the other things that were going on and cooperating…getting the Red Cross to cooperate with things we wanted to do, because that's not a national agency belonging to the government. That's a private agency, and there were all sorts of areas where there is friction and difficulty and so on. But, any rate, it was fun. And so until Eisenhower became President…I resigned when he became President, because I knew he didn't have any use for women advisors, and so I… then I resigned and went back to doing all kinds of social welfare programs and by this time, Waitstill had decided to take another church. And I had been asked for years to become a member of a public relations firm in New York, who…which handled only the kind of agencies that I was interested in, for instance, I was made the advisor to the National Municipal League, all the municipal leagues, all over the United States, belonged to a national organization and had problems in their cities, and so on, and I was interested in that, and then I also was asked if I would be the director of the program for the Herald-Tribune Prussia fund, for children in New York City, which was right at home and I could live in New York, you see, and operate that and two or three other things that we had on our…I had under my jurisdiction. So that's how I went ahead with so many things which I had done in the past were very helpful in BA: Oh, yes! MD: what I could do in the future. In the meantime, my daughter had become a Pembroker, and was already finishing her first year here, she had…I was…had been unable to get her to Washington with me because I couldn't…I couldn't persuade the group in Washington…at the Friends' School, to take her unless she resigned from the Latin School where she was going, and was definitely theirs. And the Latin School said if she resigned, she can't come back. So I was between… BA: Catch-22. Yeah. MD: Yeah. And so as a result, she finished up in the Latin School, did very well, and then went to Pembroke and was a very satisfy…factory student and she herself got engaged at the end of her sophomore year to Artemis Joukowsky, and they were married the following year. I made them wait at least one year. And they've been very happily…not only married and parents, but also, as you know, Marty has become very helpful in Brown University. BA: That's for sure. Did you meet—getting back to your days in Washington—I just had one thought. Did you ever meet with Truman? Did you…? MD: Oh, yes. BA: You met with him often? MD: Oh, whenever he would have his board together. And they…he would…and if they thought I believed in something, he'd call me up and say, "Martha, will you come downstairs? I want to talk to you about so-and-so." And of course, there were lots of functions where I met Mrs. Truman, and Margaret Truman, and we saw a great deal of the members of his boards, and of the Executive Office of the President. Because I was only on the floor above, you see, and therefore I was very accessible, and a great many things were under my…kind of my jurisdiction. And so I saw a great deal of him and I came to know him. He was a perfectly delightful man, and he was practical, and creative, and so…so terribly reluctant about pushing himself forward in any way. He was so thoughtful of other people. And he was brilliant. And I never saw him leave the office early, and he always left with his arms filled with papers. And at that time, he was living at Blair House, across the street because the White House was being refurbished. And he would go over there with his arms full of papers, every afternoon. I mean, after hours, and come back early in the morning, very often, and work. So I had great admiration for him as a President. And I felt that he was a…not only that, he was a very fine man, with a very great sense of family and very deep affection. And very proud of his wife, and his daughter. And of course, Margaret turned out to be a very good writer. And she's done some good books, so you can learn a lot about what went on. But she was really a very sweet, and extremely capable daughter, who was able to learn and used in a very positive way everything she learned. [Tape stops.] BA: Mrs. Cogan, as we sit here…as I sit here thinking at the end of this tape…I'd like to do some follow-up. Earlier in the tape, you made mention of the fact that when I was doing the summary of your activities that even though you came back to the United States in 1940, it didn't end there. Your work, everything you had done for the previous few years, didn't end there. And I remember in the text of your book something…you're talking about the day the war ended and you were in Portugal and a telegraph arrived from Jan Masaryk. Perhaps you could tell us something about that whole time in your life. MD: Why, I'd be delighted to, Barbara. Actually, our Unitarian Service Committee, our offices now in both Portugal and Spain, where administered at different times by various Unitarian leaders, including the Robert Dexters. And at the summer of 1945, they had no one who was experienced to go in there. And so, knowing that my children were in camp, they called me and asked me if I'd be willing to go and spend the summer. And I said, "Well, of course I'd be delighted to do what I could to help." And it all resulted in my taking the first plane to Lisbon, and setting…and moving into the office which they had established in the city of Lisbon. It was really quite a different kind of climate from what I had found when I was there before. In the first place, we were well known to the people, locally, and we were known also as a committee to help individual people at the time. One thing that we had established was having a…one of our workers go to the prisons every day to find out who had been arrested, and whether or not they had sufficient food, and whether they had contacts of people at home that would help get them out, or what should happen to them? Because people were starving to death in prison and they had no way of getting any word outside of the prison of what their needs were. Curiously enough at this time, the prisons were organized with first, second, and third class citizens. The first class, you were able to go out walking, have all your meals brought in, and have contact with the outside world, go out and meet at a café, or visit your friends in the hotels, and go back there at night. Second class was you had to pay for your board and room, but you were not allowed very much freedom outside. Third class, you slept on the ground, on the dirt floor, you ate the slops that they fed you, and you had no contact with anybody unless some social worker, perhaps a representative of your church or something else, should happen by and should offer to help you. And these people were in the most terrible situation. Now I had word that…because I had this man going to prison every day, and he would visit them, he would come back with lists of medicines, we brought cigarettes, and smoke and also…and food to people and also helped people get out when they had relatives that were ready to take care of them, and so on. And one day I was sitting in my office in the morning, and a beautiful…a little girl, sitting on her father's shoulder, Spanish child, came to my office for help. They said they understood that we helped feed people, and he said they had no food and they…and they were in great danger. That they were Spanish refugees from Franco and they had no place to go to sleep or to eat. And I felt terribly about them, and had…knew where I could send them to stay until we could help them in some way permanently, and gave him enough money so that he could go out and feed his little daughter and himself and find a room. The next morning, I was brought word that the man had been killed BA: [gasps] MD: and the little girl was dead, too. It seemed, and I was so upset, I couldn't understand it. I said to the police when they told me this, that this was the most inhumane thing I thought could be done. And they said, "Well, you see, we have a law." And by this time, I knew the head of the international police very well, who was in charge of all of the other police activities in Portugal. He said, "You see, we have an agreement with Spain, that if any Spanish refugee or Spaniard is wanted by Spain, we will arrest him in Portugal and take him to the border. And then whatever they do, they usually shoot them." But he said, "Whatever they do is up to them, it's not us, we're not…and if…we have the same kind of arrangement. That we also will…are returned. Any Portuguese people that we want…get over the border and become indigent, or the Spanish arrest them for some reason, they will be returned to us and then we deal with them according to what their crime is." And I said, "Why, this is dreadful!" "Why," he said, "you know, our prison is full of people from Spain." And I said, "Are you going to send them back, to be killed?" He said, "Well, we'll have to, we can't go on feeding the Spaniards and looking out for them, and keeping them hid…" I said, "Is there any way we could possibly save these people?" And he said, "Well," he said, "if you could get visas for them, and they could leave for some other place, we'd be perfectly willing to let you take them out of prison and send them any place." So I thought, well, maybe there was some South American countries that might be willing to take Spanish workers who are skilled people in their countries. And so I then went on a series of visits to every Consul General or diplomat who was representing his country from South America in Lisbon. Most of them were not interested, but the Venezuelans said, "We are in great need of skilled workers. And we will take a whole boatload if you can arrange with the police to let them go." So I went back to the head of the international police, and I said, "This is my arrangement with the Venezuelans, they'll give us passports if I can find a boat and give them the transportation to Venezuela." And the head of the police said, "Well, you see we are a humane people, I'll be glad to give you all the prisoners that you want." So we organized the transportation, then I began to look for a boat. And I found that most of the ships that came and took up passengers in Portugal all stopped in Spain on the way back north. And so then I called the Spanish ambassador, and I said, "Now, you have some people that you want who are in Portugal, and I know you really don't…really don't want them to be returned, but they are in danger of losing their lives if they do return to the border of Spain, because you have a reciprocal agreement. If they were onboard a ship, and it stopped in Spain, would you…your men arrest them and take them to prison?" He said, "Yes." And I said, "So, if I were to send them on a boat to South America, they must go on a boat that doesn't stop in Spain?" And he said, "Yes, that's true." He said, "Bonne chance." [Good luck] So, I immediately began to look for a boat, and I cabled to our committee in New York and said that there were about 50 men in prison, and I went around to the prisons, saw all of these Spanish. And they were good, able, young men… BA: And they were very willing to go to Venezuela? MD: …and they were very eager to be sent…NOT to be sent back to the border and not to go back to the Franco regime, and eager to do anything they could to work if they could go a European…any other country, but especially South America, where they spoke Spanish. So the Venezuelan ambassador and I worked out the program. I got the papers, we made out all the papers for all these people who were in prison. Then we…I took them shopping in a bus, we had the Portuguese police with us, and we bought a whole set of clothes for every man, and we also bought him traveling accessories and coat, and whatever he needed. And we finally found a ship and the head of the Portuguese police kept them in prison and fed them and looked out for them until they were ready…until we were all ready and had all the visas and all the passports ready, and there came the day when they put on their clothes and they took up their new traveling bags and came down to the dock at five o'clock in the morning to get aboard this ship. And I shall never forget that day. BA: I bet. MD: Because they all climbed aboard this ship, which was taking them to Venezuela and the Venezuelan ambassador was there, and said good-bye to them, and I said good-bye and I watched the ship leaving the shore and one of the men was pointing at his neck. And I said, "What happened?" to one of the people I was…to the Portuguese police, who were with me. They said, "Oh, he tried to commit suicide last night, because…" And I said, "How could he do that? When he's about to go to freedom?" "Well," they said, "a man said that his grandmother was really a courtesan and wasn't a good woman and so he said, in her honor, he had slit his throat. But he says he didn't hit the jugular. He only slit it part way, and we did the throat up and although he looked very pale this morning, he…I think will stand the journey." And so as they floated…went out to sea, I saw this fellow pointing at his neck and bobbing his head and saying, "It's going to be alright, because I honored my grandmother." And so they all went to Venezuela, I never have heard what happened to them. That was one of the things that happened in those early days, going back into the office in Portugal. Then just as the war was concluded, and Czechoslovakia was freed, I had a…first a telephone call, and then a cable from Jan Masaryk, who had returned with the whole Czech delegation to London, with President Beneš…I mean, they had returned to Paris headquarters, and to London headquarters. And Jan Masaryk said he would like me to come immediately to meet him in France and to see if I could help him with the problems they had in Czechoslovakia. And so he asked me to fly up to Paris and see him, and then he felt that we could go to Czechoslovakia together, and see what we could do to help the people who were being repatriated. So I…the United States Army had to be involved, and of course the United States Consulate in Portugal had to be involved, and were very gracious about the whole thing, and so I was able to get the permissions to go into this newly opened war zone, go up to Paris, and of course, all of the United States Army, it seemed to me, was quartered in Paris at this time, from what I heard. So they arranged for me to go in a United States transport plane, which had the ordinary seats for…and I was the only civilian aboard. I got on board and we started out for Paris, and the men were all most gracious, and we talked, and enjoyed ourselves, and I noticed they were paying an awful lot of attention to me. And I thought, "Well, isn't it nice, that they're so gracious to their own countrywoman?" And when we arrived over the airport in Paris, we suddenly made a dip, fast and landed very quickly. And I said, "My, that was quite a landing!" to the man I was talking to. He said, "Yeah, well, we had to." He said, "You know, we've been on fire for the last hour, and you didn't know it." And he said, "And we were trying to get here and put the fire out, and battle it so that we could all arrive safely in Paris." And we came down, and all the hoses were on the plane and they…they were waiting for us with a team and I left the plane alone, because there was no one to meet me, of course, and then I began to try to find a room in Paris. It was almost impossible. The place was not only filled with American soldiers, eating at every place where you could buy food, but there wasn't anything vacant. There were no people.there were no travelers who were going in and out, because Paris had just become released, along with the other countries. But I went to the hotel to see Jan Masaryk We arranged for me to have a room on the fifth floor of a some kind of a rooming house, and he said to me, "Now I have a plane for you and three men, a pilot, and an assistant pilot, and someone who knows our programs for relief, and I would like to have you fly all…to every one of the cities in Czechoslovakia where you did work and where we know there are problems, and make a complete inquiry of what is needed by the people in Czechoslovakia today, now that they have been released." He said, "I know it's occupied by the Russians, and you may…we may have some problems, but," he said, "I'm going to the first two cities with you, and we'll see what we get. So, we took off in this little…actually, first we had to fly to Prague, because I met him in Paris, you see, and we flew out in a bomber with a big hole in the fuselage. I never saw…! And all of the men who were on that plane were all Czechoslovak soldiers who had come from hospitals in France and had been taken care of…I had never seen such poor, sad, ill people in my life. A whole planeload of them being taken back to hospitals in Czechoslovakia. We landed in…at Prague, and Masaryk was greeted by some of the people in charge, and then he said, "Now I'm going to take you tonight to the opera and we're going to have a dinner, and then we'll start off tomorrow morning. And so that night, we went to the opera, and to dinner, and the next morning we went off with the three Czech soldiers that he had chosen. And we went to two cities, first of all, of course, we went to Prague and had a chance to look around. I had a chance to go and see my…the wife of the Unitarian minister who I had known so well when we were there, and she said, "Oh, Martha, you have no idea how terrible it is because these Russian soldiers are stealing everything we've got and throwing it into freight cars which they have, empty freight cars, down at the railroad station, they're throwing in the most beautiful antiques and the most enormous pieces of pottery and of…bathrooms, that you can imagine, and everything is going to be smashed before it ever arrives in Russia. The soldiers are picking up everything that they possibly can." And she said, "Not only that, but you don't dare to go out without an escort, or without a man with you, because otherwise, women are being just absolutely grabbed off the streets." She said, "I can't even go out to shop for food for my family without being chased, or I was, even this morning, by a Russian soldier said, and when I told him I was a woman and I had a wife and I had children of my own, he said, 'I don't care. I just want a woman, that's all.'" So you can imagine the problem of living in a city that was occupied by a wild kind of group and they looked to be Oriental soldiers, they didn't look like Russians, or like Europeans. It was certainly the people that had been recruited from those very northern areas of Russia. BA: Right. MD: Anyway, after the first two cities, I made a survey of the others and brought it back to Masaryk in Paris because I flew back again, and then flew back to the United States with it to share with and to help organize help for them with the American Fund for Czechoslovak Refugees, Brackett Lewis the executive director and I had worked all through the time I was in Czechoslovakia before, and so we were able to map propaganda and the information and speakers, because the United States was then involved in what we call the National War Fund. And we were raising money for all the countries that had been in the war and were needing now rehabilitation. So this was just one of those things that happened because I'd been there before, you see. BA: Right. Right. [Tape stops.] Another aspect of your life which you mentioned was after you'd come back to the United States, you used to spend summers in Israel, working for the Youth Aliyah. Perhaps we should hear some more about your summers in Israel. MD: Well, actually, it was a very great privilege, but also a problem to get into Israel at this period in time because Egypt was making war on Israel, and it wasn't a very good climate for people to be there. But the national…three of the national officers of the Hadassah, the national president and two other officers, including the secretary named Anna [Toolin?] and they asked me if…because they felt that I ought to know what was going on so that I could on raising money and speaking at interfaith groups, and also to Children to Palestine to get money for the children, to help support the children's program of Children to Palestine. And so I agreed I was going over anyway to do…to…I was going over to Europe to stop by in Paris and London to do some things with our committees there that I'd…that they'd asked me to help them with. Because we'd become so close during the war years. And I agreed to meet the Hadassah women when they arrived in Paris and go with them to Israel. They said they would arrange, they had a plane going over and that they would arrange for me to go with them. I wasn’t sure how many were going at any rate, but we had to meet in Paris, to meet each other. When I got there, I found that these three friends of mine who were the leaders of Hadassah, including Anna Toolin, were ready to take off the next morning, and they said that the plane was a private plane, chartered by Hadassah, and that they had to have special kind of restrictions. We were also told that the people in Israel had very little food to eat and we all went shopping, sort of surreptitiously, I bought all of the kosher salami I thought I could get in my bag. Although it was odiferous, I was sure it was going to be good to be eaten when I got to Israel. And with all these things collected, that we thought we could possibly use, we all got aboard, and I found there were just the three women and myself and two young men who evidently going over to fight with the Israeli Army. And the rest of the plane was filled with medical supplies for the [Tape stops.]..