 Kim Wade: [00:00] My name is Kim Wade, and I’m doing a women’s oral history interview with Dorothy Testa on May 11th, 1988. This is side one of tape one and we’re just getting started, so... Why don’t we just start out with where you grew up, and a little bit about your high school, and your parents, and stuff like that. Dorothy Testa: OK. Well, I grew up in Brattleboro, Vermont. Was born in Brattleboro, graduated from Brattleboro High School. And my parents – my father was from Brattleboro originally. He had a sixth grade education and then had to leave school [01:00] and help his father in the grocery store. And then turned – very bright man – and turned into a millionaire. He had car agencies. We had Packards back in the ’20s, we had Pontiacs. Was a self-made man. Pulled himself up by the bootstraps. He met my mother, who was originally from Springfield, Massachusetts, class of 1922 at Pembroke, Phi Beta Kappa from Pembroke, when she came Brattleboro to teach high school – English. And she taught two years of high school English and is the beautiful, young, college graduate in town who’s the school marm. And this self-made man with a sixth grade education courted her, and they married in 1924, and they had three children. My two older brothers. One is 11 years older than I am, and one is nine years older than I am. Or eight and a half, [02:00] and 11 and a half years older. KW: Did they end up going to college, too? 1 DT: Yes. One, my older brother, is the class of 1946 from high school, so he’s class of 1950 from Amherst College. He served in the Air Force for four years. And he’s class of 1958 from the University of Virginia Law School. He practices law in Arizona now. My brother, the middle child, is an artist, and he went to the University of Vermont, transferred to the Museum School of Fine Arts in Boston. And now does art work for Doris Day. He lives in California. So he designs record covers, and her Christmas cards, and things like that. They both married and have three children each. And so I have nieces and nephews that way, too. But, anyway, back to Vermont. [03:00] Wonderful place to grow up. Quiet surroundings, never lock a door, lots of outside activities, striving to do well, and never thought much about where to go to college until senior year. In those days, it’s before Sputnik, which is when the SATs became important. And, so, the SATs were just a fact a life and something you did in your junior year. In fact, we took our SATs in the morning for three hours, they weren’t even given in Brattleboro. They were given up in Bellows Falls. So we all had to board a bus at 7:00 in the morning. Went and took three hours of SATs in the morning, and they gave us a sandwich, we took three hours of achievements in the afternoon, put us back on the bus and took us back to Brattleboro, and we went for a hay ride that night and a square dance at the barn up in Wilmington. KW: How big was your high school size? DT: My high school class was about – I’m guessing – I think probably about two hundred. It’s an excellent [04:00] curriculum in that high school. Even today, every year we take two or three people from Brattleboro High School in the freshman class of Brown. They were very advanced in their teaching, even to the small – I don’t think they even teach home ec now in high schools, but they have a kitchen for every two girls to work, for them all to cook, from soup to nuts. We had courses in sewing. We had advanced courses in Shakespeare. Every kind of a thing was a possibility to us. But, again, we’re dealing in the day when it meant, if you went to college, the only reason was to find a husband. You didn’t go for a career. As they say today, get the MRS degree. KW: Was that your idea when you went to – 2 DT: No, my idea was – my mother was a member of the AAUW, the American Association of University Women. And she was a housewife, [05:00] she only taught for two years before she got married, and, after that, she spent her time at home. Her purpose for telling me to get a college education was I could become a member of the AAUW. (laughs) So the idea was to find that husband and join the AAUW. (laughter) KW: OK, right now we’re looking at the 1922 yearbook of – how do you say that? DT: Brun Mael. KW: Brun Mael? DT: To use one form of the Latin, “brown book.” Whereas the – and it’s still Brun Mael in the later years that we’ll get to when we get into my time at Pembroke. That’s still Brun Mael. As opposed Liber Brunensis, which is “the book of brown”. KW: And that was the men’s – DT: The male book. KW: – up until the two schools combined? DT: I believe, the merge in ’71 probably brought – I don’t have a ’71 yearbook, but I’ll bet you it’s just [06:00] one Liber Brunensis then. And they dropped Brun Mael. But the Pembroke yearbook was the Brun Maels. It’s quite a thin book, small volume, very lightweight. Wonderful picture of my mother in here. And it says – there was write-up talking about each person, along with their activities, much like a high school yearbook. And it says: “The way Marion Craig corners all the A’s in creation and turns off English papers without half trying is positively demoralizing. Marion can study anywhere, under any circumstances, and this ability has won her the shining Phi Beta key. Of course she has Walter and he’s such care? One has to come early to 3 get the divan in the Miller reception-room nowadays. They call it Plutonic -- no Platonic -- and we have no way of knowing.” As you can see, she lived in Miller Hall, which of course is a dormitory on the Pembroke campus. Used in the co-ed sense now. KW: So was that [07:00] referring to a boyfriend that she – DT: Walter was her boyfriend. And I guess her true love. Walter’s trouble was that he was a Baptist. And my mother’s parents were Roman Catholic. So Walter had to go, which is a shame because probably Walter was an intellectual. She was, and my father was not, but probably more romantic. Interestingly enough, I have this yearbook put away with belongings, and in 1982, the Women’s Center here at Brown published a Women of Pembroke Calendar. And they started from the years in the 1890s, when it was the Women’s College of Brown University, up through 1928 when it became Pembroke College, and then into the merge. And it shows over the years by the months. the different garb that the women wear. So I bought a calendar, just because the woman [08:00] who was selling them and worked for Pembroke Center was here at the Admission Office being an interviewer. And I was flipping through it and therein lo and behold in the month of May was my mother, in her room in Miller Hall. KW: Had you ever seen that picture before? DT: Never. KW: Wow. DT: I had seen this costume she had on, which, we must call it “costume.” This woman has one on, too. It’s their gym outfit. And, it was sort of a velvet affair, with – KW: Doesn’t look that comfortable, does it? DT: No, it doesn’t. 4 KW: Was it a skirt? DT: And you can see the side view from the pictures, how I recognized her from that. It was a long dress. I don’t know – KW: What kinds of – DT: – if they went running around the field in that or whether that was something they put on after they got through with the gym class. KW: What kinds of activities did they do in the gym classes? DT: No, I don’t really know. I don’t think it was exactly as we had to do. [09:00] We had compulsory gym for years. I don’t believe they did. She doesn’t list any sports here. KW: When you had gym, did you have it every day, or...? DT: We had gym twice a week. And there were requirements that we had to cover, which, I don’t think they had in those days. We had to have different kinds of dance, we had to have folk dancing, we had to have jazz dancing, and we had to have modern dancing. Requirements which is the name of the game, anyway. Requirements in academics subjects, too, which made you a well-rounded person. KW: Did the men have gym classes, too? DT: I believe so. It must have been where they derived their intermural sports. So I don’t know if they had requirements of gym classes. I would assume so. Because it was much like high school, because it was required in high school. Except it was four years there. But, anyway, I was very surprised to see her picture pop up. But she did not, quote-unquote, influence me, on Pembroke, to return to the question here. 5 I was applying to different schools, was accepted and about ready to send in my confirmation to Connecticut College for Women which was then a women’s school. And, I had been accepted to Pembroke, she had me apply, but I didn’t compomise for her. And she said, “Let’s go take a look at the campus.” Because I’d never bothered to come for an interview or come to look. And then I came, and I just fell in love with the campus. And then, immediately, came here instead of Connecticut. KW: Were you specifically looking for a women’s college? DT: Yes, I was. Because my brother had gone to Amherst, and he thought the place to go would be[11:00] Smith or Wellesley or Mount Holyoke. And my mother, having gone to Pembroke, the idea in those days was to go to a very good women’s school and then you would automatically run into a man from a close by men’s school. Perhaps it was the proximity of Brown to Pembroke which sold me on it. KW: What did your father think about your choice? DT: He didn’t care. (inaudible) He thought it very important that I have an education, very important that any funds would go for my education before anything else. In fact his – he died my freshman year and his will read that before any money was dispensed, it would pay for my education. So, having a lack of an education, I think he must have admired my mother’s. And I enjoyed school, high school, so he could see that I should go off to college. KW: Did your other high school classmates have that [12:00] kind of support from their parents as far as your parents (inaudible) college (inaudible) their education side. DT: I believe so. Most of the friends in our group in high school all went on to higher education. A lot of them to the University of Vermont. And several to small schools in Maine such as Boden, Bates, Colby. Some to Colgate in New York. No one else came to Pembroke. Some to schools in Boston, Boston University. Mainly New England schools. They didn’t go much further away. But there was no discrimination as far as gender, if you were a girl. 6 My mother had brothers in (inaudible) and was not allowed at public school at first because she had two older brothers. And the family thought the money should go towards them and their education, even though she was the intellectual of her siblings. [13:00] And then it was apparent, immediately as one brother became a photographer, and another one got into some kind of sales. So then the money was important for her to go. So she had run a prospect, but I didn’t. Everybody was happy as long as I’m happy. Brown looked like a happy place to me. KW: What was your freshman year like. DT: Oh, it was wonderful. In those days, we had freshman dormitories. We didn’t live on the main campus. So, Pembroke – there were houses – King House was the furthest one away. That was all the way up Brown Street. It’s just been refurbished. It’s up almost to the curb there. It’s past [inaudible] Street. There’s that, King House, and then Allinson House was on Lloyd Avenue. That’s where I lived. It’s just two doors down from Prospect. KW: So, now, those are actual houses. DT: Real houses. KW: Not the dormitories like [14:00] they were. DT: No, these are wooden-framed houses. And backed up to us was Angell House. That was (inaudible). It would accommodate perhaps 25 or 26 girls. We had a house mother and we had two junior sisters, two juniors, lived for the first semester in the freshman dormitory rooms. The house mother that year – there’s a turnover in house mothers, so we had this very young woman who was very theatrical and she’s from New York and she could’ve cared whether you were in or out or...dressed for dress dinner. Very flamboyant woman. And so, it wasn’t the stodgy house mother that we saw later on [in life?]. KW: And she lived in a – 7 DT: She lived on the first on the first floor. My roommate and I lived on the first floor, and we had a nice big room which was the kitchen of this old house, and since the sale of the house and it became a private residence again, has become a kitchen again. [15:00] And, what would’ve been the pantry was our big walk-in closet. So, we had a wonderful room. It was spacious, lots of windows in the house, and... They had a Pembroke matching system for roommates we used to joke about a lot. And I don’t know quite how they did it, but it must be by religion, because Catholics roomed together and Jews roomed together. But the house was mixed up. It was all different denominations in the house. And there were some triples in the house also. But it was a very cohesive group. We had a full freshman week. One week of orientation activities. And amazingly enough, my mother and my brother just dropped me off one Sunday afternoon and went back to Vermont. And, here I was. (laughter) We all trooped over together for dinner at Andrews dining hall, because we had all our meals in Andrews so we had to walk from the dormitory. KW: Was that everyone from Pembroke? DT: Everyone from Pembroke ate at Andrews. And, lunches [16:00] and dinners were served, breakfast was cafeteria style. KW: So you would go through a line for breakfast and – DT: Yes. KW: – get your stuff? And, otherwise, you’d be at the table and they would bring the plates to you? DT: Yes. KW: And then you mentioned before that people who served you were students who were on financial aid. 8 DT: Financial aid. Yes. Those who were on financial aid got jobs, much as students do today. Jobs on campus. And they wore these awkward white uniforms and crisp, white aprons, and there was no discrimination – you know, so-and-so is poor so their waiting on so-and-so who’s got money. There was none of that. It was your friends, who just happened to be waiting tables in order to make money. Just as you would think you went in a restaurant and saw a friend who was working for the summer, you wouldn’t think anything of it. Meals were terrific. I duplicated many of the recipes that we had at Pembroke. We had a wonderful hamburger and potato, tomato dish that we called “train wreck.” That was an all-time favorite. [17:00] They did wonderful salads with bacon dressing, great desserts, and... We’d troop in, through the snow from Lloyd Avenue. In for our dinner and then back out again. On Sunday, noon time at one o’clock, was Sunday dress dinner. And Wednesday evenings – dinner was at 6:15 in the dining hall room – but Wednesday evenings was dress dinner. And that’s where you got dressed up a little bit better than usual. You had the nylons on, your seams straight, even got your girdle on for that one – a candlelight dinner. And you could invite men from the Brown campus for dinner. And it was usually roast beef and mashed potatoes and broccoli. And then after dinner, there’s some fabulous dessert. Then after dinner, you’d return to your individual dormitories for demitasse with the house mother. KW: And what was that? DT: Demitasse was where the house mother would serve the small demitasse cups, almost like an espresso coffee, a strong coffee in a tiny cup [18:00], in the demitasse room with a slice of lemon, and we were taught to lift our pinky as we lifted our cups. Very gracious living is what they called it at Pembroke – that’s gracious living. KW: Did most people observe the dress code then? DT: Oh, yes, sure. Because, you weren’t allowed to go to Thayer Street, for instance, to go pick up a hot dog. And Thayer Street didn’t have much there. There was a drugstore that sold hamburgers and hotdogs over the counter. But, you’d paid with your tuition and your room and board for your meal. And there just wasn’t the thought of the freedom. I don’t know, (inaudible) 9 dressing up (inaudible) to order a pizza. You just wouldn’t do that. Plus there wouldn’t be a pizza parlor anyway. (inaudible) But you might as well go get a good hot meal instead of hiking down the drug store and paying for a hot dog. KW: What about dress codes in general? Did you have – [19:00] just around campus, did you have...? DT: Oh, sure. Lots of dress codes. In fact, I still adhere to them today. I still cannot wear slacks on the other side of Thayer Street. KW: Which is the other side? DT: The other side is the more eastern side. You could in the dead of winter, wear slacks under your coat, in a snow storm, down to the bank on Thayer Street, and Hospital Trust was just where it used to be, but it’s been remodeled now. It was an older type bank building. And I’ll never forget, one day, being on the opposite side of the street with one of my roommates, who was in slacks, and who was unfortunately smoking a cigarette. And the dean came out of the bank. KW: Which dean was that? DT: Dean Tonks. And she immediately called the girl in her office and reprimanded her. KW: For the smoking and the slacks? DT: You could not walk with a cigarette. Perfectly all right to smoke in the dormitories, smoke in the dining hall, smoke any where we wanted to, there was even [20:00] smoking in the classrooms. It was very fashionable to smoke. In fact, the dean smoked. Dean Tonks smoked all the time. But, you could not walk with a cigarette. You could not walk by yourself on the Brown campus. You had to be with another Pembroker. This was more for protection that somebody would not wander into a fraternity or hear the crack of a beer can and slip in for a drink, or 10 maybe a Brown man might reach out his window and snatch you off the street. But you had your partner with you. Then, after there was a stabbing in 1961 on Prospect Street. There was an undergraduate who was walking back from the John Hay back up Prospect to a freshman dormitory. And, her life was spared, coincidental because she wore a loden coat. Loden coats were popular then. The German coat that has the plaid lining, and the stitch goes like a cross in the back. And right at the point of the cross [21:00] is where the knife had to go. And because of the heavy stitching and heavy lining, that’s what saved her life. But, after that occurred, then no Pembroker was allowed out on the street without a partner. But the dress code was, I thought, very lenient at the time because my mother had told me tales of wearing a hat with gloves and, of course, a dress, and a coat on the Brown campus. I thought we were getting away easy because we could wear skirts and sweaters, no gloves, and no hats. Except we wore (inaudible). KW: Tell me the dates that you were at school. DT: OK. I graduated from high school in ’58, in June. I came here in September of ’58. And I was here the year – freshman year, ’58, ’59; and ’59, ’60, sophomore year; ’60, ’61, junior year, and then I left in June of that year. Left for the year, [22:00] was at that point my mother had now passed away, junior year. And I had to take care of my brother, family reasons. I left for one year, I came back in the fall of ’62 – September, ’62. And then changed my major, and then went until January of ’64. So, actually, I’m class of ’62, but graduated with class of ’64. Consequently, I marched on the hill with the class of ’64. My picture’s in the ’64 yearbook. But then, I go to reunions with class of ’62. But the curious thing I realized after last year’s twenty-fifth reunion was nobody remembers past freshman year. (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) KW: Freshman year is the most (inaudible). DT: Most important year. KW: Yeah, that’s definitely still true. 11 DT: Is it? KW: Yeah. DT: And even I didn’t know whether you could play it to the idea of we were out in these houses away from campus, but maybe still important because you’re [23:00] cohesive in the dormitory halls, certain areas, you get close friends. KW: Do you feel like you were closest to the people in that freshman year, you still keep in touch with them? DT: Well, I actually keep very close contact with my junior and senior year roommate. She and I are very close. In fact, we saw each other last week. She’s the one that’s found her old gym suit that she’s going to send, I’ll have to show you. And she’s supposed to send us three copies of some of the regulations. KW: For in… for dorm life? DT: I think she meant dorm life. Perhaps it was some of the prerequisites. See, during that week of orientation, they took us on the bus [at the Heffenrefer?], at the end of the week. And they told us that all week long we could prepare a skit from each dormitory, with how – contest that made the best skit. And it was a day of frolicking on the beach and getting to know other members of the freshman class, because the [24:00] week was taken up pretty much with going to New York. And of course we got to know the people at the dorm better as we tried to do the skit. But, we were, I guess brainwashed is not the right word, but we were taught lots of things that first week, by our junior sisters, and things that still never leave your mind. Like, Jackson one-two-one-fivesix was the number of the emergency house mother. And you knew that, you did not leave your dormitory without being able to say, “Jackson one-two-one-five-six.” This is back in the old days when instead of the digits eight-six-three, we had Jackson exchanges, it was Jackson one. There’s a Plantations exchange. It’s the letters on the telephone that correspond to the numbers. 12 KW: And so would this be a woman that you’d call (overlapping dialogue; inaudible)? DT: That was the switchboard at Andrews Hall. You know on the first floor of Andrews Hall? There’s kind of a cubbyhole, and, I don’t know if they still have anyone answering the phone there or not, [25:00] but if you walked in the front door of Andrews – KW: Up above the terrace? You walk up the terrace? DT: You walk up the terrace and you walk in those doors, right there, facing you, there was a cubby hole where there was a receptionist. And right to her left, there was stairs that come down the back way and you could get into the dining hall, through that back part. KW: Right. DT: Okay, so there was a switchboard there. And that’s where they would answer Jackson onetwo-one-five-six. So it didn’t matter where you were or what had happened. All you had to do was call that number and say you were delayed. And the curfew was 12:30 at night. Say you have a flat tire, for real, at 12:15. You’ve got to call the emergency house mother and tell her. KW: Would they lock the doors? DT: Yes. This way the house mother would stand at the door, with the key, and let you in when you appeared. And you kind of wondered if she wasn’t sending a patrol car out to see if you really were stuck someplace with a flat tire. KW: What would happen if you came back late and [26:00] the doors were locked? DT: You couldn’t get in. KW: Stuck for the night. 13 DT: And you’d already been, perhaps, counted. You don’t know whether you were counted or not because they had fire drills so frequently, that they might have checked the bed and found it empty. And then you were up for suspension. KW: From? DT: School. Oh, you didn’t do that. No. We had kind of a student council. Don’t know what they called it... the undergraduate council? It’s difficult for me to remember some of the language, in that I’ve been working here and talking with students for the last eight years, that I tend to get into the lingo of what’s happening today, and it probably wasn’t the undergraduate council of students at that time. But there was some kind of a council or student council that would hear your pleas of innocence or excuses if you got into some deep trouble. KW: Was this just Pembroke students? DT: [27:00] Mm-hmm. Just Pembroke. And they could give you stiff penalties. And you could be grounded. KW: Talk a little bit about – at lunch we talked to someone about the card system. DT: Oh, right. OK. Sign out card. OK. As you walked in any one of the dormitories – freshman dorm, upper class, Miller, Metcalf, Andrews, and then later when they built Champlin and Morris – right near the door but not directly by the door – it was around the corner, always some sort of privacy to it so that your callers couldn’t see this – would be a lineup of plastic cards, and they fit in a little slot, like time cards, if you can imagine in a factory, there’s a time machine? So, they were red, white, and blue. On one side of the card was blue, that meant you were in the dormitory. The other side, if you flipped it over, it was white, you were out, but you had to be in by curfew. If [28:00] If you had taken out from the center and filled in the white side with a red piece of cardboard, that meant you were out overnight. But, to be out overnight, the house mother then could pick up the rest of the card, which was about 8 inches long, and there was a 14 form in there that you’d filled out, telling the name and people who were your hosts for the night, the address, the telephone number, so that, presumably, the house mom could either call or appear on the doorstep of that place you said you were. You better be there. KW: Did that ever happen to you when were (overlapping dialogue; inaudible)? DT: Yeah. Well, one time, I was signed out overnight, and my brother called me at two o’clock in the morning from Arizona. I don’t even remember why he called. But he called. And, came through the switchboard, went to the house mother, and the house mother came up to my room to get me for the phone call and I wasn’t there, which brought her down to the sign out board. Fortunately, I was on red, and I was signed [29:00] out, staying with some friends in the square. What it was, was we were having – a group of us were having a wonderful big party. But we put down the name and address of a legitimate person and the telephone number that was there. And so she could call and I was where I was supposed to be. So we were all in the up and up. What used to happen, though, was that we’d be signed out, curfew was 12:30, Monday through Friday – Sunday through Friday. Saturday night we could stay out till 1:30. So, if, 1:15, you were some place and having one heck of a good time, you don’t want to go back to the dormitory. You have to call up and get somebody in the dormitory to race down to the sign out board before the house mother got there, and sign you out for the night and put you on red. And then you’d be legitimate. And you just could trust people to do it. You’d make the phone call and pray to God they got there. Because the house mother would be at the door at 12:30 – or Saturday night, 1:30 – [30:00] seeing us come in, making sure we did not linger with our date. And then, looking at the sign out board. KW: Now is this whole system in each of the individual houses, or is it all setup in Andrews? DT: No, every individual house – now if you walk into – are you familiar with Metcalf? KW: Mm-hmm. 15 DT: I lived there freshman year. So, you walk in the front door of Metcalf, there’s living room on your right, living room on your left. Then you take a few more steps – and this is the way it used to be, maybe it changed a little bit – the wall of the living room is here, and then there was a hallway here, and there were phone booths right here, and then you could go in this little hallway and up the stairs to get upstairs. Right in there, backing up against the living room wall was the sign out board. So it wasn’t something that your dates or anyone in the public would view, to see. I mean, you wouldn’t want to be on red and have somebody be able to pick up your card and say, “Oh (inaudible) she’d stay all night.” [31:00] You know, who are these people. And, of course, this was true if you were home for a weekend – you had to put your self on red on Friday, and make sure you had yourself signed out for home, and when you’d be arriving at the home, so that they’d know how to reach you. They’d know where you were all the time. And people just never forgot to sign out. But that freshman week orientation was where we had that drilled into our heads that we must always have someone know where we are at all times. In other words, be very conservative and be very careful. And, learning the rules and regulations, we met with our counselor, or our advisor, that week. I had a fellow from the Italian department because I’d showed in an interest in foreign language. And, this guy didn’t know anything about courses at Brown or – he knew the Italian courses, that was it. KW: Some things don’t change. (laughter) DT: Really? (laughter) So, I had him. We met with him. We were supposed to do a library orientation because we – [32:00] graduation requirement was that you had to go through library orientation your freshman week. Track 2 KW: [00:00] This is side two of tape one. And we were talking about freshman orientation and the library. DT: Right, the first week at freshman orientation. And, library orientation was supposed to be completed. Many of us did not complete it and we still graduated. We also had to take a 16 swimming test and if we could not tread water, you had to take swimming as a gym class that year. So we all practiced in the bath tub and then went over to the Colgate or Hoyle? Hoyle? pool, which is now where the dance studio is, Ashamu Dance Studio, over on Lincoln Field? KW: Oh, right. DT: The dance studio? They built a floor over the pool. That’s where we had to go, tiny little pool. We all had to tread water. My freshman roommate did not succeed in treading, so they threw her into a class. [01:00] I got through it all right. You had to float, you had to dive, you had to do backstroke, crawl, everything. So then – what else did we do? We took an English test to see if we had to take freshman comp. And they gave us five subjects about which we could write. I remember the one I chose was, “Is it a dog-eat-dog world?” KW: What was your answer? DT: I said no. Because of course I was from Vermont, and I thought life was Pollyanna and fun and pleasant and wonderful. Anyway, I got out of freshman comp. (laughter) That was all right. I passed that one. Then we took language placement tests. KW: For foreign languages? DT: Foreign languages. So I was doing that for French, to get my French placement, because I thought I wanted to do something further with languages. I can’t think – oh, yes, we had a mixer, a reception on the Brown campus. Oh, that was special. We had to get all [02:00] tuned up to go over to Brown. Scared to death of these Brown men, not having any idea they were frightened 17-year-olds, too. KW: Now were these freshman Brown men, as well? DT: Freshman Brown men. And they were all out on the green, looking very debonair and suave in their beanies. We had to wear our beanies – 17 KW: With sweaty hands. DT: Sweaty hands, right. Exactly. Their punch in their hand and trying to look droll. And we came over, silly, like a bunch of geese. And we had our beanies on. We had little white beanies with the ’62 and Brown. And got through the reception – horrifying experience. Then we had – I think that Saturday night at the end of the week, and we had a dance in Alumnae Hall, where the organ is. We used to have chapel in there, and where the chairs are all set up. You have lectures in there now. KW: Oh, was that the Sayles Hall? Sayles or Alumnae? DT: Everything was done at Brown, but we did everything [03:00] at Pembroke at Alumnae. So we have our dances at Alumnae Hall. The men would have theirs on their campus, not ours. So we invited the Brown freshmen, the men, to come down. There was a three-to-one ratio of Brown men, so if you didn’t have a date Saturday night, you knew someone was out with your three guys. (laughter) It’s quite a lot of pressure. KW: To date? DT: To date, and if you had a date on Saturday night... And perhaps that could be sad, in many respects, because there was a lot of bridge playing among the girls. And the people, I guess, who didn’t date in high school just took it as a matter of course to stay in in their pajamas and play cards on Saturday night, and a lot of them wanted to study Saturday night. But those of us who went to coed schools and were used to dating Saturday nights were astounded not to find a date (inaudible). But then we had a few more mixers and got to know some of the guys [04:00] in class, and that resolved itself. KW: Were all the classes coed? 18 DT: Yes, except for gym class. Gym classes were held in Sayles Gym, on the Pembroke campus. And, of course, the bowling was in the basement of Sayles Gym. KW: I’ve seen that bowling alley from... DT: And our – we used to have to set our own pins; it was wonderful. And then at the Field House – we went to the second floor of the Field House to learn the history of different sports, and then we’d go out into the field and learn our field hockey and volleyball and all of those. There was quite an emphasis on athletics. KW: And were there team sports where you would play with other schools? DT: Sure. Oh, I had my letter P, I want you to know. KW: A letter sweater with a P on it? DT: A letter sweater, yeah, and it’s a letter P for Pembroke. And I got it because I played varsity bowling and varsity volleyball and varsity tennis. And we [05:00] traveled to Smith and to Mount Holyoke and to Radcliffe and Wellesley, all around the Eastern schools – [we had little seven sisters?] – and we were good, and – KW: In all three? DT: Wonderful, mostly the three I was on. Now, there were other people doing softball, and there was baseball, and there was certainly field hockey. So in addition to taking these different sports, you did – could get on our own teams. And a wonderful athletic department. In fact, some of the current people – Arlene Gorton was here then; Jan Lutz was here then. She used to live in Vermont, Middlebury, Vermont, and used to give me a ride home Thanksgiving or for weekends. Interesting enough – I don’t know if you’ve heard of posture pictures. That was another requirement that everyone had to have, at Pembroke, was a posture picture. This meant that in 19 the basement of Sayles Gym, you took off all your clothes except underpants, and had to stand [06:00] forward and sideways and have your picture taken by the gym instructors. KW: Was this for spinal correcting? DT: I don’t know what it was for, but it was not for Playboy. It was dreadful. It came out almost in a silhouette, and it would show if you stooped your shoulders, if you weren’t standing up straight, if you were fat, if you were thin. Terrible. And I remember Jan Lutz taking those pictures. We could’ve died. That was another event of freshman week, was we had a major physical examination. And the infirmary was then – you know where the Sarah Doyle Center is now, on Meeting Street? That was the infirmary at one point. KW: Was there also a health services where the one is now? DT: For men, in Andrews House. Yes, that was there, but women weren’t allowed there. We went to Meeting Street. And, of course, that house has three or four floors. [07:00] And I remembered we – you had to get into some kind of a cape, and you had to march the whole house up and down, because there were different things they were going to test you. (inaudible) on the fourth floor, they’d look at your ears on the third floor, they’d weigh you on the second floor, and then upperclassmen were assisting with this. So here was a whole bunch of 200 naked 17 and 18-year-olds having this examination, which was not too popular by anybody’s standards. KW: Especially, like, that first week when you’re nervous. DT: And you didn’t know anyone, and here was your first introduction. KW: How’d you get along with your freshmen roommate? DT: Fantastic. She was an Irish girl from Danbury, Connecticut, Fran Gildea, and a hot ticket. And she could eat up a storm. I never saw anybody eat as much and stay so thin. Turned out after graduation – she didn’t graduate, incidentally, but years later we found out that she [08:00] had a 20 thyroid problem that she did not know of, and that’s why she would lose weight by eating like a horse. But she and I got along fantastically, and we had a great time freshman year. And it was a matter of, you know, sneaking of peanut butter and crackers into the room, and – KW: You couldn’t have food in the rooms? DT: You could have food in the room, but you’d sneak it because the rest of the dormitory would eat you out, you know, each man for himself. You know, if you want to share, you could, but if someone’s got a box of brownies from home, there’s no sense telling 25 other hungry people. KW: Did you have that intercom system in those houses, too? DT: No. KW: That was just in Andrews? DT: That was in... I never lived in Andrews, but we had it in Metcalf and we had it in Champlin and we had it in Morriss. And, of course, the men could not come above the first floor. They really couldn’t [09:00] come past the living room. So they would have to check in, and then, in the freshmen dormitory, whoever was doing bells – we’d call it bells, the person that was answering the phone or answering the door – was allowed to go to bell dinner, and bell dinner would be at 5:30, so that that person could get back by 6:15 in order to answer the door or the phone while the rest of the house was out having dinner. They would take messages for you, or hang on to your date, and tell them where you were. KW: And that would be another student. DT: Mm-hmm. KW: Was that a job or a volunteer? 21 DT: I think that was volunteer. I don’t think that was paid. KW: In general, what was the relationship like between the men and women? Was there any hostility for any reason about (inaudible)? DT: No. It was kind of stilted, in some respects. It was entirely in the day where a man would ask a woman for a date, [10:00] so you couldn’t – you know, to try and make it relevant to today, it was difficult in that a girl could not ask a guy, unless it was strictly a Pembroke dance. Then you could ask – at the Pembroke winter formal you could ask a guy to come down. KW: That was like a Sadie Hawkins thing? DT: Kind of thing, yes. It was a formal Christmas dance, but it was held at Pembroke and sponsored by Pembroke, so we were the hostesses, and could ask men. Otherwise, it was always men asking women. We could ask men to come to dress dinner, which, of course, they’d die to come to dress dinner, because they swore the food at the Ratty wasn’t any good, and they loved to come up and get dressed up and eat by candlelight with us, and probably laughing their heads off at the demitasse. And we could ask men up for Open House. Once in a while on a Sunday afternoon you could have an Open House where our room – they could see our rooms, but the door would have to remain open. And I think as someone said it, “Both feet on the floor at all times.” And the house mother [11:00] would go and check. If, during the week, your father or your brother came to visit, you’d have to stand at the end of the hallway and scream “Man on the floor!”, and that would send everybody off scurrying to their rooms, so nobody would come out in the hallway in a towel or anything. And then you’d tell them, and they would come out. KW: Did people get pretty comfortable, as far as that goes, like, just being in an all-women’s dorm, walking around without clothes on DT: Oh, it was wonderful. I mean, nobody ran around in the nude, but because we all had bathrooms… well, in Metcalf there was just a couple of bathrooms per floor, but you would wear a robe and you wouldn’t be so... Because there could be a custodian out there, or somebody 22 could come up with a brother or something and not tell us that they were on the floor, or maybe we didn’t hear them if we were in the shower or something. So you had decorum of wearing a robe or nightgown, at least across the hallway. KW: Did you have telephones in your room, or did you have – DT: [12:00] No. No, the only... in freshman dormitory there was one phone. There was a phone booth on the first floor, and it was up near the front door, and you could use that. You had to take turns with that one. In Metcalf, there was a phone booth on the first floor there, too. And I think there was one phone on each floor there, but certainly nothing in the rooms. If you got a phone call, it’d come through the intercom that you had a phone call on the second floor phone. And you could pick it up. If that was tied up, you might pick it up on the third floor phone. When we got over to Champlin and Morriss, almost identical dormitories, the main switchboard – Mr. Dean was the man who manned the switchboard at all times, and he’d tell us through the intercom, and we had a phone I think on every corridor. There were more phones there than they had at Metcalf. KW: [13:00] Let’s talk a little bit about the, like, the celebrations and stuff. You mentioned that dance, and I was looking through a yearbook and I saw I think a father-daughter weekend or something. Do you remember that? DT: Father-daughter weekend, yes! I was on the committee for father-daughter weekend. In fact, I was in charge of the nametags of father-daughter weekend. What were [these?] (inaudible)... The yearbook was white and red, and there was a – yeah, I can thumb through here. KW: It’s 1960. DT: Probably not, because father-daughter weekend was for sophomores, and so it would’ve been probably in the ’59. Well, this is one. Sophomores and seniors. Freshmen and juniors had mother-daughter weekend. 23 KW: Wait, say that again. Freshmen...? DT: Freshmen and juniors had mother-daughter weekend; sophomores and seniors had fatherdaughter weekend. And so [14:00] I had started on the Pembroke Record, which was the newspaper, my freshman year, and one of the juniors was setting up the committee for those present graduates who would be sophomores the next year, those juniors would be seniors, and we would serve as committee chairmen for father-daughter weekend. So here’s a picture in Andrews. There I am there with my knitting in my lap. KW: Where? DT: Right there. KW: Oh, yeah. DT: With my knitting in my lap, so... Katie Guthrie, who was also on the Record, who got me on the committee – she was a junior – and I thought I was big time. I was one of a very few freshmen who got chosen for this big event. KW: And what did the event entail? DT: Well, it’s a full weekend, from Friday night until Sunday night, of activities with your father. And the ironic part was my father passed away freshman year, so I would not have a father for the sophomore [15:00] father-daughter weekend. My brother came to that, and so it didn’t make any difference as far as having a date. We started off with a cocktail hour and a dinner on the Friday night. Then Saturday was a football game, and then back to some sort of a reception Saturday night, and then a big banquet in the Andrews dining hall, and then a dance with fathers and daughters, and then on Sunday a big brunch Sunday morning, and then the fathers went home. Our motif was a Western motif. I don’t know whether it was “Button and Bows” or something to that effect. That was a movie with the song in those days, a Western. 24 KW: “Buttons and Bows”? DT: “Buttons and Bows,” with a paleface Bob Hope. The nametags were like chairs. Stars. KW: Stars. DT: Yeah, and what I did was I had these cans of gold spray paint, and I was down [16:00] in the basement of Metcalf Hall, spraying all my stars. And what I’d done was make the mistake of cutting them out first. They were flying around the room. And then I had to get them, so they were all... (break in audio) I don’t know how I got into this, but I was making so many gold badges, and then I had them lettered with people’s names on them. KW: For, like, (inaudible) – DT: For all the fathers – KW: -- half the class – DT: Or half the Pembroke College. Right. So it was 400 students, and 400 fathers. Of course, not everybody went, but most everybody went. KW: A lot of stars. DT: It was an awful lot of stars. There were many nights I was down there with my gold spray paint. (laughter) But they looked terrific. KW: Were you on the committee later on for that? DT: In...? KW: For mother-daughter? 25 DT: For mother-daughter, no, I didn’t, because, sadly enough, my mother was then dying, and she passed away my junior year. And so I wasn’t on any committee for that. Those stars did me in. I think they burned me out. [17:00] KW: Enough. DT: Enough. I was concentrating more of my efforts into the Record. The Pembroke Record. KW: Yeah, talk about the Record. DT: Oh, I loved it. It was wonderful. KW: How often did it come out? DT: It came out... Gee, that’s a good question. I think it was twice a week. I think it was something like Tuesdays and Fridays. I can’t swear to it, a very active organization. Freshman year, you could be a writer. You wouldn’t hold any specific position. I was both on the news desk and the features desk, freshman year. Then sophomore year you could be a copywriter, and that’s where you learned to write the headlines and learned to edit all the articles that would come in. KW: And layout? DT: Junior year you got more of layout. You were then a desk editor. And then you were really laying out the paper. It amazed me what I learned. I learned it mainly from the other girls, the upperclassmen. We would [18:00] pass it on down through the classes. And we’d have to go to downtown Providence to the printers, and on the afternoon before it would be printed, there would be the desk editor, the copy editor, and perhaps one other person. We’d stand on the corner of Cushing Street and Brown Street, and the old printer, who was about four feet tall, grubby, dirty ink all over his fingers, in an old, beaten up car, would come and pick us up, take 26 us someplace downtown – I don’t know where it was, someplace, I think, probably on Weybosset Street – and we’d go up to the second floor print shop, and there we learned – we’d see all the typesetters and see how they were doing the old-fashioned typesetting. And we’d have to, as the paper was being turned out, start right at 4:00. That’s why there were three of us there, because we’d have to be editing as we went along, what didn’t fit the page, and we were always writing up some story about something that was going on, whether it was true or not. We had to get out the paper. But we learned not to bleed pictures [19:00] into the margins, to get our headlines to make sense and to be eye-catching. Wonderful education with the newspaper in itself. KW: And with that, did you do a lot of stories about the Brown side of campus, too, or was it all Pembroke centered? DT: Pembroke. You know, because the BDH comes out every day, and not we’d ever go over and look at a copy. So we didn’t know really what was going on there. We were more concerned about who was going to be the Queen of the May at May Day at Pembroke, who our guest speaker at chapel was that week. We didn’t know who was speaking at the chapel at Brown. KW: So they were separate? DT: Oh, separate chapels, yes. KW: Where was the Pembroke chapel? DT: The Alumnae Hall. See, Alumnae Hall was our main port where Sayles Hall was for the men. And every Tuesday we had chapel, and seniors would be down in the basement there by the gate, you know, the bottom of that winding staircase, and they’d [20:00] wear their caps and gowns. KW: Every Tuesday? 27 DT: Every Tuesday. That was the joy of senior year. Oh, man, you’d made it. Every – I was so happy senior year that I could be there in my cap and gown and parade in, in front of all the other underclassmen. KW: Was this is in the morning? DT: No, noontime, about noon. And I remember we had Helen Hayes for a speaker, I think probably my freshman year. And so they did have women who had done interesting things come and speak to us about there is a life after Pembroke. KW: And it mentioned on this sheet something about chapel talks, including those on the role of the really educated woman (inaudible). Do you remember anything about that? DT: I don’t remember that much about... In fact, I can’t even remember any other chapel speaker except Helen Hayes. I mean sometimes we’d have one of the deans talk to us about the future, and about continuing your education, [21:00] the joys of being an educated woman in this time, but... And sometimes there’d be a play or a skit, or some kind of... activity, but I don’t really remember any other speakers, and I don’t remember anything about women’s liberation at that point. Unless maybe we all had blinders on because there was no liberation then. KW: That would probably be the later – DT: Probably later ’60s, sure, because this was early ’60s. I was there ’58 to ’61, but then I left for one year, and when I came back I was then engaged to be married, and then I got married before I graduated. KW: Did you meet your husband here? DT: I met him – no, he went to PC. I met him, actually, at a party the year I was not [22:00] at Pembroke. I’d spent most of that year in Vermont trying to straighten the family situation. I had come back in the springtime and met him then, because I was going to Harvard summer school 28 that summer, just to take a couple of classes in philosophy and see if I liked it, and then majored in that in the fall. But I met him at a party. I had gone with a fellow from Bryant for three years. And Bryant was then over here on the East Side, in the buildings Brown now occupies on Charlesfield, and on Benevolent Street. That was all Bryant campus then. So I had gone with him, and then I went to a party and I met my husband at the party, and then we just started dating from then on. So I was engaged to be married when I came back in the fall of ’62, which is interesting because I was planning to be married in August of ’63, but I would not finish school until January [23:00] ’64. So I couldn’t without permission of the deans get married. So I went in, in the springtime of ’63, to gain the deans’ permission, and I went in to see Dean Tonks, who had always been my savior, my helper, my guiding light. Wonderful, wonderful woman. She was a freshman and sophomore dean. KW: The whole time that you were there? DT: Mm-hmm, and when you were a junior or senior you were supposed to go on to the next dean, at first Nancy Duke Lewis, and then Professor Kenney, who came in and ran a military camp here while (laughter) Nancy Duke Lewis was dying, actually, of cancer then. Then Rosemary Pierrel came in as the dean. But I always went back to Dean Tonks, because she always was understanding, and she was on the ball. I really liked her. And I remember I told her that I wanted to get married, wanted her permission to get married, and she just leaned back in her chair and laughed. She said, “That’s what you need, a husband,” (laughter) which I thought was great. [24:00] KW: So did you get married then and had a semester, while you were still going to school? DT: Mm-hmm. KW: Did you live off campus? DT: Yes. We had an apartment in Wayland Square, and, in fact, I made the dean’s list that semester. My husband wouldn’t take me out on Saturday night until I’d done all my schoolwork. 29 It was cute, because the poor guy was so happy, because the whole previous year, ’62 to ’63, he had to come to the dormitory and call for me, and sit with all the young fellows there, and he was older, and he didn’t always want to be sitting next to the 18- and 19-year-olds waiting for their dates, but he did it, he had to. They wouldn’t let me out the door otherwise. But it was nice. And so he used to quiz me on all my work. And, in fact, I was very proud of that last semester. I made the dean’s list. And we had to take, in those days, comprehensive examination [25:00] in order to graduate, which meant two intensive days of examinations in your major field of study, which covered every course you took in your major from whenever you started taking courses in it which would be freshman year. And I got highest honors in my philosophy comprehensives. And I swear it was from his questioning and quizzing and going over notes we did. KW: That was great. DT: Yeah, it was wonderful. It was a great major too. I enjoyed it. Wonderful department. KW: Were there any woman professors? DT: Let me see... You know, I don’t remember any?. Of course, in physical education, Bessie Rudd was the head of the gym department. KW: She had a boat named after her? DT: Do you? KW: Yeah. DT: Really. KW: Bessie did. DT: Oh, she was wonderful. She was a wonderful, white-haired woman with glasses, and she loved bowling, and she thought I was about the best thing that ever came down the pipe for 30 bowling. So she’d see me, she’d be [26:00] sitting up in her office in Pembroke Hall – the basement is where we had our mailboxes, which we called Lower P. So when you came back from class at Brown, you’d go in from Meeting Street into Lower P, get your mail, and then you’d go out the door. You’d be facing Sayles Gym. And Bessie Rudd would be up in her office with the window looking out, and she’d spot me, and she’d rap on the glass and signal to me, and I’d come over, and she’d say, “Come on, let’s bowl a couple of strings.” So she and I’d go running down into the basement, set pins up for each other. KW: This is duckpin, right? DT: Yes, duckpin, yes. Oh, at Radcliffe they had candlepins, and they’d nearly killed us up there, because we didn’t know how to deal with candlepins. We never saw big balls – KW: Those are those long, skinny ones. DT: Mm-hmm, yep, just like candles. And we never saw balls that you put your fingers in. We just knew the duckpin. And we were good. We had a great team. KW: Who was your fiercest competitor with that? DT: You mean a school or a person? KW: Yes, [27:00] school. DT: A school? I guess, Mount Holyoke. Radcliffe you can’t count, because they had the candlepins, and we thought that was disgusting. I guess Mount Holyoke. We felt very strongly about going to them, and I think we beat them. I don’t know. I know we wanted to desperately. But we used to be riding the bus all around the East Coast with Miss Rudd. She was terrific. Really good memories of her. KW: What about Arlene Gorton? 31 DT: She was very nice. KW: She was one of the teachers, right? DT: Mm-hmm, one of the teachers. Always down to earth, and always interested in us as people. Same with Jan Lutz. And I still see Arlene quite often at different functions at the University. We both served on the steering committee of the Women Administrators of Brown a couple years ago. She’s a super lady, and does so much for athletics. And, of course, she’s been on the scene, as has Jan, to see how women athletics [28:00] have evolved. I mean, I’m sure they must have a good chuckle about the old posture pictures, too. (laughter) Sorry, it’s funny how that that came up. I haven’t thought about those in years. KW: What did they – did they [file?] – DT: I hope they burned them. I don’t know what they did with them. I don’t know. I really don’t know whatever happened to those. KW: Blackmail. DT: Yeah, I know, you just thought – you just didn’t want anything like that around. And I remember – and then you had to go over the pictures with Ms. Gorton or Ms. Lutz, or Ms. Rudd. It was always a miss basis. And they’d show us our faults in black and white. “You see that slope in your shoulder? You see you don’t have a tummy tuck there?” And wag your head, and then you knew why you looked so terrible in your uniform. Because the summer before freshman year, you had to send in your measurements for your uniform, and then upon, I guess – [29:00] before you got here – I guess they must have mailed them to us – they sent us a brown one and a white one, and they were like little dresses, a minidress today. KW: Were your colors the same, Pembroke’s the brown and red? 32 DT: Brown and white, yes. Everything was brown and white. Beanies for gym outfits. We had white blazers. I still have my blazer, as a matter of fact, with a crest on it, on the pocket, from 1962. And sometimes we’d wear that to chapel, too, before we were seniors. Of course, you’d wear a cap and gown your senior year. But... Oh, I know another event of chapel would be just before May Day we’d have the Queen, May Queen, and we’d have to dance around the maypole, and we’d have the queen and her court come down the aisle, and walk onto the stage, and we could see who was representing the school for now. But I can’t remember [30:00] any women... I know Rosemary Pierrel was in the psychology department, and therefore probably was a professor of psychology at the time. I never had her. I had men in psychology. I don’t remember ever having a woman professor. KW: Were there any classes that were restricted to you? That only…? DT: No. Some things you had to try out for, like creative writing classes. I tried out for that and got into it. KW: You had to submit – DT: A writing sample. We had to go, and you were given a topic, much like that same freshman week where they gave you a topic, and just write about it. I had wonderful training in high school for that. Senior year, our high school English teacher was going blind, and he had memorized all of Shakespeare, so we did that from his memory and our books for that. And then, as far as writing, [31:00] he would just... We’d expect Shakespeare to be coming up the next day, and he’d say, “Today we’re going to write. Your first sentence is: ’I am a crocus in the springtime and I have just poked my head up through the snow. Go’” So we’d always do things like that. It was good training. KW: Kind of spur of the moment. DT: Extemporaneous. 33 KW: Were there any activities or organizations that were coed? DT: Mm-hmm. The debate club was coed. I remember I went over and decided to join them, and joined up with them for a while, and they were too rigid. KW: Was that when it was seri… like, now what they’ve got is a humorous. debate. DT: Oh, really? No, this was – I think... Track 3 KW: So was she – she was a model, not a writer? DT: No, because she was a writer, also, but I just mention that in that she was such a wonderful looking person that I felt very excited to come out looking decent in the picture, (laughter) and I felt very excited about being even in the picture, because that had to be taken on the Brown campus, too. KW: So did you get this because of your work on the Record? DT: Yes. It was (inaudible). I was also features editor my junior year, and I spent an awful lot of time at the Record working on it (inaudible). I would say every issue of the Record – and I think it probably was Tuesdays and Fridays it came out – I probably had two or three articles in it. Very active in it. KW: What happened to it? DT: The Record? – I don’t know when that stopped publication. I would assume it [01:00] stopped when they merged. Brown and Pembroke merged in ’71, so I would assume that’s probably when the people that were then working for the Record went to work for BDH. 34 KW: Was there talk about merging when you were in school? DT: No. No, we thought it would be – KW: It wasn’t even an issue at that point? DT: No, we thought it would be forever, Pembroke. In fact, my mother’s degree is from the Women’s College in Brown University. Her degree is from Brown, first of all, but Pembroke was then the Women’s College. And so we were relieved that we were called Pembroke instead of the Women’s College in Brown University, because it sounds kind of second-class citizen to be the college “in” and totally separate. KW: Were you involved in any way in discussions about the merger once it started happening (inaudible)? DT: No, what I had done was when I got out in January of ’64 [02:00] I had no plans for a career or working. I was then married, and I thought it might be a nice idea if I did get a job, but then what is one prepared for? And then we think back to joining the AAUW. (laughter) KW: Did you? DT: No, I didn’t, never have. But I thought that I should get a job. And a friend of a friend had a friend who was the receptionist in the Admission Office at Brown – not the Pembroke Admission Office, but Brown Admission Office in University Hall. So I went and applied for the job and I got it. So I finished my final exams on Friday in January, and on Monday I reported for work. And didn’t have any idea how you held a whole button, but I knew this campus inside out, and that was what was important, because I was not only answering telephones, but greeting visitors, and I could direct anyone anywhere and tell anybody anything about any of the courses [03:00] as an undergraduate. So that was an exciting job, wonderful job. And I did that for a couple of years. And then an opportunity came up to run the counseling system for freshmen and sophomores, and it was the Board of Counselors. The position’s called Secretary for the Board of 35 Counselors, the Board of Counselors being the faculty who served as counselors. And because I had not had too great a counselor my freshman year – KW: Now, this is the same thing as academic advisor – DT: Yes, today, right. I thought it would be great. Also, I wanted to be a little – a poor man’s Dean Tonks is what I wanted to be. And I thought if I could do for undergraduates some of the things she did for me, cut red tape, I’d feel good about it, and so would a lot of students. So I had a great old time, and I was then, what, maybe five years older than the people I was counseling, but I knew the rules and regulations, [04:00] I knew a lot of the professors, and I got them to volunteer to join the counseling team. Before they had been told to report to it; they didn’t like that. I asked them to do it; they loved it. And we got the largest number of counselors ever, and had a wonderful time doing it. And I was working with the deans in University Hall, strengthening my ties to admission, and it was fun seeing kids admitted the year before come in and be freshmen and sophomores. Had a lot of close friends of Brown undergraduates, many of whom still write to me today. I still get Christmas cards from some of the kids who were freshmen and sophomores then. [Cathy Tacky?], the circle pin I have on – when I left Brown in ’65, the fellows from Sigma Phi who I had helped counsel got together with Tildon Thurbers and bought me a solid gold pin. [05:00] Love it. I wear that with pride today, just as I wear my class ring. This is the Brown onyx ring from Pembroke. One side’s the Van Winkle Gates, and the other side is University Hall. KW: I was going to ask you about the fraternities. Were there...? DT: They were active. KW: And sororities, were there any? DT: No. Oh, no. No sororities at all. In fact, that was one of the charms of Pembroke-- was that there was no distinction monetarily. I had gone in high school, visited Smith and Wellesley, and looked at that those schools that my brother thought were so prestigious and superior, and I 36 found a lot of snobbery and a lot of class distinction among those who had money and who didn’t, and I didn’t find any of that at Pembroke. It was if somebody was here on full scholarship, it was the same as if someone was here fully paid, [06:00] and it was refreshing. So there was no sorority. The only distinguishing characteristics among any of us were where we exceled in academics or in sports, who could write, or who could work on a play, or who could sew costumes, and what our talents were individually. Fraternities were going strong, and, of course, the name of the game was to get invited to the fraternity parties on Saturday night. And there were certain fraternities that were wild ones, and there were certain fraternities that were milder, and we could go after the football game on Saturday afternoon. Our date might take us over to the fraternity party, and there’d be drinks, and we would go out for dinner. Our favorite spot to go to dinner was the place called the Spaghetti Place, downtown. And no one had a car, so we’d walk all the way down the hill, and our date would buy us tons of spaghetti, and some kind of a spumoni dessert, [07:00] parfait of some sort that had grenadine in it, and that was exciting. We’d choke that all down and then we’d walk all the way back up the hill. (laughter) And we’re dealing with spiked heels in these days. I don’t know how we did some of this. KW: It’s a steep hill too. DT: Yes, even graduation, we marched down and up in spiked heels, for baccalaureate and graduation. KW: Do you have any more memories of the deans? You talked about – DT: Oh, Dean Tonks was the brightest light in Pembroke Hall, I think. Dorothy Horton was the reporter, which was Pembroke’s answer to Brown’s registrar. And we would go to Dorothy Horton, Miss Horton, to register for courses, even though they were on the Brown campus. But she worked in tune with the registrar at Brown. And we’d get our grades from her. She was another lovely lady, and always happy to see you. [08:00] She’d be in her private office, working on something, and you’d come in, and she’d give you a big wave and say, “Come on in, sit down, let’s have a talk,” and just delightful. Lot of nice administration, and I felt very free as an undergraduate to stroll into Dean Tonks’ office, or Miss Rudd’s office, or Miss Horton’s office, 37 and just pull up a chair and sit down and have a chat. They always welcomed me and made me feel good. KW: That’s really different. DT: Is it. KW: Do you think it’s the size? DT: I don’t know whether it’s the individuals. I try with – we hire about 25 to 30 students a year here in the Admission Office who work here do errands, and I’ve been interested in what they’re doing anyway, but I try to keep an open door policy so they always feel free to come in and talk to me. And sometimes something’s on their mind, such as “How do you cook pork chops? (laughter) I’m having someone over for dinner. Where do you buy potato salad? [09:00] Or, if not, how do you make it?” Or, “Is my hair too long? My parents are coming down this weekend. What do you think?” “What should I wear to such-and-such?” “I broke up with so-and-so; what do you make of the situation?” Those kinds of talks, which I’ve enjoyed it. One of the biggest kicks I got was – actually I brought along another funny book to show you, was, you know, the [pig book?] that’s put out every year. OK, the class of ’91 was put together this last summer, and it’s the picture of this year’s freshman class. And the day the book came out, the fellow who put it out, Evan Siegel, class of ’88, who was the editor and publisher, came up with a complimentary copy, because he put me in the dedication. “To Dorothy Testa in the college Admissions Office, for her resourcefulness, dedication, and enthusiasm.” Brought me a bunch of roses, [10:00] and a card. Isn’t that nice? Now, it’s these kinds of things, this and the pin, and I know I’ve contributed a little bit back what I got from here from some of these administrators. So maybe there are pockets of people around the university who are interested in what people are doing, or they just want to sit down and talk. Sometimes in the summer – we have a tour guide, four tour guides who works here in the summer, and after three months of insane heat and many tours, five tours a day, and lots of errands around the Brown office building, and the hot, hot summer here, we got to be very friendly. (laughter) And so then we tend to go out for lunch sometimes in the fall. And, of course, it drops off as they get busy with their studies, and I get 38 busy with work, but we’re always there for each other. There’s a girl who still comes in from Boston to see me who was the tour guide in 1980, and she still sends me [11:00] Christmas cards. And so I think there are people around that take a lot of interest in the students, and maybe it’s just being in the right place at the right time to find them. I don’t know, I think I had unique circumstances with both parents passing away as an undergraduate that made me kind of wellknown to the deans and to the Reporter, just because I wasn’t here, why wasn’t I here, and what was going on. And they were probably watching me to see if I was going to flip. (laughter) I don’t know. KW: Did they provide counseling services to you? DT: No. I guess they were there if I wanted them or needed them, but I didn’t think I needed them, and I never would’ve thought of bringing it up, and they never did. KW: What about Dean Pierrel, [Rosemary?]? DT: Dean Pierrel, Rosemary Pierrel? I didn’t know her very well. I know that she did work in the [12:00] Psychology Department, that at the time Barnaby Keeney was the president of Brown, and she did have a pet monkey called Barnabas named after him. (laughter) She was quite an intellectual woman, or is. She’s just retired, I guess, last year, and I think she’s the professor emeritus now. I don’t know – Nancy Duke Lewis was the dean my freshman and sophomore years. She was responsible for juniors and seniors, so I was seeing Dean Tonks, so therefore I never saw Nancy Duke Lewis except as a figurehead on certain occasions. She was a very gracious, lovely woman. Then she became ill, and before they got Rosemary Pierrel here they took Professor Kenney from the English department, who was the fellow I had mentioned to you, who had been an officer, I think some kind of a general, in the Army. And he became the dean of Pembroke for a year. [13:00] And – KW: Was he the first male dean? DT: (laughter) Yes, I think so, and I think the last. 39 KW: First and last. DT: I believe so. He had quite a military camp going here, and when he wanted us he told us to march. Oh, he was tough. He was tough. The funny thing was that I was in all these outside activities, and I was having a great old time for myself, and he would ask me in on different occasion for consultations about any variety of matters. And then what I was doing then was concentrating more on the outside activities than I was on the academics, and I think I was probably doing that because my mother was ill and I was spending a lot of time going back and forth to Vermont, and consequently wasn’t in class too much. He didn’t like that too well, so he called me and told me to get to class more often. I’d say, “Yes, sir,” turn around and, of course, not do it. [14:00] Funny enough, that Spring I started – I was dating a fellow, and I went to a party and met a guy who asked me out who turned out to be his son. (laughter) And – KW: Was he going to Brown? DT: No, he was older. He had gone to Brown for a number of years, but his father had taken over as Dean of Brown at one point. And while he was dean of Brown, booted his son out, and the son never returned. So there were some hard feelings between father and son. But he was, of course, full of good stories about his father, as father and as dean. I guess the man felt that to be a strict disciplinarian was the answer to get us all in shape, but we didn’t mostly want to be put in shape. After years of gracious living, we weren’t used to that. KW: Were you relieved when Rosemary came in? DT: Well, then she came in when I was out for that year, when I was back up in Vermont, [15:00] from ’61, the Fall of ’61 and ’62. I believe she probably came in ’61. Then, when I came back in ’62, the Fall, until I left, I dealt with Dean Tonks. So I don’t remember her. She used to get up and, you know, introduce speakers. She’d be at the chapel. I don’t think she would know who I was. We never had much to do with each other. And then when I came back I never was in 40 the dean’s office, because by that point I had gotten into the academics pretty heavily and knew that’s much more important than the extracurriculars. KW: Another thing I was going to ask you, from just looking at your yearbook, was that somebody had written something in there when Kennedy died, President Kennedy. I was wondering if you remembered that, and – DT: Oh, distinctly. I know just where I was that day. KW: It seems like everybody who does – DT: Oh, we knew where we were on [16:00] November 22nd, 1963. Because at that point, I had gotten married in August of ’63, and I had one more semester to go. So, as I said, we were living in Wayland Square, my husband and I. So I had two very close friends who were class of ’64, and they were living in Andrews. So what they had done was make their room available to me, so that when I was on campus in between lunch or between classes, I could use their room and take a nap, study, do what I wanted to. And Patty was the girl, one of the girls who had the room. And I was coming up from Lincoln Field. I’d just had a class. The Philosophy Department was in Maxcy Hall. And I had just had a class in Maxcy, came out of there, and I was coming up to the end of Lincoln Field, up the steps by Sayles, to go over to Rhode Island Hall, where I had an ethics class, another philosophy class. [17:00] And Patty was running down the steps at Lincoln Field, and she had just heard the news, and said, “Go home, everybody, listen to your radio.” So I ran to class, and the professor excused us and said that we could go home. And I just ran back to Wayland Square, because it was right on the corner of Waterman Street and Wayland, and ran up to the apartment, and just stayed glued to the television set for probably the next 12 hours. I mean, that’s all the TV stations carried was the news from Texas, of the White House, and LBJ, and Jackie Kennedy. It was amazing, that whole weekend, and that Sunday was – I remember we had the TV on when Lee Harvey Oswald was in the prison and Jack Ruby went in and shot him, and it was televised. We saw it. KW: That was live? 41 DT: Live. Amazing. It really influenced our lives a lot. I mean, we all felt [18:00] stricken. And it wasn’t a matter of today you might think – someone might say, well, I’m a liberal, I’m a conservative, I’m a Republican, I’m a Democrat. It was our Camelot which was gone. The country was involved with that, Jackie and Jack Kennedy. It was a revitalization from the Eisenhower days. It was someone closer to our age who was in the White House. And it was frightening to think that someone could assassinate our president. Just frightening. But I can visualize standing right on those stairs in Lincoln Field now, hearing the news. KW: And you could tell it was, from the entry in the yearbook, that it was a very personal experience for (inaudible). DT: Don’t forget, too, we were very idealistic people. Many of us – I laugh at myself because I was from Vermont, [19:00] and the Vermont upbringing was different than a city upbringing, but we were all pretty much Pollyannas. I don’t think we’d ever thought that you had to go through anything like having bulletproof covers for cars. The following year, in ’64 – I started working in January in the Admission Office, and I believe it was in September of ’64 we had an opening convocation here on campus, and it was a magnificent convocation. We had representatives from colleges all over the country, and every country in the world came to Brown, and LBJ was the keynote speaker. And he came with Social – not Social – Secret Service, riding shotgun, all over his convertible. He was riding on it, all the way up the hill, when – it was in Meehan Auditorium, which had just been built, and there was bulletproof glass [20:00] all around the front of him, and Secret Service looking throughout the crowds. It was frightening. Had this convocation taken place a year before, ’63, with Kennedy, there wouldn’t have been any glass. There would’ve been Secret Service, but never that protection. It was amazing to see the difference. KW: What about – DT: I should be looking at my notes. KW: – Brown’s bicentennial year? 42 DT: Oh, yes, that’s right. I was working in the Admission Office then. And, again, we had all the hoods from all the different universities. That’s what sticks out in my mind. I love the pageantry – KW: The different (inaudible). DT: I love the tradition of Brown. I love commencement weekend, our Campus Dance, of our [21:00] traditional march down the hill. I love looking at the hoods of all the academicians. Pomp and circumstance. It’s just what it all stands for. KW: Was there anything different about Campus Dance [in the budget?] than now? DT: No. The Japanese lanterns were lower then. In fact, I nailed one. KW: Too many people are [walking up?]. DT: I’ve still got it somewhere. I got myself a Japanese – KW: I have a couple in my room, too. (laughter) DT: Do you? KW: Yep. DT: Now I’ve noticed they’re up pretty high; either that or I’m getting shorter, I don’t know. (laughter) But they’re stringing them higher. I haven’t tried to one lately. No, same magic is there. KW: Did they have, like, the swing band and the (inaudible) – 43 DT: A different band. It wasn’t Duke Belaire’s Band. Duke has only been around the last couple years. Prior to that, they had the – I’d forgotten the name of the band, but it was a band that was around for years, and used to play when I was an undergraduate, too. And the same dance floor. The lights in [22:00] University Hall in the windows, you know the not real candles but candle lights there. The tables. Just the same magical night. The lanterns were just a little bit lower. The hours were a little different. I think it used to end at midnight. KW: Now it goes (inaudible). DT: To 1:00. It goes 9:00 to 1:00, and I think it was 9:00 to 12:00 before. And we never went undergraduate years. I went my senior year, but I’d never gone before that. Now I notice – I go, of course, every year now, but I notice there are more freshmen, sophomores, juniors, underclassmen now. KW: People will say, yeah, will sneak in. DT: Yes, right. I heard a good one the other day that someone was talking about how do you get a table at Campus Dance, and I’m fortunate in that one of my Pembroke friends from an earlier Pembroke year arranges for the tables, and she sneaks my name on a list, and I get the same table [23:00] every year, which makes the dance for me. I probably wouldn’t go if I had to stand. I couldn’t stand that long. (laughter) Someone told me what they do is they bring their own table in. You bring a card table and walk in, set it up and sit down. I don’t know how many people can get away with that before someone stops it, but – KW: Well, now I’ll know what to do if we don’t end up getting our table. (laughter) DT: Yeah, if you don’t get your table, bring a card table. KW: Yeah, so do you have any memories of the bicentennial year? I guess – 44 DT: Bicentennial, not really. I remember there was a big fundraising campaign going on. I remember Barnaby Keeney was here, and he was ringing the bells on the top of University Hall when we reached our goal for the 200 years. And it was a year where there were a lot of events. Probably that’s why they had a big convocation in that hall that LBJ came to. It was probably [24:00] the beginnings of that bicentennial year. But as far as I was working for the administration then, just came and went. It wasn’t anything spectacular, like the bicentennial of the United States in 1976. Remember, they had fireworks, and they painted every – KW: Freedom train. DT: – red, white, and blue. I don’t think there was anything spectacularly different. I mean, every year is bicentennial at Brown with commencement. I mean, if you look at some other college graduation ceremonies, they are so quiet and routine that Brown’s is such a celebration. KW: Can’t wait. (laughter) DT: Yeah, oh, you can’t wait. What they do now is when you have a reunion coming up they send you a tape, videotape, called “Reunion,” and it has pictures of the Campus Dance, it has pictures of nostalgia, and it just makes you want to come back. Of course, I don’t have very far to come back to, so [25:00] I’ll always come back. KW: Yeah. I want to be sure that you’re still – DT: Yeah, I’m wondering if we’ve missed anything here. We should mention how amazed we are that in our conversation we’re hitting all these points that are on our list. KW: Yeah, well., that’s true. Well, you didn’t really say how you felt about the merger. DT: Oh, whether it should be Brown as one or whether it should be separate? KW: Uh-huh. 45 DT: I’m so old-fashioned, and I had such a good time here when it was separate, that I lean toward the separateness of it. I think it was wonderful to be able to have your hair in curlers and no makeup on, and look just terrible at breakfast, and not be seen by men. I mean, the only man that could see you was a gardener or custodian. That’s all. By the time you got over to class, you could look halfway decent if you wanted to. You had a little choice about it. Also, it was a place to let your hair down. [26:00] You came out of class and you got back to Pembroke, it was home, and you could pig out, and have your milk and cookies, and be upset that so-and-so didn’t ask you out, whereas I don’t know if you have to kind of keep up a pretense if you’re living in the dormitory with men or not. I don’t know. I can’t quite visualise how it would be to live on the same hallway with men. KW: I couldn’t before I came here, and I definitely – DT: It’s hard to imagine. KW: Yeah, I definitely didn’t like the idea at first, because, being an only child, I didn’t have any brothers, and the thought – you know, that was really different to me. But then it felt like a real sister/brother kind of thing, and I think the comfort level finally... DT: It probably makes it a lot easier to talk with the men. The men were – KW: Yeah, you feel like they’re your friends and they’re your brothers when they live in the dorm with you, and... DT: They’re going through the same things. Like, when we were going to Pembroke, we thought that the men had it all in hand, [27:00] because the only time we’d see them was either in class or when they were dressed up at a dance and looking very... Of course, this gave them a chance to be by themselves, and for them to don their mask, too, much as we could don ours. So I guess you have to live it. It just surprises me that – I don’t know as I’d want to live around a brother. It’s just easy to be back in a dormitory. We used to spend more hours in the dormitory 46 calculating how we were going to get so-and-so to take us somewhere, or where we were going to go. Oh, my junior year I had a wonderful car. I bought a Triumph, a TR3 convertible, baby blue, and if we didn’t terrorize the Brown campus and use that car to find ourselves dates and interesting people to talk to – and I wonder if we would’ve done any of that. Maybe we shouldn’t have anyway. We had a lot of fun doing it. But if we’d lived in a dormitory with men, we could’ve just gone down to the end of the hall [28:00] and said, “How about a date?” But then again, those days you couldn’t ask the men for a date. KW: Why did you – was that really strange to have a car on campus, and – DT: Oh, hardly anyone had a car. And I had a built-in excuse, because I did have to get up to Vermont quite often. But my mode of locomotion didn’t have to be quite as sporty, but I just saw that car one summer and I just fell in love with it, and it was the summer of 1960, and I saw it in a garage, and I went in and asked the man if I could drive it, and he let me. I couldn’t believe it. And I didn’t know how to drive four on the floor. And so I took off – I came with my girlfriend – with the top down, and we thought we’d go over to New Hampshire, take the ride by the lake, which was only about seven miles away. We even stopped for ice cream cones. I don’t know how I drove the thing with four on the floor and an ice cream cone in my hand. And we came back with the thing, and I bought the car. [29:00] I said to the man, “How much?” He said $2,800, and I wrote him out a check and drove home. And it was wonderful. It was the greatest thing I ever had in my life. I loved that car. Oh, we had more fun. We’d even drive to gym classes. Can you imagine driving to Pembroke Field House with the top down – KW: What is that, two blocks or something? (laughter) DT: – in our gym suits. Right, of course, we all of us on our floor had trouble with our weight, so first we’d jump in the car, and we would drive down Hope Street to the petit four shop, which was just right at the end of where Blackstone Boulevard comes to Hope Street, with a V shape, and the petit four shop was there, just as it is today. And we’d go in, two of us, and get a dozen petit fours, which petit fours were not [made with cream and frosting, but they were cream puffs?]-47 Track 4 KW: OK, this is side two of tape two, and we’re talking about petit fours. DT: (laughter) Right. We’d go barreling down at 60 miles an hour to Hope Street, in our gym outfits, and either white or brown, pick up a dozen petit fours, and eat them all the way back to the field house, lick our chops, and get out and start playing volleyball. Yes. Oh, we weren’t doing what we were supposed to be doing. But I don’t know how that relates to living in dormitories with men. How different that would be... It’s hard to imagine. I guess both systems work. You have to be there, really. It’s like a good joke: you’ve got to be there. KW: One thing I’m really curious about is when the pill, that whole issue, and distributing it on campus, and... [01:00] Now, was that – DT: It wasn’t being distributed while I was there. KW: Did that happen later? DT: It must’ve, because I remember the pill was popular... When I went to California – I left here, and I had a year of running the counseling system here. During that year I went at Christmastime to California to visit my sister-in-law, and my brother in Arizona. Fell in love with California, and we came back. I worked the rest of the school term here, and we moved to California. We lived there for fourteen years. So I worked at the Claremont Colleges there, Claremont Men’s College. And it was more in ’66, ’67, when that pill was predominant around those campuses, but just the same time drugs and antiwar protests were going on. But in the early ’60s, there wasn’t any kind of mention from deans or anyone about sex. The only thing they did do was they made us take a urine test every spring to see if we were pregnant. [02:00] We assumed that was the reason. We don’t know. But maybe they were testing for other things. But there was nothing about any kind of safety in sex. It was assumed that one didn’t practice sex ordinarily. 48 KW: So birth control was not an open subject. DT: Nothing one would talk about. It would be just like talking about sex with your mother. You just didn’t. KW: Because I know – I guess it must’ve been later then that the whole – that distributing the pill became a big issue about whether parents were part of that, and [worried about it?]. DT: I think so. I think it must’ve been late ’60s. And I don’t know what the administration’s stand was, or when they did that. But this was prior to that. There wasn’t any known drug usage on campus, either. There was some drug usage at RISD, but RISD was always looked at as the other school, where the artists went, the bohemians [03:00] were, and you knew there were probably drugs there. Well, there were probably plenty of drugs around the Brown and Pembroke campuses but we weren’t aware of it. It was almost a Shangri-La. We looked like goody twoshoes. As I mentioned to you prior to taping, our biggest scam in life, perhaps, was signing out for an overnight when we were going to a party someplace, and we weren’t legitimately staying at Mr. and Mrs. Married Couple’s house, but we were having a party all night in somebody’s apartment. It was a big event to sneak a six-pack into the dormitory, to get past the house mother. We had a friend who only drank Brandy Alexanders, so she always bought flat-bottomed purses so she could carry the bottles in her purse without them dumping over. (laughter) We would make sure we got a room that had a balcony so we could stick the beer cans out in snow banks at night. KW: [04:00] To keep them cold? DT: Keep them cold, yeah. But we weren’t adverse to drinking them warm if we had to. KW: Did you ever go traying? DT: Traying? 49 KW: Yeah, sledding on trays from the cafeteria. DT: Oh, on trays? Never did that. I know people did do that a little bit. They had a little bit of that. Once in a while there’d be a panty raid, but not too much of that, either. That was more at state schools you hear about that. KW: Of the men doing that to women’s dorms. DT: That’s right. But things were pretty much law and order, and not... Everyone obeyed the rules pretty much. If not obeying them, they just cut corners to what we’d consider today very lightly?. And everyone got along pretty nicely (inaudible). KW: We should talk a little bit about what you’ve done since then, and how you think your education has affected that, and... DT: Yes, OK. Well, graduating with a degree in Philosophy [05:00] (laughter) one is not too prepared, but I started out being a receptionist in the Admission Office, and loved that, because I’m a people person. I love being with people. Then when I went on to doing, running the counseling system, I found out that I could be the poor man’s Dean Tonks, and help students out in their work, thereby satisfy myself, too. So it was a bending toward higher education administration. So when we went to California, I started working there at the Claremont Colleges, and at first worked in the Admission Office, because, small world as it is, the former Dean of Admission from Brown was then the Dean of Admission at Claremont. So I was the receptionist there, but that was a much slower paced office, and that work then... Got to know the head of the Political Science Department, and became his assistant, and ran seminars with him. We published a booklet of the [06:00] California Congressional Recognition Program of the then 38 Congressional California Congressmen, and what they did. I then went to work for someone else in the Political Science Department in addition who was an aide or a consultant to the Governor of California, who was then Ronald Reagan. So I ended up writing Ronald Reagan’s speeches as governor. So he would call to Claremont, say he wanted to speak on a certain subject 50 that night at 6:30, I would go to the library and research the subject, come back to the office, would write the speech, type the speech, run out to the airport in Ontario, California, give it to the pilot of Western Airlines, who would fly to Sacramento, and then I’d go home and I’d hear the speech at 6:30 that night. And that was— KW: Word for word as? DT: Pretty much, pretty much. And it was exciting. It was fun. Reagan did a lot for California, and he was a breath of fresh air for California, [07:00] and really turned the state around. It was fun to be a part of it. A wonderful Political Science Department there. I worked there for five years. One member of the Political Science Department was Martin Diamond, who was on the cover of Time magazine in 1968 as one of the country’s ten best professors, very, very bright. Since died. He was testifying in front of a Senate Committee in Washington, D.C. and keeled over. A man I worked directly, most directly for was Wiston Fisk, who’s a very bright fellow, who did something like the Advisor Program here, combining Political Science and Sociology and Law together to make a major. And he’s a friend of [?] too. Alan Heslop is a fellow that used to work for Reagan, and we used to see the White House plane come in, and we would [08:00] meet some people we knew sometimes when they’d come out. Nixon was then in the White House, so he’d come out to San Clemente, and we had people from Claremont then who worked in Washington. It was a fascinating time, just... And I did that from ’66 until ’71. I left Claremont then in ’71, because I was pregnant with my daughter, Teresa. KW: Now, this is your only child. DT: My one and only daughter. Glad we stopped there, because I’ll never get anybody as nice as that again. She’ll be applying to Brown next year. Let’s hope that she is the third generation at Brown. She’s wonderful. She’s beautiful. She’s my best friend in the world. And she’s just – if you ever want to meet a pleasant teenager, I’ve got one. KW: How do you managed to balance, like, your career here with – 51 DT: Family? KW: – with her, and... DT: That’s a trick, because I’m married to an Italian. That’s tricky. [09:00] Those Italians like stuffed artichokes, stuffed tomatoes, stuffed peppers. They like their wives to be stirring the pasta. They want them home. And that’s why I do a 9:00 to 5:00 or 8:00 to 5:00 job, as opposed to Admission Officer, because I must be home at 5:30 to cook a full-course meal every night. I cannot be out running a career at night. At five o’clock I turn into a pumpkin. I spent my day here running a whole division office. I’m in charge of a million and a half dollar budget. I have 20 employees directly under me. I advise 16 admission officers. We have about half a dozen miscellaneous employees. We have 30 students. I keep the roof on this place. But between five o’clock at night and eight o’clock in the morning, I’m Ray’s wife and Teresa’s mother. I spend a lot of time with her. I spend my Saturdays, if we’re not shopping or [10:00] walking or doing something together... We are always together. You always will find one with the other. We’re over here working. She brings her homework over. She plays with the computers while I get my work done, because I generally do work six days a week. It’s fun. It’s like being in grandmother’s house without grandmother home when you’re here on a weekend. And she’s had pretty full rein of this house since she was seven, and she loves it. But we’re inseparable. We’re a very close family, the three of us. Interestingly enough, tonight is – I mentioned to you at lunch – is the Pembroke College Club diner meeting, which I should attend, because it’s the annual meeting, the end of the year. The guest speaker is our new Dean of Admission and Financial Aid, Eric Goodman, and if I was career-oriented completely I would be there. However, it’s awards night at my daughter’s high school, and I’ll be there to cheer her on. [11:00] So family’s very important to me, which I’m glad it is. It works out well in that I’m not really that trained for anything. I have my philosophy degree, which, interestingly enough, the present Director of Admission has a philosophy degree from Brown, too. It certainly gives you this liberal arts education, gives you the opportunity to learn a lot of different things. I never thought that I could do a lot of the things I find I can do. And it’s amazing how you sit there sometimes, posed with some difficult problem, and then you just say, “I have a Brown degree. I can do it. Of course, I could do it.” And you do it. It’s amazing. 52 KW: What sorts of--you mentioned your 25, your anniversary, which is last year – DT: My reunion, my class, was last year. My wedding anniversary’s this summer. KW: Right. I meant the class reunion. DT: [12:00] Class reunion. KW: Did you – was there any type of experience with people that you met that (inaudible)? DT: It was kind of fun. It was – seeing – some people it was really good to see. I missed a lot of people, some people I’d been very close with. I know freshman year was the most important thing. There were some people there who never went past freshman year who came back for the reunion anyway, and I didn’t even realize they didn’t graduate. Nobody even realized I didn’t walk down the hill in ’62, instead of ’64. All that seemed so important back then, but turned out not to be important at all. It was a lot of reminiscences about freshmen year. It was, of course, combined with men, so it was a little bit different than had we had a Pembroke reunion. Probably the nicest part of the reunion weekend was we went to Agawam Country Club, which is a very nice private country club in East Providence, [13:00] and we had our dinner there. And we were outside. We had a cocktail hour, then we had tents, and the president was there to greet us, because our class had given the most amount of money a class had ever given to Brown. And so he was there to thank us and greet us. So my former roommate and I had gone together. KW: Your freshman year roommate? DT: My junior year, junior and senior year roommate, and I had gone to it together, as we see a lot of each other. We went up to the ladies’ room, and in the ladies’ room were two girls we knew very well from freshman year. And the four of us had a little Pembroke reunion up in the ladies’ room. And it was one of these lounge, very fancy lounge type things. And one of the girls took pictures, and even sent me pictures this summer. It was just super. And we were just 53 laughing and joking and reminiscing about the fun days, the old days. It was a different time, and different concerns, and [14:00] it was a wonderful experience. KW: How do you feel about the changes that are happening, and just does it make you feel sad when you see a lot of differences or (inaudible)? DT: No. I have difficulty realizing that I’m not 21. I really do. I think that I’m still here on the campus. I see my old professors. I see the old buildings. I feel a little bit bad when I see Rogers Hall being renovated. I feel – KW: (inaudible) [years?]. DT: Yeah, right, because I picture all the days in Rogers 15 that I used to sweat out with the lectures and final exams. But I walk into Sayles Hall for a brown bag concert, and I look up at those [carpets?], and think of the agonizing days I used to sit there during final exams, hoping one of those faces would give me inspiration, tell me who was in the Cabinet of the United States (laughter) or something like that. No, not sadness, [15:00] I love seeing it go forward. I love to see the buildings going up, because they’re still so much older. It’s such a traditional school. I don’t think you find that so much on other campuses. KW: I think it definitely seems like it’s traditional, but it’s also got a real excitement and enthusiasm – DT: You have a newness. KW: – about it that I don’t feel, just with me competing with other schools on the crew team and stuff. I definitely see a difference as far as other schools not having the same kind of – like, more bogged down with a traditional side, but not with an enthusiasm side, the sportsmanship kind of side to it. DT: I know what you’re saying. 54 KW: It’s hard to explain, but there’s a definite feeling about Brown that really comes out. DT: Well, I think, too, after you graduate, it goes back to if you got through Brown and you graduated from Brown and you have the Brown experience, [16:00] there’s really not much you can’t do. You can do almost anything that you should be doing. It was fun, I went – when I first came back from California – we stayed in California for 14 years, so then my husband, being a golf pro, wanted to represent a California golf line on the East Coast, so we came back in 1980. So this job obviously wasn’t just sitting here waiting for me, so I had to find a job, get into the Brown community to get on the inside looking for a job, rather than peering in from the outside. So the only thing available was a secretary’s job. Well, I never learned to type nor did Pembroke typing, but, oh, I learned (Pembroke) typing. That was just two fingers, look where you’re going, and I said I could do it, and sat down and did that for three months before this thing opened up. And then, do you know how to run a budget or run a big office? No, but I’ve got a Brown education. And I think so much – we’re not stereotyped, [17:00] coming from Brown. I mean, it’s fun to see some TV stars you see, like David (inaudible), or [Will MacKenzie’s?] the director who graduated from Brown. And you can see that Brown experience coming out in different walks of life. I don’t think anyone’s afraid of anything from Brown. It’s easy once you get out. If you can do Campus Dance, if you can march down that hill and back up again – and I did it again last year after 25 years. Didn’t do it in spiked heels, but I got down there and back up again. KW: Was that part of the class reunion? DT: Yeah, it was part of the reunion. We all marched with the class. My daughter even marched with me. And I had a great time, because there were so many people on the administration here at Brown, and many undergraduates who were watching the Procession didn’t realize that was Pembroke graduates. And there I was, proud as punch, walking down the hill. [18:00] I think Brown has been a mother to many of us. It’s always been there for me, no matter what strife has been in my personal life, or changes. Brown’s always here, open arms, come on back, let’s see what you want to do this time. (laughter) Next time I’ll reincarnate as something else, perhaps. 55 KW: Is there anything else...? We’re starting to run to the end of this tape, so... DT: I think we’ve probably just about hit every kind of question here, either voluntarily or involuntarily. I have based pretty much what I do around my family, because that comes first to me. And I imagine when my daughter goes to college, hopefully Brown, and my husband’s playing golf, that maybe I’ll get more involved career-wise here at Brown, but until then I’ll stay working my [19:00] six days a week, probably, 8:00 to 5:00, keep the roof on the Admission Office, keep talking to more students as they come through. KW: Well, you’ll probably have to do a couple more of these oral interviews, too. DT: That’ll be good, I like that. That’d be fun. KW: Well, thank you. DT: Well, thank you, again. (break in audio) KW: This is the end. (break in audio) KW: We have a P.S. This is back. We realized we didn’t talk about academics a whole lot. Did you ever feel competitive or tension between with men in the classroom and women as far as grades or academics, or...? DT: No, I... The only thing that sticks out in my memory as you asked the question was a nice looking young man who wanted to borrow my lab reports all the time in psychology, and I thought he was so cute, I’d loan them to him, until we both got a D one day. The professor gave 56 us both a D, because he didn’t know which one copied from the other. That was the [20:00] last time I looked at a guy’s face when it came to academics. (laughter) Otherwise, we were all sort of in the same boat together. In speech class – I did take an interesting speech class, but we got quite close because we were speaking with each other and working as teams, and that was more of a closeness, and that was later. It was distinctly a change from the late ’50s to the early ’60s, but I don’t know whether that was because I was a freshman from the late ’50s and a senior in the early ’60s. KW: What kind of change? DT: Just more of an easiness with the men. There wasn’t such a separation of the sexes, in class, or... Mostly it was in the living condition, where we couldn’t walk over to the Brown campus alone. But an easier, more easy situation in the classroom with men. And that might’ve been just maturing from 17 to 21. [21:00] I can’t tell you on that one. I did think that – of course, you and I both like to talk so much, we just can’t resist using up every ounce of this tape. (laughter) Obviously. KW: We should’ve gotten three. DT: Yes, right, until it shuts us off. I’m trying to remember the requirements. I think there were four semesters of science required for any kind of a major. You didn’t have to be a bachelor of science. And I was going into languages. And I was appalled at the idea of these sciences required, and had you taken chemistry in high school, which I did, you had to take physics in college, and Physics D1. D was for distribution courses. And damn, it was terrible. I spent more time on that, hated it, but we had to do it. I remember taking two – and all lab sciences. [22:00] We had to take two semesters of Psychology, which was very interesting, and then two semesters of Physics. KW: And then the rest? 57 DT: We had, of course, English, if you didn’t pass the English comp. That was compulsory. Passed that one all right, but you had to take so many years of English, and I did take that. I remember freshman year taking English Lit, a French. I was placed in French 3, and taking four courses. The Physics, and Philosophy, surprisingly enough. I must’ve had an early intuition that that was going to be an interest, and it panned out for me. KW: So you didn’t come to Brown planning to major in that? DT: No, I was going into languages – KW: Oh, right. DT: – and I was dead set on becoming a language teacher. In fact, I had a job lined up at Mt. Vernon, New York at Mt. Vernon High School, because I had won an oratorical contest nationally, [23:00] in high school, and the principal of the school offered me a job after I studied languages for four years in college. So I was studying it, and what did me in was I did take Spanish, along with the French, and totally confused them. I’d never had any Spanish, so it was Spanish 1, and the French 3, at the time. And found I just couldn’t... The Christmas vacation freshman year, my best friend in high school was then a freshman in languages at Middlebury, and she and I had gone through three years of Latin together, and three years of French together in high school. So we switched homework over the holidays, and I didn’t realize her humor, but she wrote in all the wrong words in my French books, so when I was called on to read in January, when I returned – those were the days we had two weeks off at Christmas; you came back, had class for a week, and then final exams – [24:00] I read a hilarious story to the French class that made no sense at all, but so funny that I had to laugh, myself. But that was the end of my language ambitions. I got out of French as fast as I could. (laughter) KW: And what about the story you told me over lunch about the class that you took with two other people from your dorm? 58 DT: Oh, yes. Professor Cornwell is still in the Political Science Department, and I’m always happy to see him on campus. He was teaching Political Science and American Government when I was a student. And at first I was going to major in Political Science, so I was taking quite a few Political Science courses, because I was going to become a lawyer after I decided not to be a linguist. So I was taking Political Science courses, and by junior year I was getting kind of tired of Political Science. Lots of reading, lots of field trips, things to do, lots of lectures. So I had two good friends, a roommate and the girl in the single next door, so I enlisted them to take the course, also. So the three of us [25:00] signed up for the course. One of us went on Mondays, one of us went on Wednesdays, and one of us went on Fridays, to class, so we didn’t have to go three days a week. KW: Did you pass? DT: I passed, and I made the mistake of telling Professor Cornwell of my wonderful scheme of how I could not be in class two days of the week. He didn’t think it was too funny at the time, but a few years ago related to me how he thought it was hysterical that I would think of such a scheme. It was fun. It was – sometimes trying to beat the system, to see if we could rebel a little bit, but such innocuous things we were doing. For instance, we couldn’t cut class before holidays, so the game would be to get someone to write your name down on the roll call, on the Wednesday morning before Thanksgiving, because you had to stay in class until noontime on Wednesday, but if you had a ride Wednesday morning you didn’t want to go to class. So you’d try to get [26:00] someone on your hall to show up to that class and write down everyone’s names. KW: So attendance was taken by – DT: By hand. The trouble with that, one girl had a very complicated last name, and it was my turn to sit in on the class and write down the names, and I misspelled her name. (laughter) KW: Whoops. 59 DT Whoops! KW: Did you both get in trouble for that one? DT: You know, I don’t recall anything becoming of that one, but maybe it was just an oversight. The house mothers probably didn’t address, you know – when the tape was off, we thought we had it covered completely. They were always there for us as a mini-dean, for a consultation, or a pat on the back, or a good cry, or a cup of tea. So you could either go in and chat with them or duck them, as you wished. KW: Were they usually single, older women? DT: Yes, mm-hmm. Typical house mother type. And, of course, you’d see them during demitasse [27:00] after the dress dinners, and some of them very nice women, very well intentioned. In fact, at the reunion up on the hill last year, I saw the house mother from my sophomore year. And she was delighted to see us, and chat, and it’s amazing, she didn’t remember some of the pranks we used to pull, which we felt so guilty about in those years. And she was just delighted to see us, and those things we thought were so terribly important, any infraction of the rule. KW: Do you remember any—a prank or anything that you did? DT: Oh, we used to always be doing something to sombody’s bed in the dormitory. I had a friend, one girl who lived down the hall, who insisted on having animals. She had a monkey in the closet at one point. And, of course, you weren’t supposed to have any animals in your room. Just generally getting by the house mother with a six-pack of beer, not being someplace you said [28:00] you were going to be. Just trying to beat the system a little bit, and thinking that was wonderful. And I guess they would just say tut, tut, tut. And I think they were keeping a pretty close leash on us. Had we really been getting into any trouble, I think we would’ve been called in. But they did give (inaudible). 60 KW: Is there anything else you’d like to add? Because we’re starting to run out– DT: Is that running out? KW: Yeah. DT: Oh, there must be something else we can talk about without the tape running out. I don’t know whether they’ll ever change the name of Pembroke, and whether they’ll ever separate again. I’ve noticed the change of dress seems to be going back into the old days, and a lot of the students say to me that they like wearing a shirt and a blazer instead of old jeans to class. I notice the dress is a lot today like it was from the ’50s and early ’60s. It’s just that [29:00] you guys get to wear slacks where we couldn’t. KW: And much more casual overall. DT: The caliber of students seems to be much the same. There’s nothing phony about the students that are here. I mean, you look at you and me; neither one of us are loaded down with makeup. I don’t have any on. I don’t know if you have any on. But I think at a lot of schools you see this real falsetto appearance. KW: What about students from west of the Mississippi? Was it mostly East Coast, or did you ever get any women from out west – DT: The West. KW: -- or the Midwest. DT: You know, it’s funny: it wasn’t very important to us where someone was from. I know our freshman class president was from New York state. There wasn’t, I don’t think, anyone else from Vermont except me. This roommate – I still see whose from the Cape. My freshman roommate [30:00] was from Connecticut. Another roommate I had was from Maryland. So it’s all the 61 Northeast corridor we’re talking about. I don’t really remember anyone being out west of the Mississippi. I’m sure there were people, though. The recruiting at Brown, as I saw in the Admission Office in the middle ’60s, got much stronger for the West Coast. And as I indicated to you before, when I went to California in ’66 – you posed a question, did I say I graduated from Brown or Pembroke, even though it’s a Brown degree; Pembroke would’ve brought no recollection into anybody’s mind in middle ’60s, and Brown very little. They would say, “Did you mean Brown Military Academy?” Now, I notice on the West Coast there are people who are Brown graduates, and there’s active Brown folks out there. KW: Limited in the Midwest, but... DT: In Missouri? KW: Yeah. I guess there’s one in St. Louis. DT: [31:00] Probably. KW: And Chicago. DT: But you would have to go a distance to get to some kind of a meeting. Well, I know I was invited to some meetings in LA, and I always lived east of LA, so it would’ve been a jaunt to go in there. I did go to Pembroke College Club meetings in California, though. I would drive all over the LA area to get to those, and they were wonderful. The average age was about 80 years old. Delightful women, oh, from the old days, that would just – KW: From your mother’s...? DT: Mother’s time, and after hers. There’s something to it about the Pembroke College Club here. Any kind of club there, you get an aura of the old finishing school days. You picture dressed dinner, and everyone speaks very nicely. Everyone’s very genteel... 62 KW: And we’re at the end again. DT: A different class. – End – 63..