 Karen Lamoree: This is Karen Lamoree interviewing Charlotte Lowney Tomas, class of 1957, April 2, 1990, in the Harris room of the John Hay Library, take one. Charlotte, why don’t you briefly discuss your education? Just ignore that. Charlotte Lowney Tomas: I had graduated from high school in Fall River, Massachusetts, and worked for several years before returning to Pembroke as a full-time student in 1954. I graduated in 1957 with an AB in American civilization, worked again for several years, returned to Brown in 1962 continuing to work part time toward a masters degree, and in 1965 was awarded the masters degree in American history at Brown. KL: Okay. Now, I notice here from your resume, I know you were secretary to President Risten for a while, then you went here and there, then you went as [01:00] placement counselor to Wellesley, and how did you end up coming back to Brown as the assistant director in the placement office? (multiple conversations; inaudible) Director of career planning at Brown? CLT: Life was slightly less complicated then. I received a telephone call from the then-Dean of Pembroke College, Rosemary Pierrel, now Sorrentino, asking me if I’d like to come down and talk to her about an opening; clearly there was no such thing as a search committee in those days, and my name had been suggested to her by someone who had known me in my earlier time at Brown, and I came down to talk with her because Kit Erwin, who had been the long time director of placement at Pembroke, had gone back to private school teaching. I didn’t want to come back to Brown because it was the womb, so to speak, and it was 20 miles from my family, from whom 1 I had successfully cut my ties as an adult, but the opportunity was outstanding and I thought it would be [02:00] a good jumping off place for something else. I came back with the idea in my own mind, although not in anyone else’s, that I might stay for a year and then move onto something else. KL: Now, why had you gotten tracked into placement? CLT: Because there were so many openings in college administration that would be available to someone without a PhD, and I knew from my past experience and what I enjoyed doing and my very brief, and not very pleasant, experience in the business world, with soap, margarine, and the New York Stock Exchange, that I did not want to be in business. I recognized early that I enjoyed working with students and with the general administrative [picture?] in the college, or university. KL: And you were assistant director for two years and then you became director in ’62 through ’ 66, as you went into the position at Brown, what were the challenges [03:00] that you saw you were going to have to deal with? CLT: Well first, I have to acknowledge that Joan Bishop, who was my boss at Wellesley, was my mentor, and she was one of the highlights in the country in the field. When I came back to Brown – or to Pembroke – the office was a cluttered little square room in Pembroke Hall with no rhyme or reason to it, and in very much in the old world casualness, if I might call it that. Some folders, some boxes with no sensibility, and I remember another dean saying to me at the time, “Charlotte, Rome wasn’t built in a day,” because I was throwing papers in all directions and sorting out. We quickly moved to a second floor of Alumnae Hall, which is now the Pembroke Center, and tore out the horizontal cupboards that had been the mask, I think it was, the Pembroke Dramatic Organization store room. [04:00] Made that smaller room into my office and the large one into the big career planning library, which worked out very well. KL: Now, was the library something that you started when you got there or had it already been in place? 2 CLT: Well, as I say, the library was some folders and some boxes and we made it into a good sized library. I might add that I had – and this might be relevant here – I had a good, longtime relationship with the then-director of career planning at Brown, Hope Brothers, and we worked together but quite separately, interestingly enough, because we had our own series of interviewers and we didn’t check to see if they were coming to Brown; now I think the interviewers may have checked to see that they were going to Brown and Pembroke at the same time, but we didn’t check with each other to see if it would be all right, as I remember. KL: During ’61 through ’66, [05:00] did you see any major changes in the way the young women were moving or thinking about careers? CLT: Not really, as much as after that time. Sixty-six is a real dividing line in my mind, for whatever reasons, and I don’t know without research when the equal opportunity act was passed, because that had a direct effect on who would hire whom, who could apply to what schools. During ’65, ’66, Barbara [Frenchpace?], I think she was class of ’65, was my placement office student assistant. She applied to Princeton for graduate study as a magna cum laude graduate of Brown University and they told her that no women could be accepted. So the times had not yet changed – KL: And you still remember that? CLT: [06:00] – oh, I remember it vividly, and she’s still a close friend. KL: When you were in the career placement office, how did you view the situation of Pembroke in terms of the larger university? CLT: Well, as soon as I became a full-time administrator at Pembroke, I became aware of and continued to be aware of the vast difference in salary ranges between men and women, and I’m sure it was the same all over the country. Partially at Brown, not out of unfairness, I have to say, toward women, but because the male-dominated science departments had large grants from the 3 federal government, which would enable them to pay more. At that point, everyone frown was loading a shoestring, and clearly there were discrepancies between men and women, but it [07:00] was as much based on the realities of what they could pay, but male and female deans, it would be ludicrous – I don’t have the comparison, and maybe it’s just as well that I go to my grave without it, to know how much my peers at Brown were making at the time. And certainly Hope Brothers’ salary probably was no different than mine because she was a woman, even though she was working at Brown. KL: How do you spell her last name? CLT: B-R-O-T-H-E-R-S. She’s a Brown graduate. KL: That’s one thing you always do on an oral history, is when someone says a name that’s not obvious, you always ask them to spell it, because otherwise the transcriber will run around and try to figure it out. CLT: Hope Richards’s brothers who graduated from Pembroke and Brown in 1940s. KL: Do you have any recollection of how you became aware of the discrepancy in the salaries, or was it just like underground common knowledge? CLT: Underground common knowledge, I can’t imagine [08:00] how I would have known specifically. KL: Now, while you were being director of career planning, you were getting your masters, am I correct? CLT: Yes, entered a masters degree one course at a time, which is admirable in retrospect, but I wouldn’t recommend it to anyone, and I did a thesis which took me a year of part time agonizing evenings and weekends with Bill McLaughlin in the history department on lotteries in America – in Rhode Island, rather, before 1824 when they were forbidden by the Constitution. 4 KL: Now, what motivated you to go back to your masters? CLT: Further advancement in my job, no question. Although I enjoyed every bit of it for its own sake, and I just loved the courses I took. I wrote a long [09:00] paper on women feminists in 1964, which has been destroyed and if it could only, I would give anything to have kept it. If I could recommend to anyone who reads or listens to this, don’t throw papers away. KL: (laughter) You have the soul of an archivist, Charlotte. CLT: I do, I do. KL: Now, in ’66, you became associate dean. Now, how did you make the transition? Was there an opening and Rosemary just asked you to apply, or what was the scenario? CLT: It was a newly created position, actually, I don’t believe there was an opening. To my recollection, no one had left, but she was foreseeing the possibility of sabbatical leave and she wanted someone to have been on the scene for a period of time before hand, and that was the two years, ’66 to ’68, before she went on leave. During those years, which doesn’t really show, I was very much an alter ego [10:00] to her at committee meetings, and sometimes in public presentations. KL: You mean ’66 to ’68? CLT: Mm-hmm. I did all of the background headache-y budget preparations for five years ahead, even I might add, in 1971, we were forced to do a budget preparation for a five year plan even though we were going out of existence. I exaggerated – it might have been 1970, but it was ludicrous even at the time, and I didn’t have a calculator. KL: Oh, god. (laughter) So there was no search, again, you were just put in the position, and – 5 CLT: There was much, I’m sure, searching discussion among the administration and with President Keeney, who talked to me at the time, told me that, “I realize that it was a dead-end street to have a PhD,” I probably shouldn’t be moving in this direction, and I didn’t say it impolitely, but I said as much, “I’ll take my chances,” which in the end, turned out to be a good thing, I guess. [11:00] KL: So you were thinking in your own mind that this was the direction that you wanted to move in? CLT: No question, no question. Before I came back to Pembroke in ’62, I seriously considered going back to graduate school at the University of Wisconsin in American history. Threaded through my whole life was a financial need to support myself, so I really didn’t see any way that I could do it, and then once I got involved at Brown I just didn’t take the time or move on. KL: Now, what were your duties as assigned as associate dean? CLT: I was the academic advisor for juniors and seniors, the advisor to (pause), one thing I remember specifically, and with great pleasure, is an advisor to the convocation committee, which had weekly speakers. [12:00] We still had weekly convocations in Alumnae Hall, where students marched in – all 800 or however many came to the convocations that day, quiet presence presumably – and we had speakers whom we then entertained at lunch afterward in a very elegant, small deans dining room on the lower floor of Alumnae Hall. KL: Which no longer exists? CLT: No, the dining room table was in Harriet Sheridan’s house when she was dean of the college, but what has happened to it now, we can’t found it. Sheila Bloomstein could not drag it down. I think the table – at any rate – among the convocation speakers were Helen Hayes, and (inaudible) were found about eighteen inches on each side, because the smallest gown was to fit for this tiny woman. Isaac Bashevis Singer, who was definitely a googling-eyed woman (inaudible) at lunch, I might add, [13:00] after his speech and threads all through his stories, and 6 he’s one of my favorite authors, but they’re definitely interesting. And John Cheever, the short story writer, whose daughter was, at that point, a Pembroke student. And a number of other people, but they were highlights. There were some lowlights during those years, too, I’m getting ahead of your questions a little bit, maybe, but there were some real difficulties with public speakers on every college campus between ’66 and ’71 because of the great unrest that was building up, for one reason or another. I remember standing in the darkened deans office in Pembroke Hall watching out the window while Norman Rockwell – Norman Rockwell, the Nazi, I always get the first name messed – KL: Oh, Lincoln Rockwell. CLT: Lincoln – no. Which one is the illustrator – KL: Norman Rockwell. CLT: Yeah, Lincoln Rockwell, who was a [14:00] non-illustrious graduate of Brown University, came to speak in Alumnae Hall with Providence police protection and so forth, and we held our breath for fear there would be some kind of a demonstration of real unpleasant magnitude. As it turned out, it was safely contained, but it was a very tense time. KL: I want to make clear, that was not a Pembroke College – CLT: No, no, it was not. Alumnae Hall was then, and has since always been, used as the main University large gathering place for large gatherings, and it should be remembered that Alumnae Hall was completely paid for by contributions for women, primarily women outside of the Brown community, at that early time. KL: Now, in terms of the junior and senior counseling, is that something that was institutionalized – in other words, the women were required the first week of junior year, or [15:00] something like that, to come in or was it on an informal basis? 7 CLT: Well, as I remember it, it was a steady stream of traffic, whether informal or formal. I doubt that we made a major effort the way we have tried to do in my recent years at Brown, I doubt we made a major effort to draw people unless there was some reason to do so. I had some very ludicrous assignments, one of which was the swimming requirement at Brown before the new curriculum was instituted in 1969, and some of the worst offenders were women from Rhode Island, because you could dip your toe in the water and go back and lay on the sand; you did not have to know how to swim, but in order to graduate from Brown, you had to be able to tread water and make your way across the pool, and many a senior spent their last week or two in the Brown pool in Lyman Hall trying to meet the swimming requirement for graduation. KL: And you were responsible for seeing that they met that requirement? CLT: [16:00] I was responsible for reminding them that they couldn’t graduate without it. As it turned out, this is one of those wonderful stories that goes through life with Brown and Pembroke graduates because I don’t think, really, anyone didn’t graduate because someone might have held them up with a big toe while they did, but at any rate, it was a serious requirement. And the other thing that isn’t quite so funny, and I think some alumnae have reminded me of it since, I had to talk, in some few cases, to seniors who wanted permission to be married, which sounds incredible to me to tell you that it happened, but it did. KL: Why don’t you talk briefly about that, because people 20 years from now won't understand (multiple conversations; inaudible). CLT: Even now it would be hard to believe that a student would have to ask permission to be married and live off campus, or to be married even to [17:00] someone who was in some distant place, so that she could visit him without difficulty, and again, I doubt very much that at any time a student was denied permission to be married, and I might say that I think there were students who had to ask for permission to be married very painfully because they were pregnant, and to have to go to a physician – a person in the position of authority, no matter how understanding or caring or gentle they were, it must have been a horrendously horrifying experience and it’s something no one should have been put through. There were a lot of 8 institutional things that I find hard to believe. My mother, who had no idea of what went on in a college or higher education beyond what I told her, was amazed when I told her that you had to pay for meals at Pembroke, whether you ate them or not. She found that incredible, and that’s part of our institutional set up here. [18:00] It always has been, it’s the way we support ourselves, and even to Europeans it’s hard to believe that a university of students who have maturity have to account for how they pay for their meals. KL: Now, in ’68, ’69, which was a real fun year, I know, you were acting dean of Pembroke. Now, Rosemary was off on sabbatical beginning in September, or had she left earlier? CLT: Probably September, but I don’t really remember. KL: And so you were going to step into her shoes; was there anyone who was going to step into the associate dean’s shoes? CLT: Well, Newell Stultz, presently professor of political science, was assistant to the dean at that time, and I don’t remember – I’m sorry, I wasn’t prepared for this question – I don’t remember whether he [19:00] came in for more hours, I think he did, because I remember talking with him about doing a survey of Pembroke students and study abroad, which had been, by the way, one of my responsibilities are associate dean. So I do think yes, I think he was there during that year. KL: He came into this because he was acting as one of the academic advisors. CLT: At that point, we had assistants to the dean for each of the deans, meaning a faculty presence, to help students plan their academic programs and he had a certain number of hours in Pembroke Hall each week. Walter Kenworthy, who was no longer at Brown, who was a professor of biology, worked at one point with Gretchen Tonks, who was then assistant dean of Pembroke College, and there were two or three others whose names I don’t have in my mind at the moment. 9 KL: Now what’s [20:00] the hierarchy – I’m just trying to place this. There was the dean of Pembroke College, that would be the top level. And then what would be the second level, the associate? CLT: Yes. KL: Okay, and then the – CLT: Assistant dean. Gretchen Tonks, was assistant dean of the college and responsible for all academic advising of incoming freshman, and – this shows what a smaller world it was – for all financial aid for the entire student body of Pembroke. Without a calculator. (laughter) KL: Yes, it was very different in those days than it is today. (laughter) So why don’t we talk about ’68, ’69, what to you was a couple of the most memorable moments of ’68, ’69, out of all the memorable things. We can go through them all, but what sticks out in your mind, if you had to pick [21:00] one or two things? CLT: One, I wish I had kept either a taped or a more detailed daily journal because that was a horrendous year in the United States, in the nation, and on the campus. There were two things at Brown that were different, I think, that combined with what was going on in terms of the antiVietnam War and the anti-Cambodian strike and so forth, Brown had this uneasy coordinate college relationship, which was, in social terms, not unlike a co-educational institution, in that there were rules for women and rules for men, and we were in the same institution, so the men could make fun of, denigrate, and in every way, attempt to get changed the women’s rules for when they should be in the dormitory and so forth. [22:00] Oh, excuse me, that was not the major (laughter), but the point was, there was a Brown Daily Herald attack on Pembroke College, which lasted, quite literally, from ’66 to ’71, and I have some very interesting friends from those time who were a mixture of people who went along with the tide, not fully understanding what they were going along with, and others who were really very much on the attack. 10 KL: Do you mean students? CLT: Students, the student editor of the Brown Daily Herald, at that point, was Charles Bakst, who was now a writer for the Providence Journal, whose picture I see every day, and was whom I hadn’t had an unpleasant relationship after the fact, but it was a very vitriolic one at the time. However, that was one thing that was unique to Brown, in that we had not a leg to stand on in the sense of being a separate [23:00] institution, but we had very different social rules. The other was that there was no objection from the men, and this may be of interest to people now, I think, to having the women join in their organizations, and by 1969, and I may be incorrect again, I wanted to see the date checked, there was a woman editor-in-chief of the Brown Daily Herald. KL: (inaudible) [Watchson?]. CLT: Yes. So in a sense Pembroke ended long – (break in audio) KL: [24:00] Did you see that, did you see the demise of Pembroke, or – CLT: Yes, it was like being on the edge of the ocean and watching the tide come in and there was no way that it could be done. At any rate, I just wanted to mention, that in 1968 – you asked about the highlights and the low points – in 1968, there was the black student walk out, which began at Pembroke. It was the women who walked out, the women who were the militants, the women who were combined with women from Radcliffe and from other institutions, maybe there were four, I believe I have the clipping at home somewhere, who made a concerted effort to tell the institutions that they were being unfair in the way they considered minority students. And I think probably my most painful experience was that the male administrators and the provost at the time, [25:00] very specifically, did not take this seriously. KL: And the provost was Stoltz? 11 CLT: When I called the provost to tell him, he said, “Let ’em,” quote, unquote, when I said, “They say they’re going to walk out.” I’ve been hesitant to make a record of this because that’s a very true fact, and when it was settled, painfully, he called me and had his secretary reach me at the hairdresser on [Fair?] Street, and he said, “You’ve got your girls back,” quote, unquote. It was comradery from his point of view, and at the time, it was so horrendously serious that it was horrifying to think that that how he thought of it, but this is the same provost who then was put aside and did not take action on the Louise [Lanfair?] case when it was [26:00] first very badly mishandled, and the anthropology department, in which could have been cut off at the past. Now, I can’t say that whatever he might have thought or acted at that point would have changed the black walk out situation, and that this was, again, there was a student push all over the country, and one that had to happen, and should have happened, but it was not taken seriously here. KL: And that was Merton Stoltz? CLT: Yes. Also, I might say, student undergraduate activities were not taken seriously, so again, I’m on the fence because I want to say some radical Brown male students might not have been taken quite as seriously as we would today, because they didn’t have any power, they didn’t sit on the committees, they – it’s really quite a different picture. KL: Now, while you were acting dean, were you in Rosemary Pierrel’s dean’s house, or did you keep in your own apartment? CLT: [27:00] I stayed in my own apartment because I knew it was only for a year. I might add that the other thing that happened during that year was the sit in in the Corporation room over the Cambodian strike – or maybe that was the year after – and classes being suspended, and it was just a very difficult time for everyone concerned. KL: Now, you spoke earlier of – let me backtrack – I want to say I’m glad you told about the black walk out because whenever I speak about it, people refuse to believe that women led it, and I always say, “No, I mean, not only has Charlotte told me, but when you go back and look in Pembroke record and Brown Daily Herald, it’s very clear what the chain of events is,” but for 12 some reason, people find it very difficult to believe that it was led by women, so I’m glad that you said that so now it’s down on tape and you know, you were the one who was there, as it were, so eyewitness account. Now, [28:00] you spoke earlier of 1966 as kind of a break. CLT: I might say the men may have been in the background all the time the women were doing this. KL: Now, you spoke of 1966 as a break, between... CLT: Well I suppose it’s a natural breaking point in my life, but I’d have to study the Brown Daily Herald, I do believe that that was the date of the first march on the [Mills stone?] at Pembroke from the Brown Daily Herald offices, and I really do think it was coincidental with my time in the dean’s office. KL: What do you mean by the march on Mills stone? CLT: (laughter) The student march on the Mills stone for doing away from parietal rules (inaudible). KL: It was an actual march. CLT: Yeah. Well, it’s a good natured one, but none the less, it was. KL: Was it boys and girls, was it just boys, or? CLT: Well, both, both. KL: Now, how did you personally, [29:00] as opposed to you administratively, what did you think of the parietal system? 13 CLT: Well, I thought it was unfair, but I think it would be unfair for me now to say I thought it would ludicrous because at the time it wasn’t ludicrous, and there was an understanding from parents, from the community at large, that women would have some kind of – Track 2 KL: Okay, let’s talk about what happened to you exactly in the merger? Now, you... CLT: Another very battling, mishandled situation. I don’t believe there was a situation connected with the five or six key people at Pembroke that was not handled atrociously; it was just abominable. You asked me about why I said one thing was connected with another – again, I’m backtracking, if it’s all right with you, because I’d like it to be put on the record – the dean of admission at Pembroke was Alberta Brown, who as a result of the black walk out during the year I was acting dean, and then an admission of a more limited number of black students the day after the regular admission letters had gone out, [01:00] caused personal grief for her, and eventually she resigned, quote, unquote, as a lady, and was given a retirement party. But her resignation, her retirement, was done very badly because she should not have been given the blame for that. Alberta Brown never made a decision without consulting the person she reported to, in her life. And she is not responsible for the black walk out and the letters not going out to the black students the following year. Granted, whether she wanted to do that or not is not the issue, the issue is that she did not, then, say anything, and there was a very angry committee on a mission of financial aid that conducted inquiries, and they interviewed each of us and Gretchen Tonks, who as I mentioned earlier, was an assistant dean at Pembroke, and I came off scot-free because we didn’t say the wrong things and hadn’t done the wrong things and done [02:00] the actual mailing, but at that time, I didn’t say anything which is to my discredit because I felt it would be disruptive of all that was going on at Pembroke when the dean of Pembroke College had not told Alberta to mail those letters. That’s a very touchy situation, still, and will be for a long time to come. At any rate, then when the time came for the merger, the then president Donald Hornig was probably a caring person, but he certainly was not a people person, and allowed terrible grief to be visited on Pembroke administrators. 14 I mentioned Hope Brothers earlier, who had been director of career planning, was herself a Brown graduate and had worked, at that point, at Brown for some 20 years. The horrendous fact is [03:00] that she learned that she was not going to be director of the combined career planning office by attending the Pembroke alumnae dinner on commencement weekend, and hearing Mr. Hornig say that Lee Pockman, the director of the career planning office at Pembroke, was going to be director of the combined office. He had not had the grace, nor had the provost, to tell her in advance that that decision had been made as of the corporation meeting that weekend. Gretchen Tonks was treated very badly, she was made an assistant financial aid officer and moved to the fourth floor of University Hall, which hastened her retirement because she had reached the age of 60 and was able to plan it – or 59, or whatever she was at that point. But she was literally given an assistant capacity, a very different situation [04:00] than she had had at Pembroke. It was taken for granted that she was lucky to have had a job continue for her. At that point, I was single, I was totally self supporting, had no other means of support, which shouldn’t have entered into it, but I emphasize that because it did clearly indicate that I could not just pick up and leave in anger or in sorrow or in anything else; I had to know what I was going to do. I went to see my good friend, then the provost, Merton Stoltz, about opportunities for me at Brown. I wanted no more part of the dean’s office, you can imagine that after that five years I just wanted to get away from the negativism all together. And I discovered that one of the areas that I was very much interested in was the then extension division, which was the evening noncredit program for community people, and I knew that the director of that office, who was a woman, Hazel Woodman [C?], was at [05:00] retirement age, and I asked Mert Stoltz, at that time again, that there was no such thing as a search committee and so forth, if he would consider moving me to that position. And I talked with him in the fall and finally I had to, with great pain and anguish, pick up the telephone in about March and telephone him to ask him what he could tell me about my future, because this was the March before the June 30th that Pembroke was ending and I had no idea where my July salary was going to come from. And he told me that it had been settled that I would be director of the extension division. I later learned from my good friend Mark Schupack in the economics department that Mart had told him at a cocktail party in Christmas time that I was going to be the new director of the extension division, but I had three months of anguish about not knowing where my income was going to come from. And it’s extremely hard for me to explain how I was able to stay when I stayed because I stayed [06:00] 15 for, I guess, intuitive reasons that Brown had to help me to figure some way out to do this, and I had very real family problems 20 miles away, which made it impossible for me to move to New York or California, in my own line, so, you do these things. KL: And of course, Rosemary went back to teach– CLT: It was taken for granted that Rosemary Pierrel would go back to the psychology department, where she had a tenured position. Again, that was handled publically very graciously, but it was not well done in any way, nor was she offered a higher administrative position at Brown. Whether she should have been or not is irrelevant, I don’t believe it was even thought. It was just assumed that she had a safe place to go back to, and now, I haven’t listened to her oral history so I don’t know what she says about this, but. KL: Now, in terms [07:00] of how this whole thing was handled, why do you think it was handled so badly? Was it that the people – CLT: Embarrassment, lack of finesse, I don’t really think it was terrible malign intent, but just the total combination was just, just awful. KL: People not knowing how to do personnel? CLT: They still don’t. They still – KL: I’m a clear example of – CLT: You’re a very good example, and I just learned recently that the woman who had come as assistant curator of list was notified her job was not going to be continued, by getting a call from the human resources department, quote, unquote, telling her her American Express card was no longer operative. She didn’t learn until after that that her job had been done away with, or that she had been done away with. I don’t even know the person, but this is not something that only happened in the past, I’m very much afraid it could happen right now, as to you. 16 KL: Well it’s kind of interesting you said that because I always, you know, when [08:00] people ask me, you know, “Why are you leaving,” and so on and so forth, one of the quips I make is that I really felt that how I would find out I no longer had a job is I would come on the 30th of some month and not have a paycheck, and people always thought that was kind of ridiculous, but, you know, hearing these kind of stories, it makes me think it really could have happened. CLT: Well, you have to plan ahead. There’s no question about that. KL: But in any case, now as director of university extension, that was ’71 to ’75, I’m reading from your resume. This sounds like a really interesting job. CLT: Well, it was, but it also had a very negative side to it. [Bronson’s?] history of Brown University tells the wonderful story of how Brown was in the forefront of adult education in the nineteenth century, and when there was [09:00] horrendous problem with people getting transportation from one end of a state to the other, they would come by trolley and go home at eleven o’clock on a trolley to go to classes at Brown University. Brown did not jump into the adult education program at a time when it could have, and the days before there was University of Rhode Island extension in Providence, before PC had an evening program, before there was a Roger Williams College, before any of the above, it did not do anything, and then by the time I had come into the extension division, it was a lovely thing for people to do. And I, myself, took a German language extension course because I wanted to learn some German, not because I was going to get credit for it, and that’s why people took an art course with Walter Feldman or any one of several other people. One of the things I was able to accomplish, [10:00] with the support of the provost, was to bring more of the Brown faculty into the teaching of the extension division, so that they would get at least some brownie points for participation in the community. Brownie points, that’s an interesting gender-related word, now that I think about it. But it had to be self supporting, and it wasn’t. It was only in terms of dollars, but in terms of fringe benefits and the way we had to allow a certain percentage toward faculty benefits, it couldn’t be. In the middle of that time – I did that from ’71 to ’75 – and handled all of the money, all of the budgets, had to carry the money to the bank – hated that, at 11:00 p.m. on a night when there was no 17 protection for me to do that – at any rate, going on and on. In ’73, Jacqueline Mattfeld came to be dean of academic affairs, and she had been at Sarah Lawrence, and she had been active in [11:00] the continuing education field. One of the things I’m glad now that I did then, and I could easily have not done it with my busyness, but I got in touch with her and volunteered my assistance in anything she might want to do for women at Brown. She immediately took me up on that and I was on the year-long study committee on continuing education at Brown, which led to the beginning of the resumed education program. KL: Let’s, now that you brought Jackie up, why don’t we talk briefly about her? Would you (laughter) describe from your point of view why – well, let’s just backtrack, I want to make sure this is all clear in my head, as well as anyone who’s listening – was Jackie’s position already existing in the university or was it created? CLT: No, it was very much already existent, and I have had, just recently, to suggest to [12:00] Louise Newman that she change the sentence or two in her very excellent chapter, because it was incorrect. Jackie became dean of the college, she insisted that the title be changed, or however it was decided, it was changed to dean of academic affairs, but she came into a position of great power. She followed three people who had been deans at the college who had gone onto college presidencies, and during her time here, she was off at the presidency at Swarthmore, which she turned down. Let it not be said that she did not have a position of authority, although I believe there has been a missed existence since she left that oh dear, poor me, I couldn’t do anything because I didn’t have the authority. Unfortunately, anyone in any position of academic authority has to use political methods in order to get things accomplished – work within committees, work with committees, bring people together who were able to do things with you [13:00] and for you, and isn’t a matter of actually telling people what to do the way one would in a corporation. KL: Now, backtrack, so I want to make this clear. Seventy-one to ’75, you were director of the university extension, but it also says ’73 to ’75 you were associate dean (multiple conversations; inaudible). 18 CLT: Yes. During that ’71, ’72 year, when she came, I was on the study committee for continuing higher education for women, or whatever. It was not for women, it never was. It was for any kind of non-regular class participation. She then arranged for me to be re-named associate dean for continuing education programs, which included the extension division, which was non-credit. The resumed education program, [14:00] which began then with faculty vote in December of 1972, and the post-baccalaureate special student program, which very little has been said about, but which is something I’m very proud of because people had been kept away from Brown in droves even if they could pay the enormous tuition per cost because it was too much of a paperwork headache for them to be dealt with, so they were just pushed away. I got a form from the undergraduate admission office, adapted it for post-baccalaureate special students, and as a result they paid money into the university for the courses for which they earned credit to help them to go onto some other field. One of my classmates from grade school had earned a bachelors degree in English from Mount Holyoke, went on to become a veterinarian, then became interested in anthropology and the American Indian and the use of forces, which she’s now become an authority on. Elizabeth Atwood Lawrence came back here, did the [15:00] postbaccalaureate courses necessarily to fill in the undergraduate background, then earned a PhD at Brown in anthropology. A perfect example, and then there were a number of other such people. And I might say, many of them were women who for one reason or another were not able to do it on a full-time basis. KL: Now, the resumed-ed program, you said that was voted at faculty in 1972, where did the impetus come for the resumed-ed program? CLT: I have to say in all fairness that Jackie Mattfeld, Dean Jacqueline Mattfeld, was a spearhead behind it. She was very supportive and very caring. And Karen Romer was someone who she had known earlier, and she brought her in as an associate dean of the college, who was very caring and supportive, and both of whom had been actively involved in women’s education. KL: So resumed-ed was definitely seen as a women’s program? 19 CLT: No, in their minds it had been envisioned as [16:00] such, and I think maybe I had some major input there, in the sense that I said, and the committee bought in the final recommendations, “We cannot do away with the women’s college and then institute a womenonly program.” And as it turned out, the resumed education program was originally 60% women, 30% men, or whatever, 66%, 33%, and has since, for many years now, been 50%, 50%, because there’ve been people who’ve been able to take advantage of it after having served in the Vietnam War, or having one reason or another to not finish college when they should. But it did not seem appropriate at Brown, with its history, to be a women-only program. KL: Okay, so is there – I’ll worry about it Charlotte – CLT: I know, I got to go swimming. (laughter) KL: Seventy-one to ’75, what would you say was the highlight of your [17:00] work? CLT: Well, I think again in all fairness, the re-introduction of me into the regular undergraduate program because the extension division was satisfying in that I could see the figures going up and the people coming in and then more instructors within the Brown community and so forth, but it had very much its downside too, it was a non-admission process and it was very much a forgotten side piece of the university. KL: Okay, so ’75 you became associate dean of the college. How did that happen? CLT: Well, because I had one of my regular meetings with Jacqueline Mattfeld, who by that time was associate provost, and she said that we were going through, then, a budget cutting process similar to what’s happening this year at Brown, and she told me that I would have to go back into the extension division full time and I saw that [18:00] as a non-pathway for me, so I suggested to her instead, in the course of the conversation, as I remember vividly being interrupted by a telephone call, so we each had time to marshal our thoughts. I suggested that I come back into the dean’s office full time instead, and that the extension division be suspended because by that time, it was clear – I have, by the way, for the record, for the archives, a copy of that memo and 20 the ancillary action – but it worked out that I came then back into the dean’s office full time. I don’t know whether someone had left by that time, or I don’t really remember at the moment. KL: Okay, you have here academic counseling of undergraduate sophomores and some freshmen? CLT: From the beginning, from ’75, from the time I came back in the combined dean’s office, I advised about study abroad for about 10 years, so I dealt with sophomores because you go during your junior – or mostly, you go to during your junior year – and that was [19:00] built up from [’98?] at the beginning, that first year that I did it, out of the whole student body to some 400 and some now, so it grew every year radically. KL: Is that something you enjoyed doing? CLT: Loved it, it was one of the highlights of my life, and it seems so ironic that all of the interviews that have been done in the last couple of months since I retired haven’t even mentioned it. And I enjoyed it because the students were, and are, such wonderful students because they wanted to study abroad because they were in languages or in international relations or they were in English literature or history or whatever they might be, development studies, going to Africa – they were the interesting people. One young woman came to see me in her sophomore year, she was a protected daughter from New York City, who wanted to study gorillas and she wanted to go to Africa. And I said, “Well, why on earth do you want to go to Africa?” And she said, “My mother thinks it’s too dangerous for me to go to the Bronx Zoo on the subway.” So she [20:00] went to Africa, it was (laughter) it was just an incredible! But just a wonderful group of people that I dealt with. And I was on the board of the Beaver College for study abroad, and I traveled to Britain several times and to Ireland with them, and just had a wonderful experience with national meetings and so forth. KL: Under associate dean, you list some committee relationships including orientation, resumeded admission, and academic standing. Could you describe for us how someone in your position ends up on a committee like that? 21 CLT: Committee on academic standing is the major focal point of the undergraduate academic dean’s office, and at the end of every semester, there’s a review of the whole student body, and each dean has responsibility for a certain group within that group. So you are keeping in touch with them throughout the semester, and we have monthly [21:00] meetings with, to some extent, is for positive reasons to make exceptions or to grant permission for extra departmental courses or for an exception to a general rule, but the final review was the more horrendous part of it, which was routine procedure. [Mintin?] on voting membership, it’s interesting because you can have a say that determines what the committee does, but you can’t vote if it comes down to a vote around the table. Except for one or two deans at the present time, there are two deans who have voting authority on the committee. KL: Now how about orientation? CLT: Well again, that wasn’t mentioned in any of the publicity of the time of my retirement, and that was in the most recent large category of fun in my administrative life because that, again, is an entirely different student [22:00] group, a student group who are so enthusiastic about Brown and who want people to want it and love it the way they do, and they’re willing to work without pay and hard, long hours from November right through till the following August in order to make it come off, and the orientation program at Brown has always been largely run by students, and it couldn’t work without them. They have always known, in good sense, that there were administrative things like testing and required meetings that they had to work around, but they did the large part of it and designed the program and worked with the administrative committee, and they just were, and are, the joy of my life. I loved working with them. KL: Eighty-eight to ’90, you were – I’m reading from the resume again – associate dean of the college and coordinating dean for the classes of ’92 and ’93. Now, why did you change [23:00] these last two years? Were you gearing down for retirement? CLT: No, no, I don’t think that had any relationship to it; in fact, the last two years have been such fun that I probably would never have retired for the negative reasons of the office. I loved 22 it. Being a dean for freshman is very different because, in this instance, I was in charge of the curricular advising program, which is some 200 faculty members who do advising of freshman, so you’re not doing all of it but you’re coordinating all of it, and I think coordination has to be my middle name, and I loved doing that. And I loved talking to freshmen; they’re wonderful people, that it’s very different. And I needed a change of pace. On the other hand, let it not be said that this was unusual because all of the deans have varying duties at varying times. Ted Hail, who had been my predecessor as associate dean for the orientation program, then moved into junior counseling after a long period of [24:00] time doing orientation. There just comes a time when you want to shift gears, and any proper administrative dean sees to it that everybody’s doing something that they’re happy doing and if there are the responsibilities that come along, that they do them. And that was true of the committee on the status of women, which I got involved in, because it was clear that I had had so much involvement with women over the years that it was a good responsibility for me to have for quite a period of time. KL: Now, that was a faculty committee, or? CLT: Well, that’s interesting because I think it is now, I’m not sure it always was. There was a corporation committee on women and, you can help me with the title, the one that Ann FaustoSterling was involved with from the beginning. KL: Coordinating on the status of women or – CLT: No, it was not, it was – KL: No, that’s the other group, umm... CLT: – at any rate, there was a corporation, probably still is a corporation committee on women, but this was literally [25:00] to try and – probably the problem with the committee on the status of women, and I understand it’s been very halting this year, it hasn’t been functioning very strongly – is that it has never known exactly what its focus was, whether it was on undergraduate 23 women, graduate student women, faculty women, administrative women, a combination of the above, and it is too large a plate. KL: Okay, I think we’ve wound it down, is there anything else you want to say? CLT: Well, it’s been more fun talking about it, more has come out than I had imagined would, and I’m delighted to have had a chance to do it. KL: Good. Now I have one last question for you, it just occurred to me, when you were at Pembroke, were there any women, besides Doris Stapleton, who were married? CLT: No, and I read something recent– when I say, “No,” I’m not sure if the answer’s categorically no, but largely no. Interestingly enough, as you know, Rosemary Pierrel [26:00] and I have both been married since that time, but I think it was irrelevant. I really do. Alberta Brown was single, who was dean of admission and had been in that job for many years, since she had been a graduate student at Brown and had moved into it automatically, so to speak. But several of the women that she had working with her were married. The Pembroke librarian at that time, Agnes Little, was a widow, but she would have been there whether her husband were alive or not. I think it’s really more coincidental than anything else at that point, it’s not like my oldest sister who had to leave nursing school because she was going to be married, which is the most ludicrous example. When I was a very young girl, that ludicrous example came home to me, because if you were going to be a good nurse, it seemed to me you had to know something about life, and yet you had to leave nursing school if you were married. That was definitely not true of college administration. I think it was really that women were staying at home more [27:00] after they were married, and the women who were available for full time exhausting administrative jobs were not married, or didn’t have family responsibilities. KL: Okay, well I think we’re done. CLT: Thank you very much. 24 KL: Well, thank you. - END - 25..