 JH: This is Julia Hyun about to interview Linda Mahdesian at her office at the Brown News Bureau. It's April 21, 1988, 5 o'clock P.M. LM: Either that or it's all... JH: No, I think I put fresh ones in. Very important. LM: Hmmm, I know. JH: Okay, why don't we start off with family background, and you tell me a little bit about your mother and father, and your family life, and... some of your reasons for going to Brown. LM: My mother and father separated when I was very young, so my father was never a part Of our family. He visited quite often, like weekends and stuff. and he came to my graduations, and he came to Easter and he came to Christmas, but he wasn‘t really a dad. My father is Black and American Indian. My mother is white. So I am multiracial, and all my siblings are. There's 5 of us. We were raised by my mother and my grandparents on my mother's side in Chicago at a time when the neighborhood was changing from. Jewish to Black very rapidly. I mean, we moved to our home in Chicago in '66, and by ‘69, it was an all black neighborhood, or 99%. And so, my mother and my grandparents were like a few white people in the whole neighborhood and we were going to an all black elementary school, and then we went to the all black high school in that neighborhood. And our high school was a convenience kind of high school, it was close to where we lived, and it was the worst, one of the worst schools in the City of Chicago. It was public school, not that public schools are bad, but it was a public school, and it was public, very public, I mean everybody who didn't know h0w to read and write was sent to this school. It was one of those kinds of schools. And we always did well academically in grammar school, so high school wasn‘t that hard, and we all excelled. We were all like salutatorian or valedietorian so we were very high achievers in high school. My guidance counselors counselled me to go to college but they didn't counsel me to go to Brown. In fact they counselled me to go to state schools in Illinois, mainly because the financial. aid was better, because if you an Illinois state grant. you can't take it out of state. So when I said I wanted to go to Brown, they were like, "Well, what is Brown?" A lot. of them didn‘t. even know what Brown was. And I found out about Brown because Brown somehow sponsored my school with a Brown Book Award. I don't know how. But they did. And they had to choose a junior in 1977 to get this award, it was the dictionary with your name in it and all that stuff, and a junior who excelled in writing and reading and all that stuff. So they picked me, and was I like, "Oh great. I've never heard of Brown, but I'll look into it.“ So I looked in Barrens and I looked in those big college catalogues and found out it was a... It had everything I wanted out of a school, because I knew I wanted an Ivy league school, I knew I wanted a school away from Chicago, I didn't want to, you know, go to school in Chicago, I knew I wanted a small school, and I knew I wanted liberal arts, because I didn‘t want to go to technical school, or something like that, because I liked writing and reading and stuff. So Brown fit the bill very well, and so I applied, well I applied for information and I got information, and applied and was called by aIums and students who were living in Chicago and was very impressed by that kind of personal touch because none of the other schools I applied to did that. And I didn't have enough money to Visit, so I just kind of said, "Well‘ looks good to me. I'm going apply. And they accepted me, so I'm going to go." And I didn't visit. 1 did all the wrong things. I didn't visit, I didn't talk to faculty, I didn't do anything (laugh). It was just such a... kind of a... you know, blind thing, an unconscious decision. But... and it was the first time I'd ever gone on the airplane before, coming from Chicago. JH: Lots of big things out there... LM: Oh, man, I remember my mom took pictures of me that day that I left, and my face was green. I mean it was absolutely green. I was just like... because I was kind of in shock, you know, and I was sick because of, you know, worry, and what am I doing, I'm on a plane, I've never been on a plane... So I looked like a little orphan going off (laugh)... JH: Were you the eldest? LM: I was the fourth of five. And I came from a... my three oldest, let's see. My oldest sister went to Yale, my next little sister went to MIT, my brother went to University of Illinois, no... Roosevelt in Chicago, and then there was me, so... and my mom, with the financial aid forms and the whole bit. We had no money. I had loans, I had grants, I had scholarships, and I had work study and the whole nine yards, and that's how I got in. I don't think I would be able to get in now with the way tuition is. I don't even think tuition was over 10,000 at that point, JH: Who encouraged you to go to college, or was it something just that was always accepted? LM: It was kind of always accepted in our family, you going to college. My mom was, she's very artistic, and she's very smart, and because of her family situation she never finished college, and she always instilled that whole education ethic in us, and not so much overtly either. I think it was just working hard in school, always working I remember. Always having this unspoken thing, that we're going to work hard in school aren't we? and we're going to get A's not B's. And I don‘t know, always achieving and always going on to bigger and better things. I mean there was no thought that I wasn't going to go to college. I never for myself had that kind of expectation that I was just going to go into the working world from high school, even though a lot of my friends did that. And in fact one of my friends dropped out of high school for various reasons. But I was always in that, you know the bookworm-nerd Clique, you knew, in high school, and of course we all go to college so... There was always that kind of mindset to go on to college. JH: So did Brown live up to your expectations once yOu got here? LM: Oh man, I didn't know what to expect. I guess I expected hard work, a strange environment, a lot of white faces, an Ivy League kind of culture... and it lived up to all that, but it didn't live up to, like, personal attention. Like I don‘t think I got a lot of personal attention from guidance, you know, faCulty advisers, and people like that. I got from Resident Counselors, but not from the administrative counselor types, the deans and types like that. I felt, I... anyway, it was probably just a function of being in college, and you have to seek them out, they‘re not going to seek you out. So... JH: What was percentage of minorities on campus at that time, do you know? LM: It was about 10% black I think, which was a lot. I think our class had one of the highest incoming classes as far as blacks. JH: Did they have any, they didn't have any special orientation program... LM: Yes, yes, we had a whole week. JH: No, for minority students, because I know they do now. LM: Yeah, it was called Third World Transition Week, and it was August something to September something, and that's when I first arrived here, was for that. And my roommate was from Brooklyn, I remember, her name was Melissa Kirbin, and her name was Jewish, but she was not Jewish. She was part black and part Indian, like, India-Indian, and we had such a good time that week, it was great. But it was weird because being multiracial, I can be mistaken for white, and I have been mistaken for white. And several times during that week I was mistaken for white. In fact one of the sessions we had, one of the black females said very loudly, "Well aren't you one of the white counselors?" And I was like, 'welcome to Brown.‘ And I guess that was kind of an awakening of something I really didn't deal with before coming to Brown was this whole issue of being multiracial and what do you do, and who do you identify with‘ and... So I kind of politically identified with blacks, and was a member of OUAP, and pretty active in that, and marched against South Africa investment and things like that. But I never felt accepted by the blacks here because of that. It was kinds of like an arm's length type of a relationship. And there was no, and I think now there is a biracial support group, which there wasn't then, kind of wished it was, I should have started one. But I didn't see anybody like me, but I did find out there were some people. But I found that usually they identified with being black and they didn't want to call themselves biracial. In fact, a couple of the leaders in OUAP were biracial. One was half blaek- half Hispanic, and one was half black— half white, and neither of them would acknowledge being biracial at all. They were very militant black, you know, like burn down University Hall kind... because ‘78, when I came in, you were still with the same people who knew about the '75 takeover. So you had people who were juniors, who were, let's say, sophomores or freshmen in '75, still there, and they knew about the '75 takeover. And they still had that kind of, there was still that kind of ’let's put down the whites,' type of thing during Third World Transition Week. There was a lot of that, well, this is the history of Brown and it‘s very racist and you have to know that when you come in, and don't expect these white people to understand you and all this stuff. It was very anti—white, as opposed to being pro—Third World, which I thought it was going to be. You know, I thought, well, I'll come in here and I’ll be able to understand Hispanics and Asians. And it was less of that and more of, get ready to come into a... JH: Getting a new challenge... L: Right, right, get ready to come into a white society. And for me, I guess I really didn't need that cause my mother's white, so... but... And I don't think a lot of students there needed it either because they came, a lot of them came from white suburbs, and white prep schools, or white public schools, and you know, I came from an all black school, and there were very few who were like me who came from an all black high school, or even came from an inner city high school, a public inner city high school. And all of a sudden, we're dealing with this whole anti- white thing and I'm like "Hey, what is this...I don't hate whites... my mom's white." And so it was really a weird kind of trip. And that kind of theme of not being accepted by blacks because I was half white kind of played out in different areas. My freshman year also I went on a college fair and represented Brown-- like I know all about Brown, I'm a freshman~~ with some upperclassmen who were black, and it was a fair for minority high schools in Hartford. And it was like all these colleges came and sent their peopIe and on the way there, one of the upperelassmen said, "So Linda what are you going to do? You going to hang white or hang black?" You know are you going to associate with... I said, "Well, why do I have to make that decision, you know, I mean my friends are my friends." "Well, if you hang white you're going to have some problems." I mean, I was like, ‘okay, welcome to Brown.‘ And that did play out, because when I would be seen with white friends, there would be this kind of cold shoulder treatment by blacks. And if you didn't sit in a certain part of the Ratty, you were looked upon as well, you don't want to associate with us, you think you're too good, or something, I don't know. JH; So a lot of biracial students, rather than face that, would just completely break off and just identify with the black students? LM: I think so, if they were a mixture of black. Now if they were a mixture of, I don't know, Hispanic and Asian, I'm not sure how they would go. But my experience would be that they associated with blacks, or they didn't deal with it at all, and kind of absorbed into the student population without even dealing with it, which... I don‘t think that's healthy. I think you need to deal with it somehow. I mean, I'm not against someone identifying just as black, but don't put me down, because I accept both sides. JH: Was this tension something you felt throughout college all four years? LM: Off and on, yeah. I remember once going to the Third World Center, and one of the black students who I had gone out with, I mean, he wasn‘t like a stranger, he said, "Well, what are you here for? to take notes on the natives?" And it was like weird things like that, and he was light skinned too. It was like, "Well, who does he think he is?" And... I'm trying to think of something else that happened... I was an MPC, and we had to go on a retreat to get trained and stuff. And it was a very emotional kind of thing where you share a lot of deep things. And I shared that I was sad because I'd never known my black grandmother, and I started crying because it was just very emotional. And everyone was kind of supportive except for that biracial woman who was very involved with OUAP, and she basically scolded me for crying, and scolded me for getting upset about it. And she-- you'd think she'd be the one person who understood-- but she was the one that was very vocal not understanding, and that was very hard.... I'm trying to think. It's weird because I had black friends and I had white friends and I had friends of different races. But as far as the black student population, I always felt like I was kind of an outsider. And if I went to a party that was a lot of black students they‘d be like, "Wow, I didn't realize that you were going to come. What are you doing here?" And if I walked down the street and and I was walking with a white boyfriend, it would be like stares and stuff. It was just a weird time. Now, I don't think that would happen as much. I think it would happen, but not as much. JH: Right. LM: But so much has changed, I mean it's like 10 years ago. And so much has changed as far as attitudes towards interracial dating, and being biracial, and the whole thing, so... JH: Well, what sort of classes and things did you take when you were here, as far as academics g0? LM: My freshman year I took history, biology, Calculus and English. I was like a high school thing. I thought well... JH: One of each... LM: ...one of each, I'm going to play it safe, do one of each because I had no idea what I wanted to do. I came in and wanted to be a business major.. (sarcastic aside) rightra at Brown?... and I was going to be a hospital administrator, and at first I started majoring in Health and Society, that major, and I started taking Bio 11, Bio 12, and got really into the biology, but then had to take Econ, and I sat in one class, and I said, "No way, no way." So I said, "Okay, I'll be a Psych major," so I took Psych l... (sarcastically) oh this is fun, I play with rats and stuff, and I decided "Oh, I don’t want to take chemistry." You know how you have to do all that prermed stuff. Because my roommate was pre—med and she took all this chemistry. I looked at her stuff, I said, "Vivian, there ain't no way I'm going to understand this stuff." And I knew I liked to write, and I loved English, and stuff. I said, "Hey, why don't you be an English major?" So by Junior" by first semester junior year—- I basically declared that that was going to be my major, and so a lot of my courses were writing courses and literature courses and stuff like that. Some history thrown in and an anthropology, and I think I took a bio course that was all nutrition and stuff, but mostly writing and literature, lots of books. JH: Well, by this time the merger had happened and Brown was Brown... LM: Right, Brown was Brown... JH: I mean, what was the campus atmosphere like at that time? relations between men and women.. did the school seem to encourage women to... women students... LM: I think so... I think it was at a time where the women's movement was pretty hot. The 60577 late 60's and early 70's“ was like a blossoming I think in the climax of the women‘s movement. I think now we're kind of in the stagnation of it, but in the 70's it was like, gung—ho, you know. And I think there were a lot of new groups that were forming in the 70's: Women's groups, like Women for Brown, and Women's Health Collective, and things like that. In fact we had a Third World Women's Day or something-- Festival, where I read a poem that I had written. And it was actually a poem that was about being multiracial, and it's called "Color Me Green." It's like a metaphor for being a mixture. And that was a good time because we had Hispanic women reading poetry and Black women and Asian women. It was really a good kind of unifying thing, and we put together a collection. I don't know if it's at the Sarah Doyle Center or not. JH: It must be. LM: Yeah, it's a collection of poetry and stuff. And there was a dancer, and an artist... So it was really a good kind of celebration of talents and diversity but still a bond of being women, that women share a similar role in society, and have similar battles to fight being in a university and being career-minded, and stuff... (murmurs) Let me think... JH: So, during that time you really were aware of both your position as a minority and as a woman? LM: Oh yeah. Especially when you studied or you were in a class where you noticed that there were a lot of men. I think our class came in 50/50, but certain classes are just mixed differently. And with classes where there was a lot of men, I really felt that there was a difference there between the two of us, and the way, and also the way the professors treated them. I think the professors treat them as sons, you know? "I'm going to train my son up and encourage him..." And I think they saw us as, "Well I don't know what to do..." JH: People just sort of sitting in... LM: Yeah, sitting in and not really going to go for a hard challenge or anything. Some professors, not all of them, but some. And I think I felt that especially in a certain English course I took on Chaucer, and it was a Visiting professor from Harvard. Oh he was such a jerk. And I asked him-- well I told him about a paper I did and I had, and I came up to him and I told him about it after the class, and he looked at me and he said. "Wasn't that nice?" JH: Oh that's disgusting. LM: And I think he even patted my head. I think, I am trying to think this through. I think he did that, and I remember just wanting to kill him. I felt so demeaned, like, "Oh isn't that a cute little thought from a cute little girl," you know, that kind of thing. But that didn't happen very often, but it did happen again. I remember the bio professor when I got a B or something and I had a question that, I was like a few points from an A, on this exam, and I wanted to dispute this. And he said, "Well, you should give me a kiss. I'll think about it." Or something like that. Such a jerk... JH: Did other female students have stories like this? LM: {laughs} Yeah, I heard stories, especially from minority women there were a lot of stories where they would COunsel the minority women to go into being biotechnieians, instead of a doctor, and... JH; You know, that was another thing I was going to ask, like the career counselling and did you see a difference between how they treated men and women? LM: My counsellor was... he wasn't really a career counsellor. He was more of an academic counsellor. And he was good. It was Professor Borts of the economics department. He was really good. Because he was objective. He wasn't like, "Well, you have to take econ to be a smart person." He was like‘ "Well, what are your goals and how do these fit into your goals." He was very analytic about it. And I think he treated me with a lot of respect. I didn’t feel talked down to or anything. But I know with minority women that there was a problem. And probably with minority men there was probably a problem too, where they were not looked upon with the same kind of, having the same kind of potential as white males. And another thing that hit me going to Brown was the white male dominance of the University. I mean, I came from a school where I had black female teachers, the president was black- - I mean our principal was black, the vice principal was a black female... The white males were in the minority. I mean it was like a rarity to have a white male teacher. And coming here it was like all you had were white males teaching you. You never had a woman teaching you. And when I took Lois Monleiro's course in Health and Society, it was like, "Wow," you know, "it's a woman teaching me." And it's funny, I had a black, I had 2 black professors, one who was very inaccessible, just intellectuallym-just kind of... I don't know... aristocratic. And then there was another one, Barry Batgum, [whistles] total Opposite. But he had this, Barry was very intimidating; he tried to play that power game with the students and stuff. But he was very accessible. If you go to his office, he would talk to you like a person, and he'd encourage you, and encourage yOur writing, and stuff. So it was kind of uneven the way... but it was still very male dominated and male oriented... white male oriented. And the whole administration was white and male. I think when Beverly Ludbetter got hired, it was like a revelation [laugh]. JH; When do you think the university really made a commitment, if they ever did, a concerted effort to hire more female or minority professors? Or give professorships to them? LM: I think that happened in the 60's and I think the results were there when I got there. I think the push was already done, and they were satisfied: This was enough, you know, ”We have minority faculty, yes we do, and boy, do they work them hard." Because if you were a minority faculty or a minority administrator you had to wear so many hats, because there were so few. You had to sit on umpteen committees and do umpteen counselling and represent the university in all these community things, so that the university looks good, and national things too, and... I don't see, and I haven‘t seen a big push to get... because hiring a faculty is more determined by the department than the President. Howard Swearer might like somebody but if the department doesn't like him, I doubt that they would get them. And in fact, one of the '85 demands was to increase the number of minority faculty. And that is a, it's a tough job to do that. Because you have to get the faculty, "Okay, we'll go along with this." And you have to get minority Ph.D.‘s out there in the world to want to come to Brown, and be one of the few. And kind of be, I mean they're not pioneers, but they're not... JH: It's not going to be very easy... LM: They're not going to have this big Third World Community of Faculty here, colleagues to talk to and all that stuff... JH: I think I'm going to... it‘s time to turn the tape over. LM: Okay. End Tape 1, Side 1 Tape 1, Side 2 JH: You were talking about minority faculty and... LM: Or administrators... JH: ...and administrators. Have you been working at the University since graduation? LM: I was pretty embarrassed to say the least. I had six jobs in six years since I‘ve been out. Isn't that embarrassing? (laugh) And one of those jobs was working here in ‘84, I think, working at the Venture program, that was half time. And then the other half of the time I was working downtown in Barry Beekham's publishing company. So, in effect I was kind of working for Brewn because he was still affiliated with Brown. Then I went to, well, should I go in the whole order, or do you want, is that enough? JH: Either way, whichever one. LM: Okay. Sad tale. And it all starts when I did my summer jobs in Chicago, during college. In Chicago there are very few jobs for people who don't want full time jobs. And you either work at Me Donalds or a waitress or something like that. And I didn‘t want that, so the only job I could get was working in a bank. So for the four summers in college I worked in the same bank in Chicago. So my resumes all have this banking stuff. So I get out of college with an English degree and banking. What do you do? I couldn't find any jobs I guess in writing or media things. So I took a job at Oldstone Bank, and I'll never do that again, because it was... I am not a banker, and I'm not financially oriented, you know, big profits don‘t really excite me, and figuring out people’s checking accounts... And I lasted there about a year and a half. I gave it a good college try, and I did very well. I got promoted like three times, you know, and they had me in Newport as the manager of the branch and everything. I was on my way to VP, but I knew it wasn‘t for me. So I guess I tried to steer myself toward public relations, writing, editing, that kind of thing, and that is reflected hopefully in the next jobs that I had, which were Barry Beckham's writing, publishing company which was a lot of PR work. The Venture Program was more of an income thing. It was like I needed the supplemental income because Barry wasn’t paying very much. And that was a program type of job, where you're a program officer. The Venture Program is a leavetaking program, for undergrads. And 1 was basically establishing more internships for leavetakers in areas of business, finance, and things like that. And that was fun, but it was only a half time job, no benefits, no nothing. And, so I needed a full time job, and a year later a job opened in the PR department at Rhode Island Hospital, editing their newspaper, and doing other media things. I thought, "Wow, this is great, I‘ll benefit, good job," and it was a very good job, except for the fact that, and this is my introduction to corporate women. My boss was a woman and she was terrible, as far as... she was very threatened by me, and I think by other people in the department, because she did not have a college degree, she worked her way up, here I am, you know... talented, whatever, and it was very kind of a friction like relationship between us. And I dealt with it for about a year, and then I thought, "Well, there's no way to move up, except for her job, and she's not going anywhere." So I kind of looked around, and I found a job in a public relations agency that published newspapers of companies like Hasbro and AT Cross and people like that. And I did very well there, except for... this is another female boss --not that female bosses are bad, but the ones, these two, were tough to work for, because you never felt like they were growing you or challenging you. I almost felt like I was just being worked. And also with that job there was a lot of driving to different Clients and things, and not a lot of rewards, on a lot of levels there weren’t a lot of rewards. And not very much room to grow, again, as far as career, so while I was doing that, I was freelancing for the George Street Journal, and got to know Don De Maio. And one conversation we were having, he said, "Well by the way, Nina's leaving." And she was the one who had this job. And I said. "Oh, really? I think I'll apply." Because I always loved Brown, I always loved being associated with it, and being around it. There was always this kind of love relationship that I had for Brown regardless of what students said to me or did to me, that I always... had a soft spot, I guess you call it, for Brown, and probably always will. Because I really see that my life has been changed dramatically because I came to Brown. I mean, I would not be the same person if I had gone to the University of Chicago, if I'd gone to Yale, because of a lot of things that happened, and because of the university itself, the way it's structured. So I started here in July of last year, and I like it a lot. It's very challenging, and my writing in fact has gone downhill because I'm so busy doing production things that I don’t concentrate on my writing. So I have to do that more, anyway. JH: So have you seen the University changing from the time you graduated? LM: Yeah. One way of course is the fact that they have a biracial student group. The attitudes toward biracial people, multiracial people is a lot more accepting. The student body has changed a lot and I think it's a function of financial aid sources being scarce, and middle class or lower middle class people are slowly but surely being squeezed out of the Brown student body. And in fact Ijust had lunch today with a Hispanic student from Central High School. Central is just like my high school. I don't know if you're familiar with Central, but it's a school in Providence, inner city Providence, drugs, the whole bit. You go there and half the people don't graduate, and that was just like my high school. And Jose, the young man that I interviewed-— I interviewed him when he was applying to Brown, because I do NAS interviews, I don't know if you're familiar with those. They're the National Association of Schools program or something. And it's where Brown Alums interview prospective students, and that's who interviewed me when I was applying to Brown, were people who were going to Brown or had gone to Brown, and so I knew that once I was out of Brown I wanted to do that, because I knew that it made such a big impact on me. And I wanted to interview inner city kids. I didn't want to interview these suburban kids who were going to be interviewed by anybody. And I wanted the kids who no one else wanted, because these kids, they're the ones who need Brown the most. And actually they're the ones Brown needs the most, because Brown needs racial and economic diversity, socioeconomic diversity. I mean it's one thing to say yes we have blacks, we have Asians, we have Hispanics... but if all those people are upper middle class or upper class people then you don't have diversity. You have the same ideas, the same viewpoints, the same labels on your clothing, the same experiences, everything... politically conservative, or whatever, or liberal, as the case may be. So Jose got in, and I told him, I said, "Jose do you know what a rarity you are?" And he said, "Yeah, because I'm the first person from a Central in ten years that has gotten into Brown." And he wants to be an engineer... hahl one of the hardest majors at Brown, if not the hardest major, it's like 22 courses you have to take out of 28. Anyway, I'll talk him Out of that, no, no... So that has changed. I mean the fact that he is such a rarity, people like him, because I wasn't such a rarity. I was kind of a dying breed coming from an inner city school with hardly any money, I mean really, and now it's even worse, so that‘s really sad, that that's happened, but I understand why it's happened. I think politically students are in general more apathetic. There are a lot of active students politically, but I think in the early '70's to the late ‘70's there was more of a wider political activism. There were so many issues, you know, and there still are, but at that point there was a lot of divestment issues, a lot of affirmative action issues, and this whole Baki case was during that time, you know, reverse discrimination and all that stuff, and a lot of women's issues. I think during that time Louise Langvier who was a faculty member here, sued Brown because of discrimination based on her gender, and that was a big case. JH: Did students in any way get involved with that? LM: I think she had student support. I think the women's groups on campus gave her a lot of support and I think the Rhode Island women's groups gave her a lot of support. She had a good case. I think she won it too. And I think gay rights was becoming more of a widely accepted issue at that time. Now it's like second nature for people, but then it was just emerging as a force on campus. And the whole idea of Third World I think was coming at that time. And now it's kind of talked about but I don't think really pursued aggressively, yOu know, to get a Third World kind of unity among students here and to push for certain things as a coalition. I mean otherwise you'd be in a coalition with something that came out of the ’60's and the '70's. And on various issues at various times, the groups on campus would act as a coalition. You'd see Third World Coalition protesting this or endorsing this or not endorsing this or speaking out on that, and that was kind of a common thing then. But now it's kind of died down and people, I think people are because of the pressure to go out there and pay off your loans and make money because things cost so much, and maybe the me—ism stuff too, there is not that sense of being unified and the coalition concept and all the stuff, so I think that's changed. I think people are a lot more pre-professional than in the mid to late '70's. And it kind of shows in the Venture Program which is a Ieavetaking program, that the kind of leave students are taking are almost like career leaves, kind of like they're not going to plant seeds in Africa or whatever... JH: Internships... LM: Yeah, they want internships, they want lab work or whatever... JH: What about women? How do you think they've changed? LM: I think... students, you mean? JH: Both, students and... LM: I think on the administrative side, I think women have become more of a force. People like Beverly Ludbetter, peOpIe like Carrie Cherian, Sheila Blumstein, and Karen Roeollin-Romer have, I guess validated voices now that they didn't have before, or maybe they didn't, maybe they weren't perceived as having before. I think now they have a lot more of that validated power that administrators have. Student wise... (tapping pen) I think there was probably more pressure to, for women, to try to figure out how to balance everything, to try to figure out how am I going to go to grad school, tnaybe get married, tnaybe have kids, all before the age of 30. And it doesn’t happen (laugh). And I think there‘s this biological clock hanging over us all. and we’re all going, 30, and then my eggs go bad... or something crazy like that. And it's just totally not true. but... I don't there's a pressure or anything to get married or anything, but I think there's a pressure to figure out the future and get it down pat before graduation day, which is a lot of unnecessary pressure. I felt it too when I was a senior. That's why I didn't go to grad school. I often regret, I had all these applications, I was all set, but then I said, "There's no way I can take another four years of school, or even two. I just have to get out there." Because I had been in school since kindergarten-- no breaks, no leaves, no nothing. I should have taken a leave. And the day I threw those in the garbage was a very nice day. So really there's, I remember throwing that whole stack in the garbage, I felt so good. Because I didn't know what I wanted to do. I was like, "Why am I going to pay all this money to do something I’m not sure about?" You don't have to be 100% sure, but if you don't want to be a lawyer, why are you going to grad, law school? I had friends that were going to law school just to go to grad school. They didn’t want to be lawyers, but they didn't want to be doctors, and they didn't want to be businesspeople, so it's the only other choice. You have more options than those three little bins, and that mentality is really strong. The whole career services office just kind of blossomed in my four years. I remember as a freshman getting little typed up little dinky things from Career Services. My senior year, it was like Career Forum, and you'd get like this, you know, and they'd be like free, free speakers, including alums, you know, and it was-- and now it's like a machine, it's like this institution, it’s almost like a department on campus. I mean you have to write a package that has to go to career services when yeu're a senior. And the lines to get in to see Merril Lynch and stuff, out the door, and that was like a whole phenomena. It kind of started when I was a senior, but now it‘s real, it's a real force. But I think women are being told that, in our time, in our generation, whatever, we're being told that we can have it all, you know. And I don't think we can, without going nuts (laugh). I think, and I've talked to some professors, some female professors—- this would be a good idea for a forum, to have female professors and administrators talking about the myth of having it all»- beeause I don't care what Jane Pauley says, it's just, and I don't even have kids, and it's tough. I'm just married and working and it‘s tough; it is tough. Because when you decide to go to grad school, it‘s like, "What do you mean?" Half the ineome‘s gone all of a sudden, and what are we going to do, go on welfare for four years? And it's all these complicated issues start coming up and you say, "Well, I want to have kids, but when do I want to have kids" before grad school. during grad school, after grad school? What do I d0“ do I stop working, do I work part—time, do I do this, do I do that?" All these choices that no one prepares you for. All these decisions, I should say, or issues, that no one really prepares you for—— how to arrange your life. I'm not talking about career planning-- I‘m talking life. Do you get married now? do you put it off? Do you get pregnant now? do you put it off? What's important? what's not? What has a time element to it? what doesn't? And I guess it's a faster paced society, I think, for women, and it's harder to make choices because there are so many. I’m not complaining that we have these, I mean I'm glad that we have this problem, because it's a testimony to the women's movement that we have these these many issues, I mean these many options. I mean, the success of the women's movement is the fact that we have to grapple with all these. And if it failed, then we'd say, "Well... I'm either going to get married or I'm not and that's it." And that's all I have to choose. I‘m breathing. okay I'm happy. I remember I was talking to a faculty member here yesterday and she said... oh what did she say? something like... "Well, I'm trying to do all these things. I'm trying to..." She's going to go to lecture in Oxford, England in the fall, and she's very excited, so, "Oh well I'm going to be [unintelligible], oh and high school, the kids and the husband..." And you could see all these things she had to deal with, and I just can‘t imagine how she organizes her life. But I think that's the biggest issue, is how to organize your life so that you don’t sell yourself short. One thing I‘m grappling with now is this whole idea of grad school, because I kind of think there are two ways I could go. either into the writing program or into an Am Civ program on a graduate level, and not have to worry about money too much because there's fellowships and stuff, because I‘m at a time now when Brown and other schools are trying their darnest to get more minority faculty. It's that whole issue again, because Brown didn't do and other interviews didn't really aggressively recruit them in the late ‘70's and now they're paying for it. And now they're saying, "Where are they? We don't have any. What‘s wrong?" That's because you didn't recruit 5 years ago, that's why. And so now there are all these fellowships and all these grants for doctoral and masters levels, and it's great for someone like me. And so I‘m in a good position to go into something without having to worry about financial aid and stuff. But I was getting back to the whole idea of I have gone through an Ivy League University, I have succeeded, and I owe it to myself-- I feel this way—- to do more than just sit here and write news releases, and articles. And I also have a clock, you know, I say 28, I'm old, (laugh). And then I see people 70 going for their masters and I don't worry about it anymore. But there are times I say. "Oh Linda. forget it, You're too old." And I think a lot of it is because when you're out of school, and in the working world, it's a lot harder to go back to school. than it is to just follow the crowd and go right into grad school and get it over with. But I think it's more rewarding when you do go back, because you know why you're going back, you know what you want to get out of it... JH: You're more sure... LM: ...y0u're more sure of it, and y0u know how important it is. You know the value of it. You're not just going to sit by as minimum. And I think you become a better student, you approach your graduate level work on a more scholarly, professional level, whatever you want to say, more mature level anyway. Instead of, "Oh well, another paper. another course to pass, so I can get my MBA, whatever." So I think that's a good way to approach it. So probably either this year or next year I'll start, and it's hard. Well, another reason why it's hard is that you don‘t have an advisor. You don't have a Professor Borts or someone. I mean you can go and probably and you know, "Well, what do you think I should do?" But you're an alum, right? and you're supposed to know these things. You're an alum you're supposed to know everything; you're supposed to have your life in order, come on, you‘re an alum. And in fact in the Br0wn Alumni Monthly, I don't know if you've read it, not this issue, but there have been people writing letters, alums saying, "You know it hasn't been a bed of roses out here... You kn0w, I though I was going to have the world at my feet... I really had underachievement after I graduated, it's terrible..." I think that from believing that, the world is going to bow at your feet when you show them your diploma, and anyone who believes that needs a little dose of the real world, to bring them down to reality (laugh). Because then maybe they'll work harder next time, and not expect it to be handed to them. I think a lot of people come in expecting that, and I came in by the skin of my teeth, I know I did. I mean, my SAT's were below average. I mean, the only thing going for me was my personality, and my extracurriculars, and my minority status, and it was the '75 agreement, it was like, "Oh well we had better increase the number of blacks here." Thank you for taking over university hall in '75 because otherwise I wouldn't be here. I mean it's true, I mean, you can see in the specifics after '75 all of a sudden the minorities went way up. The university di500vered, that minorities could think. Especially blacks, I mean the number of blacks went way up. I think the class of '77 was the highest. Funny, I mean, in fact, last year's class coming in the number of Asians is really high, and it's only because the Asian American students put out that report saying that Brown has discriminated against Asian American students applying: the SAT's were higher, academically on par or better, and that whole issue, because that was ridiculous. But then all of a sudden, whoal We got Asian Americans. It's such a trip... JH: Okay, I'm going to switch to the other tape. LM: Okay. End Tape 1, Side 2 Start Tape 2, Side 1 LM: It's a magical place, I have to say. JH: This is tape 2 of the interview with Linda Mahdesian, Okay, let's see, we were talking about admissions. and stuff like that... LM: Oh yeah, and how it‘s harder when you get out of school to direct your career, your life, because you don't have advisers. I] mean if yOur parents,, I guess you could use your parents and stuff, and my mother certainly is enCOuraging me to go back and get my PhD, A doctor, finally, yeah_ﬁ,, so and there's a lot of that too in all of my achievements, her approval or her vicariously being a part of it, you know, I just want to do so well because I want her to feel the achievement as well, and she does, you know, JH: Who was y0ur role model, growing up or”. LM: Oh my mom, workaholic, she has worked be same job for about 25 years in Chicago, and she doesn't drive, so she takes the bus, every day of her life to downtown Chicago, and takes the bus home, and never complains gets up at 5 o clock in the morning, and she's just, I respect. her and the older I get the more I can say wow, she‘s too much, I could never be like her. Cause she's sacrificed so much and I know there‘s part of me that’s willing to do that for my kids whenever I have them, but I don‘t think I'm ready to do that now. I think that, I don't think so. Tough decision to go back, because once you go back yeu‘re gong back for yourself, you know, it;'s not some , it;s not like going from sophomore to junior year or junior to senior year, or even senior year into grad school, it's it's like starting, it;s a big risk, cause you're... JI-I: You're putting everything on hold... LM: You're putting everything on hold, or and you;'re investing in yourself, and there's not a lot of people saying, well, your application has to be in a certain time, you have 50 steps and you have to do this, you know, like guidance counselors used to do, none of that, it's all self directed, and your scholarships are self dsirected, you don’t have the classmates feeling, or the elass______ you know, it's kind of a lonesome kind of thing because you have to really be aggressive i think and assertive, and go after what you want and the peeple that you want, the mentors that you want, you know, if you don;'t like a certain. whaddayaeallit, advisor dissertation adviser, you know you've got to tell them, and say, this is just not working ,and I need a person that will support me and go on. I don’t think I could have done that at 22, I think I was so naive of authority figures and how ,my relationship to them. I don;‘to think I would have ever , I don't think I could have ever like stood up to a professor. or something, in that way, maybe I couldn't. But now I have no problem. At least arguing, you know it;s not saying I don‘t;t agree with you I;m getting another professor, adviser. JH: Well, I have a question, that i forgot to ask earlier, and that was, you know you were telling me these stories about these professors, but you had... LM: I;m not naming any names. JH: Did, was there a place you could go with complaints like that, I mean for women? LM: Yeah, yeah, well, yeah, there was and Barbara Tannenbaum I think was part of that whole thing. There was like a sexual harassment task force or committee to go to. There was also a racial harassment committee to go to, Yeah, there was, and I think those started at that point‘ there was a lot of, I think the rape crisis center started at, in that time. III: What sort of role did the women's center have at that , Sarah Doyle, I mean... LM: See, that's another thing that's changed, is that their role on campus has grown a lot more. When I was here, it was like you know, I can't this is terrible,m this is like the view, well, if you‘re a gay woman that’s the place for you, you know, like that kind of thing, and so it always had this kind of negative connotation to it, and very few minority women get involved, and now, it's like a women's center, and there are minority women, it seems to be more active and more I guess they seem to sponsor more things, and have a variety of things. It used to be, I guess because of the function of the times, a very feminist thing, and that was like a pigeonhole almost, that it because a feminist thing, instead of that being a factor of it, and now I think that it's a faction of it, and it's not the whole function of it. The gallery, I don't know if the gallery existed, when I was here, and now it's like one of the main galleries of the campus, if you;'re going to put yOur stuff up and you’re a woman, you’re going to at the Sarah Doyle Gallery. My aunt in law, in fact, my husband‘s aunt, displayed her work in the Sarah Doyle Gallery last semester, and we all came to the opening reception, and it was great, it was just great,t and she donated all the funds to___. She sold actually, it was a display of ceramic leaves, and she sold the leaves for $10 a piece and gave the money to ____ House, raised like $600 or something,. JH: Wow... LM: I know, it was beautiful, fall leaves. Anyway, so I think the Sarah Doyle Center has become more prominent, and well managed and just a well working part of the campus. JH: yeah, because I know that... LM: Third World Center on the other hand is going down.... and I think that's a function of the director, I don't think Presley Smith knows what he is doing, and this can be on tape cause I don't mind at all. I don‘t think he has a firm vision of what Third World-ism is all about at brown or in the world, or what the center is supposed to do, I mean here's this beautiful facility, and it doesn't do anything, I mean, and when it was in the basement it did more, in the basement of Churchill House, There were so many functions coming out of the Third World Center when it was at Churchill House and because of the leadership. It was a very student run type of thing. And there was always art exhibits and poetry reading 5 and meetings and talks and dinners and pot Iueks and receptions and now at Third World center it’s just a shell_____ Anyway, if I didn‘t go to grad school, and if he left his job,m then that's one job I'd like to have, but i think I'm going to go to grad school IH: Does your husband support your decision to go to grad school? LM: Yes, if I get the money, cause if I get the money, I could probably work part time and go to school, and so he supported that, but he does know it's going to be tough because he is in school, he is in seminary, and I'm supporting the two of us basically, financially it might not be a stressful thing if I get fellowships, but, emotionally it will be stressful for both of us to be in school at the same time. JH: Right. LM: On the other hand, and then I think well, i could wait until he's out of school which is 1990 and I'll bee 30, and that biological clock up there, you know, and I always think about that, I always do, because I want a family, and I'm not going to wait until I‘m 40 to have a family, but I also want to aetualize my potential careerwise and i don't want to sell myself short. I mean I could have gone to URI and do what I'm doing now. Why did I go to brown, if not to develop further intellectually, and make more of an imprint. I mean I have a strong social conscience, I guess. I don't want to, I want to reach society somehow either through my writing or through teaching, and my dream would be to be a professor here, and maybe teach courses about multiracial history in America, and maybe even comparative with other countries, but there was a lecture, I don;t know if it was today, somebody talking about biracial people in Latin America and their experiences, and I missed it but i would have liked to go. But you know,m that whole issue ius kind of fascinating to me, because no one, I mean there are books about interracial marriage and stuff like that but I don't think any one has ever sat down and did some kind of historical analysis, of how did these people‘ i mean they're not a people in a sense but yet they are an invisible kind of minority that doesn't get much recognition or validation, and we‘re kind of socialized to choose one or the other. You know, you can't be both, you can't be all, you've got to be one, and it's ironic because you have this tension of that you have to be one, and grappling with the reality that you're not just one. grappling with this whole social idea of the melting pot, and isn't it wonderful that the races can live together, but the products of that races living together and marrying and having multiracial kids, is that the products, us, are told to choose one or the other, and hence deny one or the other, and it's a psychologically damaging dilemma to deny you know part of your heritage. And to be rejected by a society that's telling you isn't it so wonderful that we have such a multidiverse society, so I think that would been interesting study and therapeutic for me too. So and in fact Brown, and this is a big change too, Brown is gong to start a center for the study of race, an actual center on campus for the study of race and ethnicity in America and that just thrills me, because this w0uld be in line with what I want to study and I've talked to a couple professors involved in that formation of the center and told them what i would want to do and they're excited about it, you know, so a part of me is just... I guess part of me is this kind of inertia saying oh boy because another thing that's a function of the last six years is that like one thing after another after another and there's been no real stretch and stability you know, a part f me's like just don't make any big life changes right now, you know , just give me two years, just two years that's all all ask and then you go pay __ , you know, that part of me is saying, but no no, you know, I have to go with my convictions you know and part of me is like uh, but then another part of me is, it's worth the risk, you know it's worth the risk it's worth the hassles, and it's going to pay off, I hope (laugh). But I think it would, I think I;d be a good professor, and I think Brown would be good to have me, because one, because I am a multiracial person, and I'm bringing a course of study that hasn't really been brought, I mean there are similar courses, but not really thoroughly delving into it as far as I'm satisfied with, so it would be, like I could see that i wouldn‘t have to worry about getting a job you know after grad school, I wouldn't have to say, who's going to hire me now that I've got this PhD. 1 think it would naturally progress into a position somewhere in the Am Civ or something, and then I'd have to publish a course but and get tenure and all that good stuff, but you know part of me is think ing Linda you've got to be crazy, you know, what do you think ,you know,m who do you think you are, you know, part of me is still back there in Chicago in inner city saying you can't do it, you know, who do you think you are going to Brown, I think I‘ve been programmed in that way and you know, ghosts of thought come back from that time where nothing was possible, you know, where just graduating and go and get a job and go get married and that was it, but i think coming to Brown was like the pivotal experience for me in my own self- image development that I can actually do this, I can actually go to an Ivy League school and achieve and succeed and thrive and contribute you know and wow, I'm something else you know, (laugh) but ah, but still doubts oh, how can I go to grad school, how can I study, I don;t know how to study, I don't know how to... you know it's like, yeah, I kind of have to slap myself and say shut up, you know, you graduated you passed, you got all A's, 0h,.... well, not every semester, but... there were a few, but i think those doubts kind of haunt you, and I think that's a function of being a minority woman in society, hat, not to blame society for all my hang-ups but, you're not you're not nurtured in the same kind of ways you know to believe you can conquer the world and here you are, isn't Brown lucky to have you and all that great stuff... JH: It's more like surprise that you’ve achieved. LM: Yeah, it's more like wow, you should be glad you are here, you should be glad they let you in, you know that whole idea of letting you in, and the whole idea of minority affirmative action, it's almost like well, I got here, I got here because of my skin color, you know. and you don‘t really believe you could have gotten here even if you were white, you know‘ it's kind of a turnaround thing of credentials and you're there, and you're glad you're there, but you're doubting that you c0uldn‘t have done it unless you’re a minority, and you know you have this it's kind of like master- slave, like oh thank you for having me, you know it's this terrible kind of psychological game you know instead of you know you should be glad to have me and I should have been here 200 years ago as far as minorities you know, it shouldn't have been a phenomenon of the 60's to have minorities at Brown, in large numbers, which it was a phenomenon of the 60's you know to have minorities in large numbers. i think the class of 68 was the first to have a significant number, so there's still that kind of tape, I guess psychological tape, that says you've gone far enough, you should be satisfied, after all you're a woman, and you‘re minority, and come on what do you expect out of your life? you know this is America, it’s a man's world, it's a white world. blablabla, and you kind of have to fight your battles that are inside of you, I think those are harder than the ones that are outside of you, because I can deal with the enemy outside, but the enemy inside is harder, much harder to deal with. JH: Do you think that's one of the greatest challenges facing you know, women, because it's just.. it seems like now we've dealt with all that, or we've been actively dealing with the things on the outside but then those little ingrained things you know.. LM: yeah... JH: ...the stuff you grow up with. LM: Yeah, because you're always the exception. I mean, it‘s a reality, that in the society, if you‘re a woman ,and if you‘re not in a traditional woman's role, you are the exception, and you always think,you either think I have to be Superwoman, you know to achieve, or you think, I'm the token, and it's funny here in the department, I‘m the only woman, in this department, and I'm the only non—whiteperson in this department, who is a staff member, I‘m not talking about the secretaries, and it takes it's a lot of responsibility that's on my shoulders I mean, if there' an issue that's a minority issue they come to me, and if it's a women's issue, they come to me, and the way I respond is the way they're going to respond, if I see i as important, then they'll say it's important, if I am kind of glib and __ then they'll see it that way, so it's a big weight you know, to carry that kind of reSponsibility. You know, I did an article on Hispanics at Brown, Hispanic admissions at Brown, and it was not something that they thought of, you know, and I have had to consciously in every issue of the George Street Journal try to get the minority voice somewhere even if it's a play or something about blacks or Asians or something you know, just to show, and it’s good that someone's thinking that way because this paper is supposedly representative of Brown, and if Brown is just a bunch of white faces then it's not representing Brown, especially our precommencement issue we had a photo montage of graduates from previous years and stuff and I had to say there are no minorities in this picture, in this collage, you know, and we had to get some and we did. JH: I think it‘s really interesting how you know it seems like a lot of times they don't mean to be offensive but it‘s just they don‘t think about it, and so it's like... LM: And that's the most offensive of all. JH: Right. LM: you know when you come down to it, not to be though of, I'd rather be thought of negatively that not to be thought of at all, you know at least think of... JH: It's just not in their conscious enough yet that they think of it. LM: And I think that'll take a lot of pushing and so I push and I don;'t feel guilty of pushing because I know that to the extent that I push it will be that much easier for the next generation to come along or the next person in this job who should be a minority, because this paper should have someone on it who sees more than just white, and you know it's what you said, it's not consciously that way, but it is, and I know that there are times when there would be racial slurs and I'd have to be the one who says hey wait a minute, and I know if I want here that wouldn't happen, so I kind of have to be the educator and the consciousness raiser and them moral bastian you know it's a lot of responsibility because you‘re a woman you know you're in a man's __, everyone else is a man in this department, and they're all pretty much ,well, except for Don, they're all pretty much upper class kind of you know guys and here I am and it was just weird I thought over whether to capitalize Black,I said you're going to capitalize Black, I mean Black is not a little b, it's not like the dog is black, you know it's not and they wouldn't, one guy was like well, why don't you capitalize white then, you know, and I was just like because (laugh). But I‘d rather have those arguments than not have them, at least get them to think about things. So yeah there aren't a lot of inner tapes and inner doubts that are just the function of being a woman and of being a minority in America. yeah, we are looked upon as exceptional that we are here, you know, and come on, if you're a male and you're at Brown, it's like a given, I mean you didn't have to work, you just got here, and that really bugs me, it‘s like, "and we let in so many women," it‘s like, you didn't let them in ,they earned their way in, I mean and that whole thing about letting in minorities in too, it bugs me, but because of affirmative action I think they have to catch up for all the mistakes they made way back when. I remember I interviewed Sam Naybriek who was the first Black PhD from Brown, and he told me that the Bio department didn't want him. They said a Negro was going to upset the family atmosphere of their department, and he came in and the chairman of the department tested him, you know, gave him more rigorous kind of things to make sure he was serious, and once he passed that hurdle they were like friends for life. But... JH: But I mean it's frustrating to always have to prove yourself, you know.. LM: Yeah, and I think as woman you always have to prove yourself, and I think until lit changes we have to accept it and not fight it, you know and not Complain about it, because it's almost like complaining about the weather, you know, just deal with it, and accept the role of having to prove yourself and saying you're going to have to push for prosperity, uh posterity, whatever, the people behind you, because it's reality, if you don‘t push they're going to just say she's a woman, sorry you know, we tried, but she just didn't and if you do push, yes some will say that because she's superwoman, you know that' because she's a special one, Linda got here because she's a special minority woman, but there will be people who‘ll say, I guess minorities can make it, I guess women can hack it, I guess they can make big decisions without having a nervous breakdown, you know, or crying or being hysterical women, you know,m and I guess you have to prove yourself to yourself because you know our society has taught us you can only go so far, or if we go farther it's because we're some special Superwoman or because of our race, we'll always have a handicap. And you just have to go out there and prove to yourself that none of that is true and hopefully some other people along the way will see it too, and because I think that's all you can hope for is to not only change your own mind, but change some other minds, and only after minds are changed will attitudes change and policies change. Policies don't Change until the minds change, and that's what racism, sexism, any kind of ism, that's what race workshop does, they just talk about racismr They just explore it, they don't preach to anybody, you know, and in people's cases they see their hangup and their minds are Changed and that's success, that's success. End Tape 2, Side 1 Tape 2, Sied 2 LM: (laugh) and now back to our program. But you know it surprises me that I have those kind of self doubts, I really didn't think I was that insecure, but I guess at a certain plateau you start pulling back, at a certain career decision or risk you start saying well I don;'t know about this one, you know, because it's not just going to grad, school, it's not like I'm just going to go to grad school, and life won't be any different. Going to grad school sets into motion a whole other chain of events and a whole other path... JH: It's breaking new ground... LM: Yeah, it's breaking a whole in the ground, and getting into a whole another pool I mean you're swimming here, and swimming in little corporate pool, basically corporate, you know going to work 9 to 5, get a paycheck, blablabla, and going into the academic pool is a whole another world, where you're now a scholar, you're now a researcher, you're now accountable to who I don;t know, department chair, I don't know, but to yourself more than ever before, you are now the expert so to speak it your subject, you're going to have colleagues, you're called professor, you know and you have students that look to you for the final answer on things, or at least the right questions, you know (laugh) I think the best professors gave the right questions. And now the pressure is to publish your work and to get tenure and all that stuff so you're in a whole another race, foot race, you're not climbing the ladder, so much as well, essentially you are but, it's a different kind of ladder, it's more on your brain than on you output, I mean your efficiency your productivity, how well you get along with people, all that kind of stuff, and you have to publish the stuff, but it's more publishing what you're interesting in doing anyway, so it's a whole another world, that whole academician world is so different and I can only think about I don't even I have no conception of what it's like but I think it will help being a student at Brown and then being a teacher at brown to understand where students are coming from, and to understand what students need fro professors, they don't need to be hand held, but they need to be nurtured, they need to be challenged as adults who think deeply and complexly and who aren't going to be shocked if you say, well, I don't know. I frankly do not know the answer and, you know, it‘s like I have not had a professor say I don‘t know. That's great question, one to do research on. They probably think their way through half the stuff. I wish they would be, like secure enough to say, hey I don‘t know, I don't I've never researched that 's a good question, but I've never heard a professor do that, and I think that's dishonest and dangerous for students to have that kind of perception that these professors are you know, they have full handle on their disciplines, because they don't. I mean they don't, there's no way they could. Unless they study it for their lifetimes and none of them have and even then there's always new data, and it doesn't matter what discipline it is, it could be science, it could be humanities, it could be history, I mean the whole thing now in literary criticism is reevaluating the literary criticism before, because they looked at poetry as some words written in a vacuum and they said what a beautiful style what a beautiful syntax what beautiful meter, what beautiful metaphor, but they never thought of the political time the cultural time, you know, the sexism here, the racism, and so this whole literary criticism movement is looking at that and so no one is the last word, and I think the for the professors to think they are, is first of all and ego trip ,and its misleading for their students, but then the students don‘t believe that they can add anything, you know, it‘s like why am I doing his, what am I going to add to this, he knows it all. What am I going to tel him that he doesn't know? Or she. But i think the professors should give them a sense of what's not known, you know, as sense of the open-endedness, of this body of knowledge and the potential for them to discover things that weren't discovered before. I mean ,that's the whole thrill of science, you know, I'm gong to discover the cure for AIDS or whatever, but the humanities it's just as exciting, I mean there's no final answer on even in the life of Abraham Lincoln you know, Gore Vidal wrote this whole new history on Abraham Lincoln that tells us things whenever knew about the guy, you know he had hang—ups he had these dreams, that were you know, prophetic f his being assassinated, and his wife was going crazy and all this stuff. I never knew that, you know. So I think if professors can give that kind of discovery aspect to to every discipline, it could help students to be better scholars and to be, to believe in their own intellectual curiosity. I remember taking a philosophy course, and on one level I was very excited to be able to grapple with these big questions like, what is matter? you know, that was our first essay, Well what if there was like, what do I have to say that no philosopher has said already? you know, and the professor really didn't encourage us to think originally, so, i think I'd like to do that, have that kind of approach to teaching, and i think you just, I mean I‘ve talked to professors I talk to several professors today, about the Guggenheim fellowships and I can honestly say out of the four only one spoke English, you know what I'm saying, the others are so theoretical and so professor-ease y0u know like, well I'm trying to sound the relationship between the complexities of a certain milieu, and a ...I was like shut up, fuck you, give me a straight answer, you know i just want to shake them sometimes, and these people who are they trying to impress? I mean you know what is it, you have to be, you have to talk like that for someone to think you're intelligent, I don't think they're intelligent, I think they're very difficult to understand, sorry. I don't know, I just I would love to be able to come into a class and say alright, I'm not going to try to impress you and probably know more than I do, but I‘m the teacher, and (laugh), just to give them a sense that I'm a learner as well as they are and, yes I can profess on a certain subject, but I'm a learner just like they are and I think that helps them that knowledge is a lifelong pursuit, and not something you do in four years and that's it., and I was never taught that, never, in all my years of school, never given that kind of nurturing. You know, I don;t know how I got it, I think just by looking at professors, talking to them about their work, and realizing that you know, what makes a fourth century military soldier named marcelinas important, the scholar who's studying him, and any subject can be important, and that's the whole thing about knowledge, it's like that's why Stanford, I don't know if you heard about Stanford, used to have like 15 Classics that everyone had to read, like Darwin and all these ting,s and now they said that half of these were racist, half of these were sexist, so they got them down to 6, you know, and the secretary of Education, William Bennet is like oh you caved in to the women and the minorities, you caved in, he's totally, I hate him, and and that whole thing of what is important is determined so much by who studies it, you know, and that's why a lot of books about women and written by women, are not looked, because the persons who determine that are white men, I mean I think they're very important, I think they're essential to my education, and you know I don't want to have to take a course on women's literature in order to read them, you know, why aren't they in 20th century literature? I mean there are some but not that many. JH: mainstream ones, you know, and.. LM: Yeah, right, exactly‘ the ones that the white male society deemed as acceptable. And they're white aristocratic women who are writing these I mean, anyway, but that's a whole other thing. I realized that especially when I was thinking about studying this whole aspect of f multiracialness you're probably saying so what's so important about it, well it's very important to me, you know, but then I think well will it be important to anybody else, who's going to want to study this but me? But I mean, a scholar doesn’t really ask those questions, you know they don‘t have to worry about that. But i think it's that insecurity that always had to have someone validate it, always had to have someone validate your existence and you interests and your values and your labels. For a long time i just wanted everyone to agree with my whole idea of multiracialness, you know, but I needed an outsider to validate that label, you know, which is a very tenuous situation because if they don't , then you feel like you're inferior, like you don't count, like you're nothing and you should take the label that society wants to give you, which is black, and I came to the point where I guess I decided I'm going g to take that power away from society an hold it. And i think women are not good power bearers, not even political ,I'm just talking about personal, this is what i want to look at myself as and I don't care what you think,I mean society being you, and that's a very you know defiant role for a woman to take, bu if a man did it, no problem, no problem, and I guess I'll have to balance that my whole life, but I‘m glad I see it at least, and I'm very sensitive now to that whole thing of power, and you know this whole issue of going back to school, I mean it's a big decision I haven't, I've gone to A-Y, but i haven't gone through Z, you know, I got the information about grad school, I talked to dean Bruce about it, I've talked to professors about out it, I've talked to this person about it, I've talked to that one, but haven't said I'm going to do it, and I don't care what anybody thinks, I don't care what my boss thinks, I don't care what this office thinks ,i am going to do it, and I'm getting there very quickly as I talk about it but it's just taking the power to control your life or at least steer it, I mean you can't control everything, but at least steer it in the direction you want it to go. And it's something I think I think getting married is in a sense taking some power for your life, you're saying I want to get married and I'm not going to care what anyone thinks. Cause in this Culture almost like you sold out, you know, you sold out you got married, shame, shame, shame, you know, you sold out, too bad you just couldn't stay single it's just too bad, but that's okay, you know, we'll still call you our friend, y0u know, and it's yeah, its a weakness, you know, but I think it's taking that power saying I want my life to be this way, and I'm going to do this, I'm going to do this, and I don't care what society says, you know I can be a feminist and be married at the same time it's not a contradiction in terms, and I can have kids and be a feminist, you know, I can clean house and be a feminist, I can wash dishes and be a feminist, I can change diapers and be a feminist, and as well as be a professor and go on to be who knows what. I think women have to define what success is for themselves, and that's hard, because society defines it for you every night on commercials, on MTV, you know the single woman in the bar, beautiful, 90 pounds, having a lover every night, and to me that's not success that's ___, because I just can't do it, psychologically I cannot, I have, I need a relationship, I need a commitment, you know, and men do too, and they're just imposters to think that they don‘t need it, cause they do, I mean some kind of bond, you know, [just can't get up out of bed and say fine, nice to meet you, what was your name again, you know, I can't see myself doing that. But, I remember going to a lecture, and it's funny it was at a case conference. Case is the Council of revamping Secondary Ed or something, Brown sent me, and Brown is part of this whole thing. and this woman said something about success you know, has to be defined by you, because to put success in the hands of someone else is to give them too much power over your life. Because then you'll always trying to please them and they can always be fickle and say‘ well that's not success, that was success yesterday, bu that's not success today, you know it used to be success to graduate high school, but now it's to graduate college, and now it’s to get your masters, and now it's to get your PhD, and now it's, you now, and so it‘s like okay, and she gave the example of, and after this I have to go, she gave the example of, Vincent Van Gogh. and how he never sold a painting, when he was alive and he thought he was a miserable failure, and his paintings are now going for 40 million and all that stuff, and he aid well who is the success, is it the buyer who got a beautiful painting? had to pay a lot of money, but now they own it. Is it the seller who got all this money? Is it society, it's not really society because the painting‘s locked away in a vault in Japan, no one can see it, and she said is it Vincent Van Gogh, who painted it, but he thought he was a failure, and she said well maybe when he painted it, that morning ,and he was satisfied with it, then that was his success, and I think that's the way I want to live my life is if I can paint it the way I want ten I don't care what anyone says. I am a success. And you know, it doesn't matter what my educational level, or what my economic level or how many houses own, or how many cars I have, or how many children I have, you know, if it please me or satisfies me, then that's success. And that's very hard because you're always being bombarded with people‘s little measuring sticks you know everyone has a little measuring stick, a litle] agendas and stuff and you‘re constantly having to declare your independence over and over and over and over the way you want it, and I guess you have to get used to doing that in order not to cave in to other peeple' agendas, and measuring sticks. JH: Well, thank you. LM: I guess I'm going to grad school, huh? III: I think so too. LM: I think so. It's scary though I'm telling you it's scary, it is scary. First of all. it's an unknown, it;s such an unknown quantity. 1 mean I know when I go to college, but I don't know how to go to grad school, you know, you know what I’m saying? I don‘t know how to do all that in depth research you know and go to the library and all this. i know how to go to class, do this, do that assignment, I don't know how to say, well, this is what I want to do, these are the people I want to read, and these are people I want as my advisors. It's so self directed it's very hard but i guess that's the 01y way you can do it effectively. I kind of want someone to say okay. here's your itinerary for the next four years, these are the courses you'll take, these are the people you'll talk to, these are the books you'll read, you know, I don't. am. all that responsibility, you know. But, it's good for me, I need it. (sigh) This is great. I'm glad I did this. JH: 1 am too. LM: (laugh) JH: I hope everything turns out okay. Thank you so much. LM: (sigh) You're welcome. Thank you for listening to all this tangents and stuff...