 Cheryl Gilkes: Audley Moore: Cheryl Gilkes: Audley Moore: Cheryl Gilkes: Audley Moore: Cheryl Gilkes: Audley Moore: Queen Mother Moore, could you please tell me about yourself, your family, and where you were born? Yes, I was born in New Iberia, Louisiana, in 1898. In 1898? Yes, 1898. My mother had three little girls, and she died in childbirth. I was five years old when Mama died. So I was left with two little sisters, younger than myself, to mother. I was five years old. What was your mother's name? Ella. And my father had been a deputy sheriff in Iberia Parish, around there. That's the period of Reconstruction. He was deputy sheriff during Reconstruction? No, after, because I think it was the year of 1896 that Papa resigned or something like that. So that was after Reconstruction. We went to Catholic school, Saint Catherine's School. After Mama died, we went back to New Iberia with my grandmother; then Papa brought us back to New Orleans, and there we went to Saint Catherine's School, where I went to fourth grade. When Papa died, taking care of my little sisters and everything, I found myself missing school, or washing their clothes and ironing them, getting them ready for school and so on, so I found myself going to school late and finally I just dropped out. I dropped out in fourth grade, and at a very early age, I had to take up a course in hairdressing and lied about my age because I wasn't...about fifteen years old when I took it up, and I was supposed to be twenty-one. But during that time, my little sister, the one next to me, Eloise, I remember she came home one day and told us the war had broken out and they were taking a lot of black soldiers, black men to the front, to be trained﻿2 AM: (cont.) to be soldiers. CG: This is World War I, now. AM: I'm talking about World War I , [laughter], and Eloise told us how the Red Cross was giving coffee and doughnuts to the white soldiers and nothing to the black soldiers. And we went to the boxcars—they would put them in boxcars, the black soldiers, to take out of Louisiana—and we went, and I remember getting the neighbors, the women, all around, and went from door to door asking, "Will you make some coffee, will you make some coffee, will you make some coffee?" And had all the women bring in coffee and so on to the men who were lined up to depart. And from then we went to...oh, she had a young man, who was infatuated with my sister, who was very young, we were very youngWell anyway, a boyfriend, a young boy, 'cause he was about eighteen, I suppose. Well anyway, he was going to the front, and they were going to Anniston, Alabama. Eloise found out where they were going, and she asked us to come and go, three sisters, "Let's go, let's xoiiow them. Because if they treating our boys like that here, what will they do over there?" So we went, three sisters, we went. I was the oldest one. In Anniston they had a place for white boys where they had a place to play cards and everything. They really had nothing for black ones. Eloise established what I believe was the first U.S.O., because she got a place—somebody had an old church building which wasn't used anymore, or something—and invited the boys to come over there, and we made coffee and so on for them. And then she was very young, about fourteen. Eloise made herself a uniform, the first WAC in history, she made a uniform out of pants, soldier khaki pants, and things. She made her skirt and she fixed the jacket and she bought buttons and put on it, and she made herself a WAC uniform. We wouldn't call it WAC, but I say she was the first WAC. And they took the boys from Muscle Shoals, and took them to Anniston, Alabama, getting them ready, I suppose, to ship them out. Eloise went to Anniston and there was the case of a young soldier who was a recruit—I don't know what you'd call him at that stage—but anyway, he was being wrongly accused by some white officer, and Eloise felt the injustice so bad that she went behind their lines to the commandant, to speak to him in behalf of this young boy. And they thought she was in the army. They didn't know at that time that there were no women in the army. I mean she looked so real. Everything, her hat,' everything, and they thought she was in the army, [laughter] I couldn't tell you the story because I don't recall it exactly like it happened, but when they found out that she wasn't in the army, they didn't know what to do with her, you know. And she said even some of the old officials there began to snicker and laugh to think how they were fooled, you know, with her. And she's obviously just a child, you know. So, well, that was that incident. I pressed hair and made our little living for me and my little sisters while I was there. CG: Can I ask you, when you said you went to hairdressing school, as it... AM: I'd gone to the hairdressing prior to that, so I did know how to press the﻿3 AM: (cont.) hair, you see. CG: Right. Was it one of Madame Walker's places? AM: No, it was the Poro. Yes, the Poro, P-O-R-O. Poro College, and there was a lot of women... CG: Oh, the Poro College in Louisiana? AM: No, every state had a place where they could train, you know, students to become hairdressers. So there was a lot of women, you see, that followed the camps, we found out. There was a lot of women who were prostitutes, and they needed their hair done. So I was able to make a living for me and my two little sisters that way, by pressing their hair. In those days I think you got sixty cents to press, wash... shampoo and press the hair. Well, then when the curling thing came in, you got seventy-five cents, so that was quite something. Well anyway, I came back to New Orleans and then, from then on, life picked up. I got married and... CG: Now what year was this that you got married? AM: I don't vant to document the year. CG: Okay. AM: I've got reasons. But anyway, Marcus Garvey came on the scene, and I remember that that was really... though we had been fighting prior to that, I can backtrack a little bit to tell you that once I took my little sister to a party at a chaperoned house, and while she was there, she received a note, a young man brought her a note and told her that a white policeman had given it to him to give her. When we looked at the note, he wanted to be her boyfriend, you know, and she took the note, she and I went to him and tore it up and threw it in his face, and told him, "You take your mother out," to that white policeman. Then again, I was on the platform of a train, a train platform in the South, in a little place called Bisale, walking up and down, waiting for the train to come, and the white man was sitting on the back of the station, with his back, his chair reared back, and he was talking to a white lady across the track, but I passed between him and the white lady, and oh, he got so mad. "Didn't you see me talking to a white lady?" You know? So I answered him back, kind of flip way, and I remember my cousins in the town were very upset because I did. Because they thought that some harm would come to me for doing that. But he said, "Hey nigger," you know, "didn't you see me talking to that white lady?" Well naturally, I resented that. CG: of course. AM: But they didn't, they didn't think I should have answered him back, you see. Well anyway, there was struggles all the time, white men trying to molest us all the time, you had no peace from white men. I remember my brother, this was a brother, my father's son by a previous marriage, he went and got with the boss's son at the big sawmill, who had insulted me. That was an insult for a white man to say he wanted you, that was an insult, you see. And I remember he went and got him by the collar and made him get on﻿4 AM: (cont.) his knees and beg me pardon. The white man's son, the rich white man's son. And my father prior than that had horsewhipped a rich white man who had horsewhipped his son. When he came home, his son told him what happened. He'd been playing with a little white boy, and I don't know whether they fought or whether they didn't, but the white boy got angry and went in the house crying and told his mother. And when the father came home, he horsewhipped my brother. And Papa called the white man to the door and took his horsewhip and horsewhipped him. You see, we had all those kind of struggles going on. CG: Oh, so the baby of the family was a boy. You said you had two little children when your mother died? AM: Oh, well this was from a previous marriage. Papa was married three times, and he had one concubine; he married three times, he had one concubine. In those days, you know, they bad concubines. CG: How many brothers and sisters did you have all together? AM: I had about eight, you know, from the different marriages. And he married my mother... My father's father was a white man. His mother had been raped, you see, on the plantation, And so he was the son of a white man. CG: Now what was his name? AM: My father was St. Cyr Moore. Father was a very handsome man, about six feet tall, and broad shouldered, very powerful man, powerfully built, very good looking, extremely good looking. And I understood that he married my mother more out of spite than anything else. His second wife was one of those...they call them octoroons in New Orleans. That is, you couldn't tell her from white. Obviously the daughter of a lot of raping in that family. And my mother was your complexion, and this was supposed to have been a cardinal sin, for a man of his complexion to marry a brown woman. And so the prejudice was very high against color in the South. The light-skinned people felt that they were superior to the black-skinned people, and this was taught to us, it was taught. Everything that happened in your life was to demean the original people, the African complexion. And the ones who was mixed with the white blood was better. It's a terrible scourge; that was, again, an injury against us. They added insult to the injury; after raping us, then teaching us that we were better than the black ones that had escaped the rape, you see? So this always had somewhat an effect on me. When Marcus Garvey came on the scene, then of course a deep consciousness was awakened in me. And I recall the lynching; my grandfather was lynched. CG: Ah. Your father's father or your mother's father? AM: My mother's father was lynched. My grandmother's husband was lynched and... CG: Now was this the grandmother that you went to stay with?﻿5 AM: Yes, that was Grandma, and you couldn't tell her from a white woman to save your life, which shows all the rape that went on in our family. You know, I mean with our people. CG: And he was lynched? AM: Yes. He was a black man, he was very black, and he was lynched for standing up to some white people who wanted his land. This was all it amounted to, because after he was lynched they ran my grandmother off the land, and she had to take her five little children and flee for her life with the things they had on their back, nothing else, leave everything, their cattle, they had cattle and everything on her farm. So all of her children, Grandma had to place them with white people. Now white people in those days, the French whites, they had a custom of having a little black child in the home to play with their little children. I mean people who don't see the prejudice against black people today can't understand this, that they would rather have a black child play with their children than for their children to socialize with the little white child who was lower in rank than them, you see? So in order to keep their little white children company, they had a black child in the home, and they took care of that little black child, and as in the case of my mother, sent my mother to school. Well, my mother was placed with a family called DeConge'e. Now this little girl, that my mother was to keep company with, went to Paris. When she went to Paris, my mother went, and when she went to Sorbonne, my mother went, too. And so my mother got the education, you see. And when my mother came back, she was very much snubbed because of her complexion, black, because the prejudice was so high against the black woman. But she had more education that all those so-called Creoles put together, you see. So when my father, who had just divorced... this was unusual too, because a rich white man was going with his wife, and my father divorced her, and this is quite something, you know, unusual and unheard of, a black man to divorce his wife using a white man as correspondent, you know, in the case. Well anyway, my mother and my father, they were very happily married, and I remember my mother going to grand opera, because she had been brought up in the French tradition, you see. And I remember my father had a fine stable of horses after he left Jeanerette, after the mob came, after he horsewhipped the white man. Then he had a livery stable in New Orleans and he had those very fine horses. In those days, you know, you didn't have the transportation like you have today. It was uaostly horse and carriage for the rich, and the poor used wagons, you know. And of course, they had streetcars. Well, the surreys, with the fringe all around, and the footmen and all of that. Well, I can remember my mother going, getting up in the surrey with a long train to her dress, beautiful black brocaded, because we kept the dress for years and years. I may have some of the tail of it still, with the beads all around, you know, hand-beaded around the tail. Well anyway, I remember her picking up her train and putting it over her arm in order to get on the surrey, and she had her long jet, with the golden chain around her neck and she had an ostrich-feathered fan with tail, long, very fabulous black ostrich feathers, and she was going to grand opera with Papa. I can remember Mama being...and Papa doing the czardas on the dance floor...﻿6 CG: The czardas? AH: The czardas, yes, that was a French dance. And Papa bumped Mama into a post in the floor and we, for years, we teased Papa about dancing awkwardly. We used to tease him about that dancing, you know, even after, long after Mama died, 'cause I was five years old when she died. I had a nurse, and I remember at five years old, my nurse took me to school, and when I got to the door to the school, I took out my little pocket handkerchief and noticed that there was a hole in the hand-crocheted lace, and made her bring me all the way back home to get another handkerchief, so you can see I was going to be a little bourgeois stinker had my mother lived. Because she had taught me that a lady doesn't show her feelings. I had a nail to go in my leg, in the barn. A young boy was pushing me on a swing; I was swinging on it and went sideways, and the head of the nail went in my leg. And so Mama was taking me to the doctor, and I don't know if I was crying or not, but she told me a lady never shows her feelings. I'd say she must have turned over in her grave a million times, because I certainly showed my feelings and resented my oppression and made it known as vocally as I could possibly have done in so many ways. Frown in my face and everything else. But I always remembered, so much so that when she died, I was sitting in the little rocking chair and ashamed to let anybody see me cry, 'cause Mama had taught me that, never to show your feelings. So I put my head down in my hands and did my crying like that, I can remember that. CG: Did they have her funeral at home? AM: Mama had her funeral, yes, she was laid out with her little newborn baby, And all of the convent... CG: Oh, did the baby die too? AM: Oh yes. The convent turned out for Mama, and of course she had the High Mass and all that, she was high up in the Catholic church. They had built a Catholic church where blacks could attend, 'cause I remember going to the Catholic church where Mama had always gone, the Saint Joseph Catholic Church. They put a screen up one day; one Sunday Mama went, and in spite of the fact that they had a pew, you know when you have a pew, meaning that you pay by the year, and your name is engraved in the silver plaque on the pew... Well, my mother went there only to find a screen up in the back of the church saying, "For Colored Only," and she was ushered away from her pew to the back of the church. I saw my mother cry. I saw my mother, who had taught me never to show your feeling, I saw the tears roll down my mother's cheek, and she stayed back of that pew, knelt down. I can remember as though it was yesterday, you know? Now my spirit was, I'd walk out, but she stayed there. But they got together, the black people got together and built themselves a church. CG: This is all in New Iberia. AM: New Orleans. They built the Saint Catherine Church. And my mother was one of the founders of the Saint Catherine Church. And that was for black people. But today while I'm in my right mind, I look back, that was the﻿7 AM: (cont.) Man's thing, just the same. She was in that Roman thing in the first place, and to go and build herself a Roman thing—although it was a black thing, or rather of black people, it was the same situation, with a white priest. So, I mean you have to re-examine all of those things so that you can properly evaluate your situation, really. When you're captive mind, you're captive mind, and you'll go from one thing to the other, but you'll find yourself going around in circles in the same condition, you understand? So it was just like the African Methodists under Allen; they were very indignant, insulted, and they went and established themselves their own Methodists. But you're establishing the same thing! You see what I mean. So we're caught in that trap. You might be interested to know that I saw a lynching when I was a child, and that had a great impression on me. CG: Was this in New Orleans? AM: I was little...no, in New Iberia. I remember the hollering, these men, white men, hollered like wolves, and the man's feet was tied behind the wagon and he passed in front of our house. I remember Grandma allowing us to look through the shutter and be careful not to open it too much, so they wouldn't see us. And we were looking through the shutter, and the wagon was drawing the man. He was tied and his head was bumping up and down on the clay, the hard, crusty road. I don't know if you ever saw dirt like that, it comes in lumps. And I can remember his head bumping up and down, and the men hollering behind; white men, like wolves, were behind this man. Well, you know that's a terrible thing for a child to see, and you grow up that way. Still, it was Garvey who brought the consciousness to me. You can experience things without being conscious of yourself, too, you know. And I find that that is true with our people, they see the brutality of the police all against us, and they see the fact that jobs are denied our people, housing is denied us, and so on, and yet a certain consciousness is not aroused. Even a lot of times you fight against certain conditions today without developing a real consciousness. And I think it's necessary to understand, very necessary to understand the nature of our oppression and our status in the United States as a captive people. We haven't always formulated our status in that light, but now that we've had our right mind... incidentally, I didn't get my right mind back till 1945. I fought all the years of my life, I fought oppression, but without the consciousness that I needed. Even under Garvey, he raised in me a certain knowledge of me belonging to people all over the world, the African people, and he gave me pride, and he gave me a great knowledge of the history of the wealth of Africa. He talked about the wealth, the diamond and the gold that the white people had confiscated for themselves. And I learned that, but there's another consciousness that goes with it. The consciousness of the society under which we live, an analysis of the system under which we live. What kind of system it is and so on. Well, I didn't reach that new consciousness until I joined the Communist Party in 1930. In 1930 I joined the Communist Party and it gave me an﻿8 (cont.) in-depth understanding of capitalism, which I had not known that I was under, a capitalist system. It taught me the science of society, an analysis of the imperialism and of socialism, and for that I'm grateful. Although in 1950 I resigned from the Communist Party because I realized it was no longer moving in our best interests, and there were certain forces within the Communist Party that was racist, definitely racist, racist to the core. An example, they had built a big project here in New York, the first housing project, and it was a terrible struggle to get one black doctor in this project. One was all they had in it! Until I moved in it, after quite a bit, a lot of discussion had gone, until they allowed me to move in, and yet they were... I'd hear them talking about Negro rights and all that sort of thing, but they didn't mean it, you see. In practice they didn't mean it. Well anyway, that's a lot of experience, I decided, mostly on my identity, I guess if they had dealt with my identity I would have still been in there, because I was very concerned about who I was, and they wouldn't deal with that, And none of the blacks in there, who were calling themselves Negroes, would deal with it. And the whites wouldn't deal with it 'cause the blacks wouldn't deal with it. The blacks wasn't dealing with it 'cause the whites wasn't dealing with it, so I saw a vicious circle there, and I resigned. 'Cause I could no longer accept myself as a Negro. I knew that there was no land in the world called Negro land, and that in analyzing all of the histories of the other peoples, they all came from land. And those who didn't come from land, who robbed land, as soon as they robbed land, they changed the name of the land, and then they named themselves after the new changed name of the land. So even these people here who you all call Americans, this is not America. This country is not America. This is only one country in North America. To show you how you can be caught up in this thing, it's very tricky. If you're not conscious you lose all reason, you lose your reason. For example, how could this be America? How could...and do you know, I find very few people understand this, very few. They'll automatically say they're Americans, meaning this country, meaning this people. Is Canada in North America? Is Canada...I'd like to ask you, is Canada a North American country, on this continent? Is Mexico a North American country? How [do] you happen to be the American? It's because this country has no name, and the white man is different from us. He doesn't allow himself to be nameless, lacking in identity. See, this is the reason he's called the American, you see. I call him a settler, that's what I call him. A usurper and a settler here. Yet if we were to really examine our true history, many of our people can truly call themselves the American, meaning the continent, because we were here long before the white man ever got here. You see, many of our people and there's history, historical facts now to back that up, that we were here, we were here. And if you see, if you're going to Africa and saw what I saw at FESTAC, many of the Africa tribes way in the backwoods who came out with their dances and performed with their feathers all down their backs, with their beads, beaded skin, cloth, skin attire made out of animal skin, all beaded and so on, with their war dance and everything, then you would know that it was they who taught these people who you call Indian here, you see. You see their beaded works, it's just fantastic and they're similar to what you find right here.﻿9 AM: Well anyway, now I can leave New Orleans a bit. I left New Orleans, came up here. Oh, while I was in New Orleans, Marcus Garvey came on the scene. CG: Right. When did you first hear about Marcus Garvey? AM: In 1919, I think, I first heard about him, and somewheres about 1920, '21— I can't remember the year—anyway, he came to New Orleans to speak to us. And at that time I was in business, had a grocery store and everything, and we were making money. CG: You had come back now from World War I. AM: Oh, yes. I had come back. I'd been back. CG: Did you start this grocery store yourself? AM: No, no. My husband, you know. But anyway, this was about '21, '22. Garvey wanted to speak to us and the law prevented him from speaking to us. So we carried on so and protested so much, they allowed him to speak to us the next night. And we went to the Longshoremen Hall. Everybody went, determined that the police won't stop him tonight. And how do you determine that? By carrying guns. So we all had guns, everybody had guns and a suitcase of ammunition. I had two guns with me, one in my pocketbook and one in my bosom. A little pearl-handled gun, I'll never forget. So we were determined, so you see we were not cowarded down, down there, and a lot of people think we were cowards. CG: That's a myth. AM: That's a myth, that's a myth, you see. Yes, that's a myth. How dare they stop him from speaking to us! This was the thing, the audacity. Then your oppression comes, it's focused right there, you know, where even the blind could see it. So that the people was aroused and we went. And the police had turned out by the hundreds, it seemed; they were lined all in the aisle, they were lined across the stage, they were lined down the outer aisles. Man to man, when I say lined, I mean man to man, down, up and down the aisle. And when Garvey came in, we applauded, you know, and then we sat down and Garvey said, "My friends, I want to apologize to you for not speaking to you last night. But the reason I didn't speak to you was because the mayor of the city of New Orleans permitted himself to be used as a stooge by the police department to prevent me from speaking." When he said that, a policeman there jumped up on the platform, [he said], "I'll run you in." When he did that, everybody stood on the benches, we had benches in the Longshoremen Hall, not like today—you all don't sit on things, you just sit on psychedelic chairs, you understand? But we had benches then. Everybody stood on the benches, all the guns came out, pointed up in the air. "Speak, Garvey, speak!" Guns pointed in the air. And Garvey said, "And as I was saying," and he went on and repeated [laughter], and we all sat down and the police filed out of there red as crawfish. Now those of you in the North don't know what crawfish are, but crawfish is something that gets red when you boil it, red, red, red.﻿10 CG: Like little lobsters. AM: Yes. Like little lobsters? Well, that's the way crawfish are. Well, those police were just that red, and they filed out of there and left us to our meeting. Now that was that experience. From then on, oh, I was a staunch Garveyite, you see. And I remember telling everybody how proud we should be of our woolly hair and Garvey had taught us all that. And I was black complexioned and everything, that we as a black people had a great history, kings and queens. I hadn't known that, you see, Garvey taught me that. CG: Did you,started to read a lot after Garvey spoke? AM: Oh yes, oh yes. I started to study and read. I remember I used to read the papers, although I'd only gone to fourth grade in school. In those days you had black teachers and they taught you. So I knew now to read, you see. But I remember my husband buying a lot of things, we'd pack trunks, we sold the store, we're going to Africa. And I was going with him, until my aunt came to the house saying, "Oh my God, no. Oh no, oh no, you can't go to Africa. Why, those people will eat you up, they eat people in Africa." And she carried on so bad until I changed my mind about going to Africa, and instead my husband and I went to California. Well, they said we had freedom in California. When I got to California, out at Santa Monica, we went out there, and they wanted to charge us five dollars for a bottle of five-cent soda. And you couldn't drink it in there. They'd sell it to you for five dollars, and you couldn't drink it in there. For a five-cent bottle of soda. Well, I was so disillusioned and disgusted with California until all the people there said, "Oh my dear, if it's that you're looking for, we could have told you, we have discrimination in California. Where you should have gone was Chicago. Oh, our people are living in Chicago." I went to Chicago and I found all the black people shuttled into one little district and the condition there was worse than we had in New Orleans. Oh, they said, "My dear, it's not here, it's Harlem, this is where you needed to go." Now I didn't realize Harlem, too, was Jim Crow. But Harlem...so we upped and came to New York only to find "For White" signs in Harlem where you couldn't even live in Harlem, many apartments was for white only. And the theater in Harlem, you had to go upstairs, the blacks had to go upstairs in Harlem in the theater, you see, and yet that was supposed to be our district. And we had to go upstairs. You couldn't work nowheres in Harlem, couldn't work nowheres in Harlem, none of the stores would hire you. So that was the condition and so what can I tell you, dear, I got into the movement. I started the movement... CG: Now what year was this when you went to Harlem? AM: Well, I found myself in Harlem in 1922. CG: So you didn't stay very long in California. AMi No, I stayed a month, I think, less than a month. Oh, it was awful in﻿11 AM: (cont.) California. I was indignant over the fact that I was being charged five dollars for a five-cents bottle of soda. So I got my husband to leave and we came to Chicago, then couldn't stand Chicago, 'cause the condition was worse, and then we came to New York. Well, I'll tell you I never was so disappointed in my life as I was when I came to New York. No black men was driving the buses, the streetcars, no black men on the subways, no black people working in their own neighborhood in Harlem. Black women on the street corners and the Jewish women used to come and—almost just like slavery days—feel their muscles, look at their knees to see if they had crust on their knees... CG: Feel their muscles? AM: Yes, indeed, to see if they were good strong workers, and they were working them at fifteen cents an hour. Looking at their knees to see if they had crust on their knees. If they had crust on their knees, they'd be hired, because it meant that they would get on their knees to wax their floors. And the muscles, they had to have good muscles to change those mattresses all the Lime. You see, the Jewish people change their mattresses over a lot, and they wanted strong women. On the corner. The Jews used to come and pick them out, off the corner, off the corner to... CG: The auction block. AM: Yes, like the auction block. So I was appalled at that condition. Well, thank goodness... Oh, first of all then somebody said to me, "Well honey, I tell you. The only thing you can do to change these conditions is to get in politics." Well, I don't know nothing about politics now, so I wanted...I called my people together, I remember calling my people together. I didn't have a program, I just knew we ought to be united and what did I say? For us to say yes at once or no together. Either we all say yes, or we all say no. And that was my program, together; isn't that something? Well anyway, finally somebody told me I should join the Democrats. Now I had that much sense. I knew the Democrats was in the South, you see, I knew about that. No, I said, I can't be in that because that's in the South, I can't be in that, no, these are the people... CG: in the Democratic primary and the way they kept blacks from voting... AM: Yes, yes. I couldn't be in that because I remember my father telling me what the Democrats did to overthrow the Republicans down there. They came down there in the countryside and promised the people a ham if they'd vote for them. And then after they voted, they'd go and pick up the big sack and it wasn't nothing but—they'd get it home—it was a sack with wood, a piece of wood with a sack all greasy on it. The sack was greasy like as if it was ham in there. It wasn't nothing but a piece of wood. CG: Now did they promise that to the black people or to the white people? AM: Yes, to the black people, to vote for them. I don't know if they gave to the white people or not. I'm just telling you,'cause the poor whites in the South, they were so poor and so miserable that...black people were taught to look down on them. We looked down on those poor things, they were so poor, with their stringy hair and their unkempt selves. They're﻿12 AM: (cont.) just bad off, they were worse off than our people. 'Cause our people used to wash and iron their clothes, little children had new pleated skirts and hair combed with ribbon in it and everything, you know. So our relationship has mostly been with the rich whites, you see. Well anyway, I lost my thought there. CG: You were talking about the Democrats, what they had done. AM: Oh yes, so I couldn't join the Democrats for that reason. So I went to the Republican Party. Well, I went to the head man downtown. I said, "Well, if I'm going to be in this party, I got to see what the head white folks say about it, you see, what we should be in this party." I went downtown, I'll never forget. This man was astonished I went to see him. I said, "Well, I want to know what this party means for my people." "Oh," he said, "why, Abraham Lincoln was a Republican." That was supposed to be good enough for us, you know. But at least I tried to see, you know, in my backwardness, and backward I was. Oh yes, I want to tell you how backward I was. When I went to California, I had never had literature 'cause my mother spoke only French, and her books was all in French. She was all French all the way. CG: And was the school that you went to also in French? AM: No, the school was in English. It was the nuns, you know, Saint Catherine's School. But I wanted a book, so what book I bought? An encyclopedia. That was my first book I ever bought. And I learned to say encyclopedia. I was so proud of the fact that I could even pronounce "encyclopedia." So when I went to California, I found myself in what was called black society. And the women had a luncheon and they got to talking about the books they had read and everything. And poor me, so illiterate, backwards, everything else, although I had made more money than all those women put together, I'm sure, 'cause I was brought up, my father made a lot of money and my husband made a lot of money. I had money, I had $10,000 around my waist at the time I was sitting at the luncheon. You know? My husband had had the money, but for my pocket money, I had $10,000. In those days when you could get a dress, five cents a yard, material, and shoes at a dollar, that was something. But I was illiterate, it shows you how backwards we can be. The women talking about books they had read. Now, I want to be a part of the discussion. Oh, I told them that I had just bought a book, it was an encyclopedia, [laughter] I know now they must have looked at each other and they knew from where I'd come, because goodness knows I didn't know, but I thought I had done something when I bought an encyclopedia. But I want to tell you, that encyclopedia was my lifesaver, because it taught me a lot of things that I didn't know. Well anyway, I wanted to retrogress a little just to tell you about that incident. CG: Could I ask you something? You said when you went to California, that you were in black society. Now you're talking about the upper crust of black folks? AM: Yes. CG: And this was in Santa Monica? AM: No, they were in Los Angeles, but they drove me out to Santa Monica, showing﻿13 AM: (cont.) me the surroundings, you know, and we went in to get this drink of soda. There's where we had that experience. CG: Where did they live in Los Angeles? AM: What do you mean, where? CG: What area of Los Angeles... AM: I don't know what area. In the city proper. CG: Were those the same kind of people that you met in Chicago as well? AM: No, no. In Chicago, I guess the part of Chicago I was in was the very poorest, I'rfi sure. I can't imagine any place being more dismal than my experience there in Chicago at that time. Oh, it was just awful. Well anyway, I joined the Republican Party. This man told me Lincoln was in it, and I had heard about Lincoln. Lincoln was in it, that's all I knew, all right. Then I worked very hard, worked very hard, not for money or anything like that. They had a black man running and I thought he should be in. I didn't know whether he was good for us or not, but he was a black man. I'll never forget his name, although I'm very poor on dates and names, you'll find me. But some names did stick and his name was J. Dalmouth Steele. CG: J. Dalmouth... AM: Dalmouth Steele. And he was jet black, and oh, I thought what a wonderful thing it would be to have that black man in the legislature, and I just worked so hard that the Democrats had to change forces on the corner four times to keep up with me and my sisters. We worked so hard for J. Dalmouth Steele. CG: Oh, so Eloise and your other...what's your other sister's name? AM: Eloise and Lorita, there's three of us. Audley, Audley... CG: And they were with you... AM: All the time. Papa on his deathbed told us to keep together. He also told us, when I questioned him about his money and everything, because every Monday he used to send the money; Brother Henry would come and he'd take away bags of it, big bags. We had a lot of things going, and Papa had a lot of money. And Henry would take it in bags to go put it in the bank. Well, Henry banked it, so Papa said on his deathbed, he said, "Brother Henry will not take anything from you." He said, "Brother Henry will give you rather than take from you." Honey, Papa wasn't cold before Henry told us we had to get out of the house. We had to get out of the house, do you hear me? Do you know what I did? I went in the barn and took, I think, three of Papa's mules and took 'em to the auction. Young girl like that, I had to know. And I took 'em to the auction and sold them and went and rented a place for me and my little sisters.﻿14 CG: This was when you were in fourth grade? AM: Well, I had left fourth grade. But I went and rented a house for me and my little sisters, that's right. CG: And Brother Henry kept the money. AM: Oh, he kept everything. He told us...and the grave, now, the plot that Papa had bought, "None of us gonna get in here, so you may as well make provisions for your own." Well, honey, he and all his family's in there, so who wants to get in there? I don't. I'm still here, I'm still here, you see. So he was by the first marriage, Henry, and Clarence, two brothers, they were by the first, and the sister Mattie whom I visited in Chicago. CG: Oh, I see, they were your brothers by your father's first marriage. AM: Yes, first marriage, you see. So he didn't have any children by the second marriage. And he had a set of children—you know children came in sets in those days?—a set of children by his concubine. Well, this is a funny story about the concubine, let me tell you. Mama heard about this girl that had these two little girls with Papa in the country, on the plantation. And Papa came home one day. Mama had sent her... She had men working around the place; she sent [one of them] to the country to bring the girl with her two little ones, to her. And Mama had that girl with her two little ones in the house when Papa came home that day. And he [laughter]... Well, Mama had been in France, and concubinage was a common thing, and she understood the system, though Papa was amazed to find Miss Cindy—her name was Lucinda and he called her Miss Cindy—in the house with her two little girls. And young as I was, I can remember Mama going and buying a bolt of gingham—in those days you bought your stuff by the bolt, and food by the sacks, you know, you don't get a pound of this and a pound of that like you get today. That is, not my people. I remember her getting a bolt of gingham and making her three little girls and Miss Cindy's two little girls all off the same bolt of material. We all had dresses just alike. And when Mama died, Miss Cindy was in the house. So that's why Grandma become very indignant and took us away. All those children can't stay in there with that woman, you know. So she took us to the country. And on the train, my little sisters, all of us broke out in the measles on the train and poor Grandma had all of us on her hands. By the time she got to New Iberia... There's a little piece of land in New Iberia where I was going, that Mama had, just a sliver of land. It goes from corner to corner on the street, only thirty feet in width and two hundred feet in length. I'm now trying to get everybody from Louisiana, let's put up the same kind of project you have here, to do research on all the people from Louisiana who have made some kind of history. I thought it was appropriate since, not that I put that kind of value on myself, but the brothers and sisters all over the country have done this, they've called me. I've gone to all the colleges, I've spoken in nearly every college in the country. There's very few colleges that I haven't been invited to speak at. The brothers and sisters have seen to it. Although I've only gone to fourth grade in school, I find myself giving lectures in the colleges. I even went to Meharry and﻿15 AM: (cont.) gave a lecture to the young doctors; I've been to Tufts University and I've been to Brandeis University, and I've been to Cal State University, Berkeley, and throughout the West Coast. I did fifteen colleges in ten days. I've gotten so I go to a college, and I don't even care about what its name is, I only know my children are in there and that they want to hear from Mama, and I go to them. And this is the way it is. Uh huh. Just here the other day a thing happened that broke my heart. [At] Fairleigh Dickinson in Jersey City, the sisters and brothers organized something to pay tribute to me. They gave me one of the most fantastic plaques you ever want to see in your life, with a clock in it and everything. And these little urchins here at the church, what the bishop take in off the street, stole it, and broke my heart. I don't know how to tell them that the plaque is stolen. What do you do in a case like that? I don't want expensive things, because the people envy the expensive things, and I can't be bothered watching nothing, you see. My life is not made up that way, I don't value personal things. I want riches, I want you to have all your riches that you're entitled to, 'cause I just... I resent the fact that all your gold and your diamonds and your onyx stones and all your rubber and everything is just stolen from you. All these cars running out here on your rubber, you see. And our people aren't conscious of their wealth, of tin, zinc and cobalt, copper, all the great veins in this world that belong to us! And we've been severed from all of this, you see, we've been severed. And unconsciousness, this was the crime! The crime is that we don't know that it's ours and don't know that it's been confiscated away from us. That's the crime, you see? Well, right after the election, one of the rich white women, the wife of a judge, in the Republican Party—they had gotten Judge Cutter in, she was the wife of the judge—and she said, "We're planning a reception, a victory reception, but now you colored people can plan yours." Who'd lost? "Honey," I said, "what is this I've gotten myself into?" You know, if I was too ignorant at first, certainly the things struck home to me. The fact that here was the same old thing. I may as well had been a Democrat as to be in that. So it was right then that my sister Eloise came to me. I was washing clothes because I had neglected all my washing during the election campaign, and my sister said to me, she said, "Oh Audley," she says, "you here washing?" And she said, "Harlem is ablaze." I said, "What do you mean, ablaze?" She said, "A parade. There's a big parade, there are thousands of people there for the freedom of the Scottsboro boys." Well now, I had read about the Scottsboro boys, but here was this great thing happening that I didn't know about. So, Honey, I left all the clothes in the suds, I went and rang the doorbell of the people, said, "Come, let's go to the big demonstration for the Scottsboro boys." I'd never seen a demonstration in my life. I went to Harlem, because I was living up on the Hill, they called it Sugar Hill. I always said that's the place where the white man got all the sugar, you know, 'cause the rents were so high. Well anyway, I went down to Harlem, honey, and there was thousands of people, there was banners, red banners, the hammer and sickle, things I'd never seen, big placards saying, "Death to the﻿16 AM: (cont.) Lynchers," "Free the Scottsboro Boys," "End Jim Crow," all these kind of things—signs. A white girl was carrying the sign saying, "Death to the Lynchers," and I remember walking up to her, taking that sign from her and saying, "Let me carry the sign. You can march by my side. But I'm the one to carry the sign." And I took the sign from her, marched all around where they was marching, "Scottsboro boys shall not die, Scottsboro boys shall not die." And came on back and heard the speeches and in the speeches again, I heard the speaker, Mr. James Ford was there, the Communist representative. He was a black man, talking about imperialism in Africa. Oh well, and that they had a worldwide movement with the working class organized throughout the world. Well now, I thought this was a wonderful vehicle. If they've got a movement like that, and they're conscious of this thing that Garvey had been speaking about, then this may be a good thing for me to get in to help free my people. And they was interested in the Scottsboro case, all right, so I joined with them. Well, I didn't join, it wasn't the Communist Party, it was the TLD, you know, ar*^ that was a sub-organization, affiliate of the Communist Party. CG: International something? AM: International Labor, yes. I joined that, International Labor Defense, ILD. Well, I thought that was the Communists, 'cause there were Communists all in it and Communist hammer and sickle, and they talked about Russia and they talked about all the Communist world, so I thought I was in the Communist Party. It was months, months, months later that I found out I wasn't in the Communist Party at all. And that one didn't just join the Communist Party like that, 'cause they usually tested you out to see how sincere you were and so on before you joined the Communist Party, before they invited you to join. So later, yes, later I was invited to join. I found out the difference, that I was not in the Communist Party. All right. CG: So this is 1930, now, AM: Uh huh, yes, uh huh. Well anyway, it wasn't until about 1933 before I joined the Communist Party, but I joined the International Labor Defense first. Well, I struggled in the Communist Party. They were interested in freeing the Scottsboro boys and they were interested in an antilynch bill, they was interested in a voters' rights bill, they was interested in civil rights, they had a civil rights movement going. They was interested in all of those things, they was interested in the people not paying exorbitant rents. All of that was good for me, you know, and I learned a lot, and I participated, I joined in with both feet, I struggled, every day, every day, every day. Nobody had to beg me to come out. I disciplined myself, I learned the discipline of the movement and I was taught many things. I was educated in the Communist movement, 'cause I was ignorant before, very ignorant. And I'm still ignorant to a great degree. I don't consider myself learned. I think if I'm the last word, you all are in trouble. Children, if this is it, you're in trouble. You've got to go a million times deeper than I've ever gone. Oh yes, there's lots to learn, lots to learn, and you have to master, you see. That's what my advice to you is, that you study, you've got to study. It's hard, oh, it's hard if you want to be free, it's not an easy task, but it's a very rewarding task because I've just come from...﻿17 (cont.) First of all today I feel like I participated in Africanizing my people, because they didn't know what to call themselves. I participated in a great campaign to de-Negroize them, let them put down that Negro thing, and it's rare today that you find a person that will say, "I'm a Negro." Well, I helped initiate that, see I'm glad of that. I named the Republic of New Africa, which I helped to found, I named the countries of African people, I gave them their name. I helped to Africanize, and to me that was very important, to establish our identity. Well, others have gone much deeper than I have. Others have established... For an example, I'm just coming from California where brothers have been dismissed by the "Board of Miseducation" because they insisted on teaching our little black children. They don't allow you to be a good teacher today, a good black teacher is dismissed. Well, they have set up alternative schools, and I'll tell you to my pride and joy, I've visited schools out on the West Coast and I know they have them on the East Coast here. Other people have set up alternative schools. All of this is the result of the awareness of our people. The children were so magnificent, little five-year-olds... When I went to California, when I went to visit their school, they had been, I understand, they was practicing all day for the moment that they would be receiving me that evening. And when they saw me come, they ran back in the house. I thought they were running away from me, or frightened or what, I don't know, because you see I'm dressed in African attire. Although they all know it, because their mothers was all dressed in African attire. Well anyway, it wasn't that, but "Here she come, here she come," and they ran, the little patter of their feet echoing in my ears. And then finally when I got into the house, they all came up, "Surprise, Queen Mother, surprise." You see, they had left to gather themselves^to gather to come out as a whole. Little five-year-olds. Then without a word, the thing they'd been practicing for, they formed themselves and began their little songs and their verses, what they wanted to say to me, and the dances and everything, they began it, without even an instructor standing there telling them what to do. So this is gratifying. I say, the struggle is hard, but it's rewarding. The fact that you're here, the fact that somebody was interested in gathering this, all this is come out of the movement. It's not any one person's bright idea, like it wasn't my bright idea. I got it from somebody. I got mine from Garvey, you understand. We hand down, sometimes you can't even tell where you heard the words, but it's like you're unraveling a sweater or something, it starts, it's going, the seeds are sown, the seeds are sown. I'm always meeting somebody. "Mother, how you doing?" I say, "Fine, thank you." "I know you don't remember me, but I saw you..." in such and such a year at such and such a time, such and such a place. A young man this morning here tells me, "Mother, I saw you in 1966. You was in a struggle to restore a black teacher to his job." You see, they had fired, they were always firing black teachers for teaching our children. So from the Scottsboro case, before you knew it, it was Willie Magee; then it was the Martinsville Seven, seven men who was executed in one day in Virginia, and we tried to save them. Seems as though they had gone with a prostitute white woman, that her husband was selling her services, and they had lined up, like all the white men had, to go with the woman, and they were executed for doing it. Emmett Till. One to the other, big, big, big, big, big struggle, and I participated in all of them, all of them.﻿18 CG: What was a typical day like for you when you were working... AM: A day, a day. From morning till night, you leave your home, you leave your beds unmade, you leave your dishes in the sink, you're gone, you're gone, you're at meetings. I met with the labor forces, I helped in everything that went on. When you were in the Communist Party, you...that's one thing I liked about them. They initiated, for example, getting black men on the subway. I must say that about the Communist Party at that period. I don't think they're doing anything now, too much, 'cause I resigned in 1950. But in those early days, they definitely did, and it was time to get...for example, they are the ones who appointed me to break Jim Crow in the big leagues. At that time, I didn't know anything about baseball. As a matter of fact, I don't know anything now about baseball. I didn't know one base from the next, and I knew nothing about any players. And it was a question of breaking Jim Crow in the big league, and of course I was against Jim Crow. I organized the committee. I remember going to Reverend Powell, asking him would he head the campaign and he said he was too busv, but that he would head... If I got somebody else, he would work with them. So I got Captain Hugh Mulzac to head the committee, and he was our first black sea captain of the S.S. Liberty ship, that's the Second World War, yes, he was a sea captain. And I got him to be the chairman, and I got Adam Powell, Reverend Powell then, to be cochairman, and we launched a campaign to break Jim Crow in the big leagues. Why, I'm sure today there's not a baseball player knows me, not one know me. Neither have I gone to make myself known to them. It was the struggle. But when I look back on that struggle now, that was because I was fighting, I was a Communist, but I didn't have my right mind. Now remember, this might be difficult for you to comprehend. I was a Negro, I was a Negro, I've been a Negro and I know the condition of a Negro mind. A Negro follows, he's incapable of scrutiny, he's incapable of analyzing, and he's incapable of perception. A Negro is functioning with a European mind, a European mentality. So he's not hisself, so he doesn't know what's good for him and what's harmful for him, and he'll do most anything... If people are going, he'll go, and this is the way a Negro is. Well, so at that time I was a Negro. Now had I not been a Negro, I would have said to the Communists—you see the way the Communists work, they didn't launch that committee in their name. The committee has another name, a broad name, Committee to End Jim Crow in Baseball. You'd never know that the Communists initiated it, you understand? Like so many things that happens for the good of the people in this country, like Social Security and unemployment insurance, all of these things can be attributed to the leadership of the Communist Party. I can tell you this, 'cause I've been in there, and I can tell you this, Did the Communists have racists? Racists by the score, racists, full of racism. They were constantly in the party, was constantly bringing up charges against somebody for racism, racism, so that by being a Negro you don't really know how to adequately deal with these kind of things, you see? But you don't have your right mind. So I was a Negro, fighting for, to end Jim Crow in baseball, okay, for Negroes to get in the big leagues. Negroes to get in the big leagues. Oh God, that word, how I hate that word. How we ever accepted that terminology, for our designation, is amazing when way back when they gave us the word, we had scholars. But it shows you that whatever education﻿19 AM: (cont.) our scholars had wasn't meant to free them, you see, wasn't meant to let them master their own destiny. That's what that proved. Well anyway, had I not been a Negro, I would have fought to get our teams in the big leagues, do you see what I mean? But what I did was kill the teams. We had teams. I found that later, I don't know nothing about baseball then, but later. Oh honey, when I know what we did. When our teams played in the communities throughout the country, our communities was ablaze with activity, our hotels, we used to have hotels and all, we used to have taxis, shoeshine boys, old women selling candies and peanuts and everything. There was activities; our youngsters, something to aspire to. A round of clubs and a round of...there was activities, right? Well honey, now you have a Negro or a ten Negroes or a twenty Negroes there, but the whiteman gets all the gate, he gets all the receipts from the ball, the profits. So that's what it was all about. I would have fought to put our teams in. That's a qualitative difference, you see, a qualitative difference. Well, one of the things the Communists did teach me was the di ff TRnc' a ounr>t it.at.ive change and a qualitative change, you see. They taught me the science of society. I'll give them that, while I give them hell on other things that they did wrong, you see. CG: What is the difference? AH: To deny that we were a nation here, this was what they did, you see. In the early days they had analyzed the fact that we were a nation, then they denied that we... CG: That was Harry Winston... AM: Henry Winston, yes, Henry. I haven't talked to Henry since he came back from prison, you see, I haven't talked to him. CG: That's right, you did know him. AM: I don't know if he's had reason to reflect or not, but he knew before he left that I was already questioning the term Negro, you see. Yes, I had just begun to, I'd say, 1945, I began to be worried about our condition, our status. I remember going to Earl Browder, the head of the Communist Party, and talked to him about our status. And when I looked, they had shipped me from New York to Detroit, Michigan. And somebody said that that was the graveyard of all the black Communists. Whenever they wanted to get rid of them, they'd send them to Detroit, it was one of the hardest districts. Well, when I looked, all the people I knew and all the things I had done here—I had been campaign manager and elected Ben Davis, and Ben Davis didn't believe he was going to be elected. He didn't believe it, and the Communist Party didn't want him elected. The reason I know this, a week before the election campaign, they wanted to pull me out from the election campaign and send me to Brooklyn to work for Cacchione, the Italian Communist. And I was the campaign manager for Ben Davis, and they wanted to pull me out and send me here to work. But what do you call that, you understand? And Ben was elected. Ben himself called me in his office and told me to cool it, because I was arousing too much enthusiasm around his campaign, and there was a danger that he would not be elected and then﻿20 AM: (cont.) the party would be terribly let down. Now isn't this something? I had the people so aroused that here we had a fighter that we were going to send...the first black in the City Council of New York. And honey, the thing caught on like wildfire. The Communist Party didn't know what was happening out there amongst the people. They didn't even know. And I had organized a hundred different committees, I had organized Mrs. Gimbel and Mrs. Macy on the women's committee. I introduced Mrs. Gimbel to Mrs. Macy. I introduced them. I worked, honey, I had everybody working on every level, a businessmen's committee, a ministers' committee, a nurses' committee, a doctors' committee, I had organized a labor committee. I had an actors' committee. I had everybody on my actors' committee: Lena Home, Joe Lewis, Cab Calloway, Count Basie, Ella Fitzgerald—oh honey, I can't begin to call their names, Leadbelly—I can't begin to tell you who I had on my actors' committee. Some of the actors, the names escape me now, but I had them all on my actors' committee and they all—Josephine Baker—all of them. They all came and performed for me. They all came, and the Communist Party, let me tell you, they told me about that. They didn't want them to come. They said—I was charging $2.50, $2.50 in those days, to come to that performance. They told me to put it down to a quarter, 'cause there was a danger that there'd be nobody there. And the thing was called for three o'clock, and at one o'clock, the police had to rope off the street, there was so many people. And there was such an overflow, that was at the Golden Gate, I had to run out and rent the Renaissance Casino, which is unheard of in the annals of a political campaign. Never in history has anything like this happened. And the same actors went to the Renaissance and performed for those people. I mean all of those actors gave $100 to be on the committee; not only were they not paid, they all gave $100 to be on that committee. That night the Communist Party came— now I had a treasurer for my committee, my nonpartisan committee and everything—the Communists came and took all the gate receipts. We didn't have money to even thank the people who came to our aid and vote, who organized things and all. We couldn't even thank 'em. I was getting $50 for the week, they put me on the payroll for January, that January to November. The first campaign, I was getting $25 a week. But then the second time I was getting $50 a week. CG: Now which year was this now? AM: In '42, I think, something like that. CG: Right before World War II. AM: Yes, you see. Well, when you look back, how they took the money, and the woman who was treasurer, she wanted to make a big stink about this, but I wouldn't allow her because it was the party, you see? They took the money. We never knew how much money came in, and Adam Powell, oh he was disgusted. He was the head of the campaign, you see, for Ben Davis, and he was my chairman of my committee. We couldn't thank the people. We wanted to have a little party, thank 'em for supporting Ben, you know. We couldn't. We had to close up the office right away and so on. Well, the Communist Party had given me $500 to start my campaign, and that was all the Communist Party gave us. And with that $500 I went and got an office, office space in an office, and that was $25 a month, and I had﻿21 AM: (cont.) telephone service and everything right there. It was a very good break. And then I went and paid down on the Golden Gate Ballroom; and I secured that just before the election campaign. And all of my campaign was these stars coming out to support Ben, that was the publicity. I'm sure if you'd go through the Amsterdam News and look in the archives, you would find the record of the Ben Davis campaign, because somebody from the Communist Party came and took all of my records out of my house. They asked me to show them the records and said, "Well, I think we'll keep this, we'll keep this." CG: How long ago was that? All: Well, it was then, it was after then, you know. I told you, I'm terrible on dates and terrible on those things. But anyway...I just wanted to show you why I had to leave the Communist Party. It wasn't by choice, it broke my heart, because I felt that that was a vehicle to lead us to freedom, you know, and that's what I was interested in, freedom. CG: Do you remember the day that you left, and who you talked to and — AM: I resigned, and I'm probably the only black that's ever really resigned. 'Cause, see, I remember a group of teachers came to me with a big fist of money to give me, and that day I told them, I had resigned from the Communist Party. We had opened up the Harriet Tubman Association place on 125th Street and Lenox Avenue, and the rent was $300 a month. I'd been wanting a place to feed the African students, 'cause I'd heard that two African students died after getting their Ph.D., from malnutrition. In those days, they didn't have governments behind them, you know, and it was very difficult for an African to get his education. That thing just stayed with me, so terrible to think that right here in the United States we had an African student hungry. So I opened up and had a big soup kitchen in the street for African students after school, to come, and I'd put on a pot of stew, or beans, every day, and they'd come. I also bought, in an old secondhand store, an old raggedy mimeograph machine and a piece of typewriter where they could do their work, up in the place. They have their papers, their term papers and so on. Well, that's what I did. But when she came with the money, the teacher... Why, I had been appealing for help through the party; when you're in the party, all these different forces, whether through labor, different departments of labor, they'll always try to help. So this teacher came with the money, and I told her honestly I couldn't take her money 'cause I had resigned from the Communist Party, and she took that money back. Of course I expected her to take it back; I didn't take it. So from then on, my dear, I've been grappling, grappling with our situation. Now there's nobody to turn to, 'cause the Communist Party seems to have had... they have a monopoly on thinkers, but when you don't have your right mind, you can't think. If you're Negro, you can't think. I say that over and over again. Now, I'm just in a condition now to have been able to be a Communist or anything else I wanted to be, 'cause I've got my right mind. I would have been able to learn, I would have been able to absorb, I would have been able to reject and everything, but when you don't have your right mind, you can't do that. So I had nobody, hardly, to talk to now. It was very, very hard, when you're seeking and you're searching and you can't explain﻿22 AM: (cont.) yourself, you don't have the development enough, the educational background, to be able to put into words what you feel. I knew something was wrong. How could we be Negroes and no land was named Negro! I couldn't understand that, didn't make sense. How could China produce Chinese, Japan produce Japanese, Africa produce Negroes? I couldn't understand that. No, no, no. And so I just had to...with my limited knowledge and education, and my sister Eloise and my other sister Loretta [Langley], we three sisters, my dear, just had to begin. Sit up night and day, night and day, searching that Bible—not reading, searching— studying it to see where we were in that Bible. We had to examine God, Jesus with all them whites on his board of directors at that Last Supper! In a black man's territory. Garvey had taught us that's black man's land. Well, how could Jesus only find white men in a black man's land to be on his board? All these things come to your mind once you've become awakened. CG: And this all started in 1950 after you left the Communist Party. AM: No, no, that was the reason T left—because I was beginning to be aware. My awareness started really in a big way in 1945, but I went to the Communist leaders and they couldn't touch it. As a matter of fact, they began to look upon me as an enemy, 'cause you're not supposed to think out of their realms. You understand? So I resigned. I recognized the coldness and aloofness and everything, you know. Here I was searching, and that was no good for them. So it was hard, it was hard. I went to everybody I knew that had a mind to talk about us. I went to DuBois, I went to Walter White, I went to Mrs. Bethune and I went everywheres they told me somebody had a mind, honey, to talk about us. Searching. And it was hard because I mean I wasn't on nobody's payroll. It was a question of doing this, just trying to find myself. Well, what you want to say? CG: I was going to ask you, you said you went and talked to DuBois... AM: I talked to DuBois, I talked to Walter White, I talked to Mrs. Bethune, I talked to Sally Steward, I talked to, oh, let's see, everybody that had education. I thought people who had education should know, so if they told me somebody had some learning, I'd go to them, you know. CG: What do you remember most about DuBois? AM: Well, that's what I remember most about him—he's sitting there and he's not understanding a thing I said. I remember that more than anything else. The search for our identity. He didn't help me. Dubois did not help me with our identity, and neither did he think that was too important, and that really turned me off. I couldn't believe it, but there it was. CG: And with Walter White it was the same thing? AM: The same thing with everybody. Reynolds of the Elks, great, great leader of the Elks. If they told me somebody was head of the Masons, I'd go try to... Everybody I'd go see, try to see who I could see, who would see me. CG: Do you remember Mary McLeod Bethune particularly?﻿23 AM: Yes, I remember her. I went to Washington to meet with her. CG: Oh, you had to go to Washington. AM: I went all the way to Washington, sit down in her office and met with her. She told me if she had ten women like me, she said, "I wouldn't go through the back door no more, if I had ten like you." That's what Mary McLeod Bethune told me, "If I had ten women like you, I wouldn't go through no back doors no more." That's what she told me. She made me give a speech to the women. I was one of the women who was there when she formed the National Council of Negro Women. CG: At that Y in New York? AM: No, that was in Washington, and I became a life member in Washington, of the Council of Negro Women. But Mary McLeod Bethune made me give a speech on Howard University lawn to those women... I said, "Mrs. Bethune, I've never been to school, I can't talk to those women. They're professors and doctors and intellectuals," you know. That's who she had, all the high echelons of black women in her movement. "And I can't." She said, "Get out there," she said, "you got more in your little finger than they got in their whole hands, you get out there and talk to them. They need what you got to say." That's what she did, she made me get out there. Well, somebody else, Dr. Lawrence Reddick, he was the first one who made me make a speech. I'd been speaking on the street ladders because none of the churches would let us in with our kind of talk. They didn't want to hear no freedom talk. Now this wasn't nationalist talk, mind you, this was all that integrationist talk that the Communists were doing long before any Martin Luther King. Communists started all that integrationist stuff. But no church would have it. So we had to put up a ladder and speak on the street corner. That's where I got my Ph.D., on the street corner, s'peaking, you see? So Dr. Reddick, Lawrence Reddick, he's at Harvard now, he's a Harvard professor, and he got a hold of me one day, he said, "I'm having a meeting at the YMCA." Well, at that time the YMCA represented the black intellect, you know, it wasn't for the little people. And not having an education, I was always conscious, overconscious of my lack of learning, that I didn't belong with those people who had learning, you know? So he said, "I want you to come to my conference I'm having. I want you to give a talk." "Oh, but Dr. Reddick, not me. I haven't been to school," I said, "my grammar's bad," everything. He said, "I want you just like you are, don't change a thing. I want you to come." And he said, "Don't change a thing." It sort of gave me a little confidence, you know. Well anyway, he put me up on the stage, and that was my first stage. Dr. Reddick, he started me off, he certainly did, and he always, although he was highly educated, he always had a kind word, a smile. He'd stop a moment, "How are you? What you doing?" You know? He had that, I give him that, I give him that. But on this Negro thing, honey, nobody could help us, nobody to help us! Me, my sister Eloise...my sister Eloise badgered Richard B. Moore; he threw her out of his store three times because she'd say, "You in here with all this book and everything, and you're using that term Negro, and it's a detriment to us," and caused him to write the book, The Detriment of the Word Negro—its danger and detriment. The word Negro is dangerous and detrimental.﻿24 AM: (cont.) She caused Richard B. Moore to write that book, and he didn't even give her credit for it. As a matter of fact, there was Adam, there was Dr. Mulzac, and who else... CG: You're talking about Adam Clayton Powell. AM: Adam Clayton Powell, Captain Mulzac, oh, and Ben Davis. Three men, three men that I was in struggle with. Adam Clayton Powell, who I taught how to struggle. He didn't know how to struggle. I went to him and asked him, would he head my job campaign, would he head it. He said, "Oh, I'm so busy." "Oh, Reverend Powell, you don't have to do a thing, just say yes. I'll organize the committee if you say you'll head it." He said he'd head it. I went and got Reverend William Lloyd Himes to be cochairman with him, so he wouldn't have to give it too much attention. And I got Arnold Johnson, Mr. Johnson, to be secretary. So there was my committee, all established. Adam said from his first meeting, he took to that committee like a duck takes to water. I never had to pull his hand or anything. He got on the picket lines, he initiated...he had me picket captain, I was captain of the picket line. Picketed ail night long, round the clock, picketed the World's Fair, down 42nd Street where their headquarters were. Adam took to it like a duck... You never saw anybody develop so quickly in the struggle as Adam Powell did. But I remember taking him and making him come down to the May Day parade the Communists had every year. He said, "And come the revolution, I know I'm going to be shot." I said, "Yes, 'cause I'm going to be a commander in charge of the shooting brigade." And I said, "If you don't go all the way, honey, for the people, we'll have to shoot you. If you ever turn on us, we'll have to do it." I remember that as clear as it was yesterday. Well anyway, he laughed, you know. But Adam was beautiful, beautiful. He became a very good friend of Ben Davis, the Communist. There was much respect for Ben. Ben was a lawyer; he had been a lawyer, but he'd never had a case. The Communists got him from right out of school, and so he's never practiced law per se. But Ben was a beautiful person, and Adam became his best friend. That was on his level, you understand? Me, I was little people. I was enthusiastic for my freedom and I could organize. I found myself... That was one reason the Communists found it hard to deal with me, because I was such a great organizer. I was the best organizer they ever had, they said that. They never had an organizer like me. I wanted freedom so bad, you know, the bug was in me, oh my God, I just couldn't rest. I couldn't tolerate my condition, you see. But even then I didn't have the full understanding of my slave's condition, you see. Even while in the Communist Party I didn't have the full understanding of what these people owed to me and the injury they had done to us. Our names, can you imagine your name, can you imagine the names that we carried? The weight. It's one of the most atrocious things that ever happened to a person, is to take their name from them, you see? So that's a great injury. Your complexion, the fact that you no longer have your birthright, your complexion which you should have been born, beautiful black, ebony black. We're all colors, you look in the room, no two of us are alike, that's an injury. Your language, you don't have nothing but a foreign language. Incidentally, the students should all be taking English as a foreign language instead of wrassling with Greek and Latin and French﻿25 AM: (cont.) and Spanish. They should take English as a foreign language. So when they come out, you see, they'd be more advanced; then they could go in and major and get their degrees in English because they'd already have a good background in English if they took English as their foreign language, you see. 'Cause English is not our mother tongue. We are another people. I cannot emphasize that sufficiently, that we are another people. We are not them, you see, so English is foreign to us. It was imposed on us; you know not what of your beautiful languages you had, you see. You don't know anything about your languages. Over 800 languages. We don't know one. And that's a crime against nature. And what's more, we don't long for that, that's the biggest crime. I want you to understand this. It's one crime to have cut us off and denied us, but another, greater crime to have us in such a condition that we're not conscious of what we've lost, and we no longer desire those things. Then you know you've been totally killed. Now, the United Nations has defined our condition as mental genocide, you see, that's what we suffer. Mental genocide, oblivion. We're oblivious to all of our surroundings and all of our conditions, we're oblivious to that. We're oblivious to world conditions, we're oblivious to our place in the world. So that a Shockley can come up on the platform and say that we never made a contribution to world civilization, when we civilized him. And we haven't armed ourselves sufficiently with the facts to be able to refute a Shockley, you see. I've just come from Michigan where, no, Los Angeles, where they had the King Tut exhibit, and it's going to come to New York soon, I think for some times in the latter part of the year. Well, to see the wonders and the splendor of the King Tut tomb and to know that all of this was black history, which they're trying their damndest to make white history. It's true that you had white occupation in Egypt for a few centuries, but that was a short time in the life of Egypt. You may see a white, a statue in Egyptian attire, but that doesn't mean that they are the Egyptians, 'cause the Egyptians are black. So we're people who lack any knowledge, and I would advise all of the students to address themselves, to study. Now they got our students playing ball. Ball, ball, ball! I found them majoring in ball, and even majoring in black studies. I don't want to see our students in school in black studies! That's something for them to do on their own, to get this stuff. To go into the libraries, to dig for their stuff, to use the colleges and things to get the sciences, the chemistry and all. Get the sciences, students, not go after your black history. Because now what's happening? We organized it just long enough for the white man to come and take it over. He's dismissing all the black scholars and he is running the black studies now. I've just come from a tour and I know, many colleges, the whites are taking over the black studies, and they insist that you study from white people's books on black history, on African history. So that what do you get now, where are you? If you don't have your right mind, you won't know what to accept and what to reject, you see, because you got to do check and double check. You got to go to precursors of the precursors in this study, honey. Oh yes, it's hard, it's hard to find your way. Now we're beginning to, you see, we're beginning to. Well, what else can I say? I found the answer, I found what happened to us, I found that﻿26 AM: (cont.) our condition, what the United Nations have def ined as mental genocide. CG: Did you know William Patterson? AM: Oh yes. Oh, of course I knew...but he never dealt with the mind. He was under the Communist influence so he didn' t dig deep enough. He dealt with the lynchings and the different things. I'm dealing with an entirely different thing. That was physical genocide, what he talked about. I'm talking about the mental genocide, I've taken it further. I said that I should get a Nobel prize, 'cause I discovered how they made a Negro, how they made a Negro and defined our condition as oppression, psychoneurosis, which we suffer. And of course I'm trying to find the psychiatrists now who will come and elevate this work, because with my limited education—you could hardly call it limited, how could you call fourth grade limited? But I'm unable to clothe it and cloak it into the clinical terminology that would be acceptable to the intellectual class which it has to reach. Today we have about 200 psychiatrists in the country, and I'd like to see a conference of psychiatrists to deal with our mentality. I want to be able to prove to them that even with a Ph.D., especially with a Ph.D., you are unable to comprehend, you see. This was a terrible thing, this was a terrible thing... Well, let's stop and get a drink of water. CG: Before we went for our break, we were talking about your perspective on... what's wrong with our people. In other words, why they don't have the right mind, and you were talking about oppression psychoneurosis.. AM: Yes. I'm talking about the crime of genocide that has been committed against us. And the United Nations has defined the mental as well as physical destruction of a people as genocide, and I think we, more than any other people, fit that description, 'cause there never was a people that was totally severed from themselves as we were. From ourselves we've been severed. Not only from our history, but from ourselves, and our heritage and our inheritance, severed from all of that, and had knowledge of none of it. But I claim that we're like walking zombies, that we function just as a zombie would function, in the way that we've been programmed, this is the way we function. We dress like the Europeans, we eat like the Europeans, we made love like the Europeans. Everything that the European does, we try to imitate them, and I say we are not even a good replica of the European. For a long time... I read books where they used to laugh at the Africans for being dressed in European clothes, and had European coats on, and European vests and European hats. They used to laugh, I read it in books. You get the old books, you go into the old book stores and you ask for the African sections. Then you get even the European section, where the travels of these Europeans in Africa and in India and in China, and you learn from them what they have written, you know. Of course, most is distorted, but at least you get some idea of what went on. You have to be able to put two and two together, this is where your right mind comes in. How the Africans was eating up the people, and never ate them has always been...was one of the mysteries to me that I wanted to unravel, you see. CG: How did you unravel it?﻿27 AM: Well, two things. Either they were distasteful and obnoxious, too obnoxious to eat [laughter], or the Africans never did. Either one of the two, you see, this is what I deducted. But I found that all that was lies against our people. Now for example, Africans were not heathens; the Africans believed in the Universal Spirit, the Great Spirit, which we have lost because now we know as King Jesus. We no longer thank our Maker for the rains, for the beautiful forests, for the beautiful crops, for the breeze, for the sunshine, we no longer. We take all this now for granted, and there were times when this was our deepest appreciation, the stars that came out and everything was for our glorification, so we thanked our Creator. And they called us heathens, you see. Now all you do is thanking Jesus, and you're not conscious anymore of the rain and the moon and the stars and the flowers and the birds that sing and all that, you see. I remember in Louisiana, when I was fighting to save the men from execution, which I did... I went back to Louisiana to settle the estate of this brother that cheated us out of everything. CG: Brother Henry. AM: Brother Henry. You remember his name? CG: Brother Henry. AM: Yes. Well, he commited suicide and I went to settle the estate. He left everything to his son, and his son died and supposedly commited suicide twenty years to the day that his father had commited suicide. So he had left everthing to his concubine and we had to break the will. So I went to the funeral... CG: Okay, now when was this, about? AM: In 1955. While I was there, I found out the jails were packed, the death houses, with men to be executed, black men. I had already been visiting the prisons, you know, and was able to... I knew how to go in the prisons because I had been ordained as a bishop, and I did so for the reason that I wanted to visit the prisons up here in the North. CG: Oh, you had already been ordained then. AM: Oh yes. I was ordained in another religion. I've got all the religions, because you see I used to be a Catholic. Then when the Pope blessed the ammunition to kill the Ethiopians, the three of us, three sisters, came out of the Catholic church. So I had some right mind, you know, I wasn't totally dead. Of course you can und erstand too that I also had been through Garvey, I had that kind of awakening. But when he blessed the ammunition, honey, that was it. And of course when I began to do research of the religions, the five so-called great religions and everything, and I learned all about the Crusades and the Inquisition and what went on, I wondered how we could have ever been Catholics. Roman Catholics that is. Well, I also learned that we were the people that the Romans fed to the lions, the Christians, and that they established "Christendoom". This is what you have, you have "Christendoom", you don't have Christianity. Because if you had Christianity, you'd be living together, working﻿28 AM: (cont.) together, taking all the little urchins off the street like this bishop is doing. Even though they do us in after they get in there, steal everything we have, yet he brings them in, you see. He's brought some in while I left them here, three weeks ago to go to California. I came and found them. We had a vow not to bring any more in. That's that Christ ian stuff, it makes you love your brother, it makes you share whatever you have. All those little children that he picked off the street, they come and put their feet under the table for breakfast and dinner and supper. Bishop would look over the table, and if he'd see an empty place, he'd say, where's such and such a one? "Where is he?" Somebody would say, "He's still sleeping," and he say, "Go get him." Go get him for what? To bring him to the table. To do what? To eat. You see, so that's Christianity, that's the Ethiopian Orthodox Coptic Church of North and South America. Makes you "love thee one another." And when the Pope came—now we have our own Pope, so when you say Pope, you see, our people automatically think about the Romans. They don't think they could have anything, just like when you say Queen or Empress, they can't imagine they have one, you know, so they think about Elizabeth. Now I consider all those people bastard queens, they're illegitimate. Talk about illegitimate, they got their royalty from us, you see. Their whole idea of royalty came from us. CG: You left the Catholic church when the Pope blessed the ammunition? AM: Yes. Well, so I mean when Abuna came from Ethiopia, our Pope, I was baptized into the Ethiopian Church. CG: Now how long ago was that? AM: Oh, that's been since, what, '69 or something. I can't remember years, honey. Somehow, you know, I work so hard and going, going, going every day, it's seldom I have a day like this to sit down and talk with somebody, and years and time. All I know is it's been too long, too long, since I was severed from my motherland, that's all I know. But time is the thing that eludes me, and long ago I put down the white man's Christmas and everything. I knew his Christmas was a lie, I knew his A.D. and B.C. was a lie, and everything about him was a lie. So you just reject most of the time. You understand, a rabbit never laid a egg for Easter and Santa Claus never came down the chimney. You learn all of that, you see, you wake up to a large degree. Incidentally that Santa Claus thing is your "Christendoom" to make you accept his philosophy. He couldn't leave it just for that, 'cause the child Jesus was born, which we used to celebrate. He had to make a Santa Claus come in order to bring that into your home. And he couldn't accept the fact that there was a resurrection from the grave, so he made the rabbit come in the home and lay an egg. He didn't leave it to that, he left nothing to chance. We leave everything to chance, but he can't afford it, you see, he makes sure that you're caught in the trap. So around Christmas time, you say, what you going to give me, what you going to give me? All you say, give me, what you going to give me for Christmas? Like it's your birthday, [laughter] Everybody expects a present for somebody else's birthday, that shows you right there, you know.﻿29 CG: What other churches were you affiliated with between... AM: Oh honey, I've been a missionary in the Baptist church, the Apostolic Orthodox Church of Judah, you name it. Listen, in the struggle, I had to affiliate with everything and everybody, everything my people belonged to. When the Elks or the Masons, when they split, I had to belong to both sides of the split, 'cause I refused to be split, j have one objective, win 'em for freedom, and I joined everything my people... sometimes I suffered through their meetings, all the time I suffered through, I'd go to the conventions, they're not dealing with nothing basic, they're not...and honey, I just suffered through that. But I got to be there with them. I got to be. So I joined everything. Mama belongs to everything you all had; everything you have, I belong to it. And so I joined the Ethiopian church because it was Mother Ethiopia, it came from Ethiopia, it had a very historic tradition, and I joined, I become baptized. By this time, I'd lost all...when I became a bishop, I no longer had any faith in Christianity. Long ago, long ago I put that down, but I had to become all those things in order to go to the prisons, go to the death house, you see, and when you meet with the people who were scheduled to die and everything, they allow you to go. You're a bishop you can go; the police brutalized somebody, you can go in the hospital that night, you're a bishop, you understand? You don't have to wait till visiting day tomorrow or the next day. So it's an advantage. So that was why I got it, and no other reason. So knowing the history of the white man and all of his crusades and Inquisition and everything, to mostly his "Christendoom" on us after he had killed the Christianity and fed us to the lions, then I felt that all is fair in love and war, and since we're at war, we can use any kind of vehicle to get along and to get where we have to go. So that was the reason I got it. CG: Oh, so that's why you were bishop. AM: That explains everything, you know. But I'm here in the Ethiopian Orthodox church because I have a progressive bishop, and he wants freedom for his people. Well, that's good enough for me, you understand? Therefore it gives us an opportunity. We have a beautiful vehicle to organize, to rally around, because first of all, it's Mother Africa, you understand? Can't do us any harm, but I advise my people to not join anything if you don't have your right mind, you see. If you don't have your right mind, you're unfit, you're unfit to join. You're unfit to be in those sororities and all of that stuff. When I go in a college, I ask for the nigger Greeks to stand, you know, I want to see the nigger Greeks, because they don't even know the history of Greece. They haven't studied the history of Greece, I had to do it with my four grades, darling, I had to go into the ancient of the ancients, the precursors of the precursors, I had to know what was Greece before it was Greece, I had to know who were those people who were there. I had to know who were those people before it was Spain, what was it and who were those people. Before it was Italy, before the Mediterranean, who were the people of the Mediterranean? I was too illiterate, too ignorant to remain that way. I had to kill my ignorance, you see, I had to kill my ignorance, and I﻿30 AM: (cont.) had to study and do the research, and you don't always..first you don't know what you're looking for. Now I know what I'm looking for. Then I didn't know what I was looking for. Most of the things you have to stumble on, such as when you look in the Bible, it says, "Search ye the Scriptures. Wherein if you think you have salvation, and ye have not." Now our people read that and it don't mean nothing to them. But to me, that's a message by the old prophets who put that in there, so that I could understand that you got to look beyond this stuff. And I know now that the prophet that did that was captive and he put a message in there for us. Can the Ethiopians change their skin or the leopard change their spots, you see? And in the beginning, Genesis 2:13, when they're talking about the Garden of Eden, there is Ethiopia. And it says—they're speaking about the great rivers. I've been on the river Nile, I been on a yacht on... President Amin saw to it that I rode the river Nile, you see. Then I said, Genesis 2:13, it concludes with, "and so be it that compasses the whole land of Ethiopia." Well, that's one little sentence there, short little sentence, tells the whole story they've been telling about all the land filled with gold, all the onyx stones and the bdellium, the diamonds, and all the richness of the land, and so be it. And then it tells about the rivers, those great rivers. You never saw rivers like the river Nile. Okay. Now it says, "so be it that compasses the whole land of Ethiopia." I'm telling you, child, I'm describing the Garden of Eden and all that I told you, "so be it that compasses the whole land of Ethiopia," you see? The new Bible took it out and said the "land of the Cush." And where the old Bibles say Solomon was black, the new Bibles say he's dark and swarthy. We don't follow that kind of stuff, you see? In another fifty years, they're going to collect all those old Bibles away, 'cause he has a master plan, the Man has a master plan. I wrote a song about how we've mastered Marster's master plan, you see? Do you want to hear my song? CG: Yes. AM: Okay. [laughter] Oh Lord. Well, you know when I sing they usually make me a present of a brick building, brick by brick; they pay me to stop. That's the kind of singing that I do. But here it is: This country 'tis to me, a land of infamy, of which they sing, A land that they stole with pride, for which their fathers dies, But from every mountainside, justice fails to ring. Black fathers died here too, for their red, white and blue Black mothers suckled their young, In this land where we hung from trees For refusing to bend our knees, but now We've mastered Marster's master key, Our liberty will be rung. Da da da da. Well, the mastering of old Marster's keys was the restoration of ourselves, you see? His master, his trump card was making us Negroes. It was not just a question of calling us Negroes, he made us Negroes,﻿31 AM: (cont.) I want you to know that. He made us a Negro. So now that just to restore yourself, you have really mastered his master key, that's his trump card. As long as you're Negro, you'll never understand, you'll never understand, you can't comprehend. You'll read, you look at words, words doesn't mean...even though in that Scripture, they tell you the word is God, the word don't mean God to us. We read the words and the words don't mean nothing to us, you see. And many people who can read those words, say them much more proper than I can say them, but they don't understand them the way I understand, you see? So that's why I'm here in the Ethiopian church, I just want you to know. I'm in the Ethiopian church and...I'll tell you the truth, honey. With my right mind, I could join the Ku Klux Klan and know why I'm there, you understand? I could join the police force if I had to. Of course I can't imagine the police ever trusting me enough to...although the FBI did ask me to join them, and I was so insulted I didn't know what to do, and bawled them out. They were clear that I never intended to cooperate with them, but they had me down at their headquarters and asked me to cooperate with them. CG: In Washington? AM: No, here in New York; they got a big headquarters. They have two, three hundred FBI people working out of there, maybe two, three thousand, I don't know. I saw the FBI men just fallin' in and fallin' out..but they tried to get me. And so I'm saying that with the right mind, you could join anything. You're unfit to join any religion, any party, anything, any fraternal order or anything, without you right mind, that's what I want you to know, you see. 'Cause you have no purpose, you don't have your own value system. You have no value system if you're a Negro. So you go in to join others with what they do, and they may not be doing the right thing, you see. CG: What happened...you were telling me at the time of '55 you were a bishop and you went into the jails in Louisiana? AM: Yes, I went...not only in Louisiana, up here in the North, when they were bringing our people... You know, each summer they bring our people, or each year they bring our people in truckloads from the South up here to harvest, up in New York. And they have wardens all around them, just like if they were in jail. They're not in jail, now. They have a big gate where you have to go through and you're not allowed in. But because I was a missionary, I was able to tell them, "I just want to pray for them and save their souls." I'd heard that they had brutally beaten one of our men inside. That was upstate New York, and so he let me go in, and it was the hardest thing, the sisters and brothers there didn't understand me when I said, "Come on children, let's sing, let's sing." And I didn't even know any Baptist songs, I'd been brought up a Catholic, I know very few of them even now, you know. So I told them, while they was singing, I said, "What happened, what happened here? I hear somebody was beaten. Who was beaten, where's the brother?" And all of that. The brother was in jail and I was able to get him out of jail. When I went there, the warden asked me in the prison what did I want. I say, "I come for the young man," just like that. I don't know where the thought came from. I say, "I come for him." He say, "All right, you﻿32 AM: (cont.) can have him," just like that, and let the young man come out. And I was able to send him back home to wherever he...in the South, to his people, that's right. So this has been my experience in this missionary thing. So in the South, you see, I was able to go into the death cells, I found out all of our people. Oh, there was so many men in there, going to be executed, going to be executed...jailhouse just bulging at the seams, going to be executed. So I was able to talk to the brothers and found that they was all being railroaded, everybody was being railroaded. So I knew one of the young men from childhood, I knew his family from, you know, ancient days, before I left New Orleans. And I was convinced that the young man was innocent and I took up his case. Now he was about to be executed... two of them, together, and they hadn't even known each other. And during that time I was also working on about five other cases of young men to be executed. I went into the homes of these white women and pleaded with them to tell the truth. Yes, I did, honey, I went into their homes. One white womm fold me, "All right, send a lawyer. I will tell the truth." And the boy's own lawyer went there and told her if she...that would be considered perjury, if she recant her testimony, and frightened the woman off. That she was going to get two years in jail. Now that's the thing, this perjury is the thing that Miss Williams, Lizzie Williams got 218 years. This white woman would have gotten two years, the lawyer told her, for perjury. Miss Williams got 218 years for saying that her boyfriend was at her house at the time when he wasn't. She was in Alabama for perjury, providing they've had a trial. She didn't have a trial, she didn't have a trial. She said, "Four white men was talking together," and they called her and told her, "You got 218 years." She never had no defense, no nothing, you see? So she served nine of those years and then she...and why do you think she walked away? She just walked away, they had her on the field and she walked away. She didn't run. She walked away 'cause they wouldn't allow her to hold prayer meetings in the prison. Now isn't that something? If they had allowed her to hold prayer meetings, she'd still be there. So she went to Detroit and she spent twenty-seven years, or thirty-seven years, I forget which now, before they caught her. And the lawyer promised to send me the transcrxpt of the case, he's going to mail it to me. I met with the lawyer in Detroit, I met with her, I went to see her, and she was hard to find. I mean I traveled all day long, it was just something, in the car. Up and down, up and down, trying to find. Finally I did find her, and she was very grateful that I did and so... I mean in conclusion on that point, I'm just explaining to you why I found myself in the religious field, and I didn't even believe in the doctrine. CG; What eventually came...how long did you stay in Louisiana in 1955 working on the... AM: To '57. I went to the United Nations. You know they executed so many of our people that they wore out an electric chair? They had to buy another electric chair. I found our little girls in the crazy house, or the insane or whatever you want to call it, mental institutions, little twelve-year-old girls, ten and twelve years old, having babies for white attendants in the insane asylum and nobody paid that any attention. Nobody paid that any﻿33 AM: (cont.) attention, see? All the atrocious things, men who could tell you all kind of torture things that happened to them in jail. Women who could tell you how they'd come and round up their menfolk at a fishfry, put all the menfolks in the van while the cops go in there and rape the women, go back in the house and rape the women. All kind of things like that. So it's a terrible situation, a terrible situation. I don't see how we can tolerate that condition without rebelling, see. So I'm glad I had the tradition of revolt in me, in my spirit. We don't become insulted enough, indignant enough. You know the history of the black woman, and this woman I'm telling you about, to go and interview, Ms. Rosa Gregg in Detroit, she belongs to that National Association of Colored Women's Clubs. That was organized, I think, in 1896 or 1895. CG: In 1896. AM: Something like that, to repel an insult that was levied against us in England. CG: Ida Wells Barnett. AM: You see, Ida B. Wells and all those women, you see. Josephine Ruffin, she's a great woman, she called a convention, she's in your part of the country... CG: That was the Women's Era Club in Boston. AM: You should do research on that club because those women, they had nine states represented when they called their first meeting and they raised $110,000 and decided that they would open up orphanages throughout...homes for girls and boys. This was where you got all these Harriet Tubman and Sojourner Truth and so on clubs. The women are still active today, those women. This Rosa Gregg is one of the leading women in that. I was also a member of it at one time. CG: Oh, you were. AM: I told you I joined everything, you know, and I made them move too while I was in there, I made them move. I joined things to make people move. CG: Now what exactly did you do when you were a member of the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs? AM: Well, when I joined, I was under Communist influence, you see, I told you I didn't have my right mind. So one of the things I did was to have them connected with labor...I headed the labor committee, I got them to establish a labor committee, a thing they'd never thought of. And then at this convention I had a labor session that dealt with jobs for us, you see. I had labor representatives to come and...I even had the president of the Manufacturers' Association—you see, I was hitting high—to come and talk to us about jobs, you know. So he got up there, here again now, they lost the sensitivity of what the club was first organized, the association, who got insulted when Mr. John Jack in London claimed that a black woman had no rights to chastity. You see, they had no rights to claim chastity. Well, here was this president of the Manufacturers'..