 Frances 0. Grant I'm Frances 0. Grant, and this is the beginning of a biographical sketch for the Schlesinger [Library Black Women] Oral History Project. In handling this, we're dividing into three segments from the time of my birth to graduation from Rad-cliffe in 1917; from 1917 in the fall to June 1955, the period I worked in New Jersey; then from 1956 up to the present day, which finds me at eighty-two sitting in my apartment talking to my interviewer, Maurine Rothschild. I was born on June 30, 1895, and had two of the best parents that anyone could ever have had. My father was born in 1846 in Oswego, New York. He came of a family that had part of an underground railroad station, taking slaves over the border into Canada, and many a time he told me of waking up at night and seeing these slaves taken out of haycarts, and all smuggled over the border. A situation and a memory that was very, very poignant. My mother came from Virginia, and was the daughter of Maria Bailey, who belonged to the family of Leighs from Fairfax County. My grandfather was white. My memories of my early childhood are dim, as one would expect them to be, but the clearest one was a picture in the paper of McKinley, and a conversation with the family that he had been shot. Then the picture of a row of smiling teeth glasses, and a roughrider hat which obviously belonged to Theodore Roosevelt. That period was one of the most interesting of my early life. I went to the primary school, and then to the grammar school. The primary school was highlighted for me by the procession in 1902 of the IWW, the Industrial Workers of the World, that later came under Gompers's organization, the American Federation of Labor. And they were protesting the imprisonment of three revolutionaries: Bill Haywood, Moyer, and Pettibone. The offshoot of this was that my first-grade teacher, Gertrude O'Brien, marched with the cigarmakers' union, and my father, who was something of a﻿2 FOG: (cont) tory, was outraged by this lack of what he considered professional attitude. I rather thought my whole education would stop there. Then I went to the Bowdoin Grammar School. At the time teaching in the Bowdoin Grammar School, and one of the early Negro teachers in the city of Boston, was the sister of my father's first wife. Of this I should have been proud; but I found less to be proud of when I found out that everything I did in school got home before I did. One of the teachers that had the greatest influence in my life was my sixth-grade teacher, Eudora Pitcher, a real gentlewoman. She decided that I ought to go to Girls' Latin School. At that time, admission to the Girls' Latin School was by competitive examination, and she got permission from my mother for me to take the examination. I passed, and in the fall of 1906, I went to the Girls' Latin School. It was a six-year stint; one had six years of Latin, for which one got only four years' credit for college admission; three years of Greek, and two years of French, and contact with some of the most competent and interesting teachers, probably, in my experience. I feel that Girls' Latin School period influenced me greatly, because it inspired me with the desire to teach, and to be like some of the people who were working with me. One of them was Mary Randall Stark, who taught me Latin and Greek, and became my friend over the years. When I went up to Radcliffe for my fortieth anniversary, I stopped by to see Miss Stark, who at that time was very crippled with arthritis; I had promised to see her when I came back to my fiftieth, but that was not to be. She went to her brother's in the West, and died shortly after. When I graduated from the Girls' Latin School I was fortunate enough to win what then was the considerable prize of $25. I think we have to throw that into perspective, when we realize that the tuition at Harvard at that time was $100, and the tuition at Radcliffe, $150. So that the $25 prize meant a great deal more then than it did today, and I graduated at the head of my class. While I was in the high school, there was a friend and fellow student named Natalie Walker. She was the editor of the paper and the envy of most of us. She went to Radcliffe, and I was so very fortunate when I found myself there as a freshman, in the fall of 1913, to see Natalie Walker assigned to me as my senior advisor. She went through college, graduated that year magna cum laude; that was the first year that Radcliffe got Phi Beta Kappa, and she made Phi Beta Kappa. So that I always felt that if I could do what my senior did, I'd be very much delighted. Fortunately, I was able to do that. Therefore at my fiftieth when she came back, she sent me a little corsage with an inscription, "From a senior to a freshman who both achieved." Prior to my admission to the Girls' Latin School I had two or three rather interesting experiences. When Roosevelt was president, I had the opportunity of visiting my uncle and his wife in Washington. On one excursion into Rock Creek Park, who should I see but the president riding, surrounded by two secret service men. Quite familiar with his picture, I shouted, "There's the president!" The people with me shushed me. I guess I've been being shushed all my life. But President Roosevelt heard me, got down from his horse, and came over, and shook hands. I said, "Are you﻿3 FOG: (corvt) the president?" He said, "Yes, I am." So I turned to the folks, and said, "I told you so." Roosevelt also figured in two other situations. The anthracite coal strike in 1902 made it necessary for us to have the old, coal—burning range in the kitchen fitted up so that it could be used by gas. During this same time, of course, came the Russo-Japanese War. Roosevelt was able to bring about an agreement in 1905. My father, who always felt that we should know what was going on and be exposed to historic events, took us to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, to see the signing of that treaty. The one blot, if I may use the phrase, on Roosevelt's relationship, certainly, to Negroes was his firing, or discharging without honor, a group of soldiers at Brownsville, Texas, who were involved in a shoot-out. Many of these soldiers, among them Sergeant Mingo Saunders, had been with Theodore Roosevelt when he made the once-famous charge of San Juan Hill. There was much to be said on both sides, and I recall that a Republican senator, Foraker, from Ohio, who had some presidential ambitions, put them on the line to plead for these Negro troops. Roosevelt was adamant, however, and the Brownsville discharge stood. When I got into Radcliffe in the fall of 1913, there were rumors of war. And they persisted. The next year, however, came the "Guns of August" situation, and friends of mine who were in Europe had had a hard time getting back. At school we all were very, very tense; Americans, who do nothing by halves, had decided that everything German must go. No German in the schools, no German music—Schubert, Wagner, out. Karl Muck, of the Boston Symphony, was deeply chastised because he would not play "The Star-Spangled Banner" before symphony concerts, remarking that the music was an old drinking song and had no place in classical music. One of the distinguished minds of the age was Hugo Munsterberg, professor of psychology at Harvard University, who came in for considerable criticism because of his advocacy of the German cause. As students, I think most of us were fairly broad-minded, not taking violent sides, but we were a little bit distressed when Ernest Hocking, professor of religion, we found, dismissed his classes early so that he wouldn't have to meet Munsterberg in the cloak room. Matters came to a head one morning in a class when I was seated in Browne & Nichols, and all of a sudden there was this terrific thud. All of us knew someone had fallen. It was later found out that Munsterberg, under the terrific pressure of the press and his friends, had collapsed and died. True to Germany to his heart, he left his head and his brain to Harvard. When one goes through crises and survives, the crises always seem less; as I think back over the many situations that have come in my life, I recall the first very serious one, the hysteria that followed the bombing of the Lusitania. There were mass meetings everywhere, one big one at Tremont Temple; the decision to go to war immediately; the attempts by Woodrow Wilson, who had been reelected on the platform, "He kept us out of war," to try to stem the hysteria of an angry public. But on April 6, 1917, we entered World War I. I'll never forget the service that morning at prayers at Radcliffe, when Albert Parker Fitch, dean of the Theological School, spoke to us and gave us some idea of what war was going to be.﻿4 FOG: (cont) This was the year that I and many of my friends were getting out of college. At that time Negro families of substance sent their boys and girls to the northern colleges. Among the students at the time I was at Radcliffe was Ellis Rivers, a Phi Beta Kappa from Yale, who was studying at the Harvard Law School. He later became Judge Rivers. And William Augustus Hinton, at the Harvard Medical School, who was to invent the serum that replaced the Wasserman test. And so it went. But with the onrush of war was a question of what was going to happen with these young men of training and ability, whose entrance into the regular army service seemed a little bit out of the question. W.E.B. DuBois, who was then one of the officers of the NAACP, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, had campaigned strenuously for an integrated officers' corps. When that seemed impossible, he finally decided that he would settle for a segregated officers' training corps, and one was set up at Des Moines, Iowa. There went Ellis Rivers, Louis Wright, and a great many others whose names were going to be prominent in the history of Negro progress of that period. Perhaps it's a truism to say that a secure childhood makes a happy adult. My childhood was a particularly happy one. My parents were fond of each other, and fond of us. They never talked down to us, but talked with us, and for the most part, we felt we could go to them with problems that we had. I remember one little incident which indicates how wise they were in dealing with us. My father had a little cupboard in which he kept wine and cookies, and my sister and I one day found it unlocked. So we went in, and childlike, not realizing that the consistent depletion of the cookies would somehow be discovered, found ourselves detected. Our parents who could have scolded us, or punished us, or spanked us, talked with us. I remember my father saying, "What I have is yours. All you have to do is ask me for it. You don't ever have to take anything that way." We felt so chagrined, that that experience probably did much to cement what was already a very close relationship. Our father was a golf addict, and in 1899 was the inventor of the wooden golf tee, an invention which still stands up. The original plan submitted for the patent is in the Yale library as part of an exhibit in his memory. In addition to that, we were surrounded by people who had put great emphasis on education—my cousin had graduated from Radcliffe in 1900, and taught in the Cambridge public schools; we had friends who were in the civil service, post office, worked in the library, as well as people in profe ssions. There was a little bit of snootiness, I guess we shall say, because we took a rather dim view of persons who had opportunities for education but had not taken advantage of them. We had a summer place in Arlington, Massachusetts, and at that time my father's daughter by his first wife was quite a belle. When students came to Harvard for summer school, our house was rather a gathering place. There during my summers were the people who were to figure in the educational world: W.R. Valentine; Leslie Pinckney Hill, principal of Cheyney; W.T.B. Williams, assistant to Booker T. Washington in Tuskegee, and many, many others. However, the harassment of such visiting got on my father's nerves; we sold the place in Arlington and bought a place in New Hampshire, where,﻿5 FOG: (cont) as he laughingly remarked, it was beyond the ten-cent trolley ride. There in 1910 he came to die of cancer of the liver. During the period when he was a successful dentist, his appointment book read like the social register: Mrs. James Lowell Putnam, the Emmonses, the Maisons, Mrs. Garfield, Mrs. John Parkinson, the Coolidges, and in addition to that, he had a very, very dear friend, Dr. Charles W. Townsend, who gave us medical care in return for my father's looking after his family's teeth. When my father was stricken with the preliminary symptoms of cancer— yellow jaundice, and threatened blindness—Charles W. Townsend came up to our place in Chester, New Hampshire. We had driven down to the station to meet him, but met him halfway, and he had walked half of the distance to come to see his friend for the last time. The whole pattern of security and a sense of being loved and being cherished gave me, I feel very strongly, a foundation that's made it possible for me to stand a good many of the rigors and bafflements and the discouragements of a long and reasonably happy life. When my father died in 1910, a good deal of publicity and perhaps a great deal of information that had hitherto been unknown came to light in the obituary. He had taught at the Harvard Dental School for fifteen years. He had invented the artificial palate, a device made for those whose palates were cleft, and of course like all inventions made by doctors, it was turned over to the profession. It had been eagerly accepted, and my father had been asked to demonstrate it in London, Dublin, and Edinburgh. He made these artificial palates for people and instructed them in their use, and as a result was assigned as an instructor in Harvard for diseases of the cleft palate and cognate diseases, and taught there for fifteen years. He was the only Negro who was ever president of the Harvard Odontological Society. My father's death produced not only complete chaos as far as our lives were concerned, but brought to me the first realization that being Negro made a difference in what I could have and what I could get. We had to leave the old brownstone at 108 Charles Street, and seek other lodgings. As a child, I remember going around and seeing a place here and there for rent and coming back and saying to my mother, "Well, we can take this and we can take that," and her reluctance to tell me that that probably was not possible. As I said, my grandfather was white and my mother was very fair. She went out to hunt an apartment and secured one, a few steps from the Girls' Latin School. No one asked her whether she was white or colored. We signed the lease, and when we, who were light brown, appeared, then the trouble began. The accusation was that she had secured the place under false pretenses, which of course was not true, because no one had asked her whether she was white or colored. But in order to break the lease, the man who owned the apartment sold it, and we were consequently evicted. Because of the prominence of my father, the situation made quite a cause celebre, and I was given permission by the board of education to finish my education at the Girls' Latin School by registering at the Roxbury home of my half-sister, who had married and was living there. This was my first real poignant introduction to prejudice.﻿6 FOG: (cont) At college, you met a very cosmopolitan group, and I knew that among my close friends—people of all ethnic groups and all social and material classes—was Isabel Coolidge, who was frankly fond of me, and could afford to be as I constituted no particular threat to her; Julia Reynolds, the daughter of a South Carolina judge; Anna Shaughnessy, of a first-class Irish family; Doris Hellman, extremely clever, a young Jewish girl; and several traditional Boston WASPs. I played the piano, I was the class pianist; I was able to make posters because I did a little bit of sketching; I got into a good many of the Radcliffe clubs. Most of them were matters of grade. You went into the English Club, you got a certain number of grades; you went into the Latin Club, you got a certain kind of grades. I had chosen to specialize in classics. I was particularly fortunate in being at Radcliffe when the great in that field were there. My instructor in Livy was Edward Kennard Rand, Pope Professor of Latin, and my advisor for the four years that I was there; Charles Burton Gulick, in Greek; Clifford Hershell Moore, in Latin composition. So it went. The desire to emulate my senior, and my own personal pride in achievement, made me study very, very hard. When it came to the end of my junior year, and I didn't make what I had hoped to make, Phi Beta Kappa, I said, "Well, we'll see what we can do the last year." In the fall of 1916, I came to my mailbox in Fay House, and there was a little note from Dean Boody congratulating me on having been elected to Phi Beta Kappa. I had known nothing of it and rushed over to the bulletin board in Fay House; there was my name with two others as having been elected on the basis of junior year grades and November hour exams. As I came down the steps of Fay House, I met President LeBaron Russell Briggs, who of course had formerly been dean at Harvard. He stopped me and said, "Miss Grant, your father would have been proud of you." I thought that was so sweet; everybody adored him; he was just a perfect dear of a man. When commencement came, I decided to go up for honors in classics, and getting honors in classics demanded two things: one had to take second-year honors in classics, which I did; then, to take five three-hour examinations: one in Greek literature, Latin literature, Greek composition, Latin composition, and general classic background. By the time I had finished those fifteen hours, my mind was a complete blank. I couldn't even tell you whether the sun was shining or not. It all came out as I had hoped. I got a magna cum laude in classics, was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and saw the close of four delightful years at Radcliffe in June 1917. MR:* There's a little more left on this tape and I'd like to ask you a couple of questions that you...could you, just because I'm interested myself. The one is that you don't talk about your social life at all at Radcliffe, and I know, in your day, like mine, that it was very much separate from a man's school. It was a woman's college... FOG: Well, as I think I once said to you, a lot of girls went to Radcliffe to annex husbands or to establish social connections, but at that partic- * "MR" designates that the interviewer, Maurine Rothschild, is speaking.﻿7 FOG: (cont) ular time, the Negroes who went to the northern colleges came from an established social pattern of their own. One of my close friends was Marian Wilson, and the two of us used to entertain girls who were in college and boys who were in college, and we had these very, very wonderful parties. Marian was very, very attractive, and at one time was engaged to James Waring, who later became president of Downington School in Pennsylvania. She was his Class Day lady. That never materialized. Half of the fun was the fact that at both houses young people were particularly subjected to the discipline of the elders. When the folks used to meet in our house, when my grandmother felt things had gone far enough, she came through and banged the milk bottles on the front porch, which was a signal that things should begin to end. If we ignored that, there was usually a little call, "I just want to speak to you for a few minutes." And that was it. When that came, the boys knew it was time to go home. I can recall very, very vividly the first night one daring Harvard student dared to bring beer into the house. He smuggled it in, and put it in the sink, feeling that that was safe. But as luck would have it, my grandmother, whose eyes and ears missed nothing, discovered the beer, and we listened to a homily on the evils of drink. We had parties, and proms, and we went to football games, and there was a general social pattern. I think perhaps a lot of people don't feel or don't realize what a very deeply organized social pattern exists among Negroes of this time. I could start at Boston and go straight down to Washington and Virginia, and in every city find people who knew me and my friends, and drop into an established social pattern of acceptance and of a certain amount of physical and material comfort, not wealth in any sense, although there were some families who were very, very famous and made a great deal of money at the time. One family was the Wormleys, and their family had a big estate outside of Washington with horses and all the so-called appurtenances. We always looked at them with considerable awe, and felt that we did pretty well if we got a new party dress each year! But there was very definitely a social life that was quite separate from that of the college. With the patterns as they were then, there was very little exchange among Negroes and whites as far as gatherings were concerned. We went to some of the girls' houses, but mixed parties were practically out of the question. MR: How did you travel to Radcliffe, Frances? Did you live at home? FOG: I lived in Cambridge, on Parker Street, which was seven blocks from Radcliffe. One of the interesting patterns was the fact that in those New England winters, in the days of fountain pens, our fountain pens often froze between the time I left home and got to Radcliffe, and the same thing was true of girls who traveled from other areas. So that part of the early morning process was thawing out fountain pens at the radiator, in Fay House and in the basement of Agassiz. MR: Do you remember what time classes began? FOG: Yes, classes were at nine o'clock, always, which most people took great﻿8 FOG: (cont) care not to select. But there were nine o'clocks. Some of the bigger courses tended to come between twelve and one. One, of course, of the advantages or the disadvantages, it depends entirely on your point of view, was the fact that the people who took language courses had daily preparation. In the other courses, of course, you took notes and hoped by the time examination came you could read them. In the first freshman year Livy course, we had to do about five or six pages of Livy, and that kind of dose, covering a period of some twenty to forty lines was something to be reckoned with. However, the daily grind paid off, because when examination time came, you had it or you didn't. MR: Right. Frances, you don't talk about your sister very much. Did she go to college also? FOG: No, she went to the Salem Normal School, and she was a most attractive, and a most vivacious person. Lots of fun, slightly on the cynical side, and she always thought I was a kind of goodie-goodie; she was one of the pranksters. She had a delightful time in Salem, and when she graduated at the time of the war, she went into the Post Office Department and worked out of Springfield. There she became engaged to one of the college boys of the time. She was not one of the constant type. The desire to annex this one and that one resulted in the breaking of the engagement, and she never married. We had awfully good times together, and in later years, of course, when she was teaching here in New York, she and a friend had an apartment which was home for me, until she died. MR: Talk a little bit about your mother. You were telling me that you had such a dynamic father. What was she like? FOG: Well, my mother was a gentle soul, sweet, not really wholly subdued. Because she had a quiet strength that could exert itself at times, and I think even with the dominant nature of my father, he knew when he'd gone far enough. He loved her and she was always there when we needed her; but both Helene and I worshiped the masculinity and the dominance and the vibrant interest of our father. My sister with happiness, and me with regret, caddied when he played golf. I just wanted to be along and went for the ride, but hated the whole thing! MR: And did you ever play golf yourself? FOG: No. I even tried to take up miniature golf, with no success. I was a complete flop. The only really athletic thing I did was play tennis, and I had to do it under restraint, because having survived rheumatic fever, I had a rheumatic heart. In college,of course, I was not allowed to take any kind of gymnasium exercise. Luckily for me I got out of college before the requirement came that everybody had to learn to swim. Otherwise I would have been there right now... MR: There were a lot of Phi Beta Kappas in the swimming pool the night before graduation, when I was there! Frances, you talked about your father's first marriage. Did you have any relationship with your stepbrothers or sisters, or did you have any stepbrothers or sisters?﻿9 FOG: Well yes, one stepsister who was the belle, Mabel. She had three children. One of them became a Sister of Charity. This girl was rather interesting; she was very brilliant, but a complete dud as far as any kind of humanness was concerned. She went into chemistry, was an excellent chemist, and was one of the first Negroes that went into Bryn Mawr. She was the kind who couldn't let water boil without telling you at what degree it boiled. I was thoroughly annoyed and kept after her mother to try to bring Lillian down to earth. She didn't succeed. She graduated from Bryn Mawr, went on to Howard University and got a master's, and then went on to the Institute of Technology and got an excellent job with the Adams Paint Company in northern Massachusetts. One day when she was getting ready to take a trip, she took one last look in the laboratory and a draft from the door set off a fire, and she was burned all down her torso. I am inclined to think that that changed her whole life; there was a good deal of skin grafting and all, but she was cured, and a friend of hers who was an Irish Catholic eventually got her into the Catholic church and she became a nun. MR: She was how much older than you? FOG: Oh, ten, fifteen years difference. MR: And what were the other two? FOG: Now the second one whose name was Inez, she was more like Helene. She was athletic, gregarious, and went through Sargent's. She went into the school system in Boston, was most successful, and at present is a supervisor of physical education in the city. Now the last one was pretty, and married early. She had two children; one, Buddy, graduated from Notre Dame, was in the singing chorus, and a girl, whose name I can't remember now, went to Smith, and then went to the—what's the college up there in Canada?— McGill. She was interested in some kind of child therapy. We don't have too much contact, since there was a great deal of bitterness when my father died. I tried to obviate it to some extent, but it is there. MR: I'd like to hear a little bit about your father's office in the brownstone on Charles Street, which I understand was on the bicentennial tour of Boston, selected as an important landmark in the city. I'd like to know about your life there. FOG: Well, it was an interesting brownstone, built very obviously for people of considerable material advantage. There was a kitchen in the basement, and a big, big coal-burning stove, a dumbwaiter that went up to the butler's pantry on the first floor of the house. At the front was a large room which my father used for his laboratory; in those days many dentists, I might say most dentists, although S.S. White was flourishing at that time, did their mechanical work. My father did almost all of his mechanical work, was extremely deft with his hands, and made my mother's engagement ring. So that part of our fun lots of times was stealing in and just sitting down and being very quiet while my father worked on teeth, and vulcanized artificial palates.﻿10 FOG: (cont) On the first floor was the dining room, the butlerls pantry, and a small reception room in the front. On the second floor were two large rooms connected with a bathroom, which I imagine would have been the master bedrooms. Those two rooms were used for my father's office. The front room where he did his work, and the back for the waiting room. They were rather stately rooms, with windows at each end, and I suppose what was customary for that time, a tall wall-to-wall mirror between. My sister and I used to love to go up and look at ourselves in the mirrors. On the next floor was a repetition of that, and of course that was the suite that belonged to my father and mother. We slept on the fourth floor. One part of the family arrangements was interesting: as true Bostonians, we had baked beans every Saturday night. We always made homemade bread. Sunday morning, we had rolls, fish cakes, and beans. In those days, to buy from the bakery was anathema, and we talked in hushed tones about people who ate "bought bread." I never ate any bought bread in my life until we moved to Cambridge after my father's death. We'd always made our own bread and always had rolls, as I say, on Sunday morning, with codfish cakes. None of this stuff that you buy today. We bought the real Gorton's dried codfish, cooked it thoroughly, and mixed it up with mashed potatoes and eggs, and baking powder, and dropped it into hot fat. When I see these concoctions that pass for fish cakes today, I'm afraid I have to shudder. MR: You talked about Sunday morning, and I'm curious to know a little bit about the role of religion in your life. Did you go to church on Sundays? FOG: Well, I was religious but my father was not religious, in the sense of a churchgoer. He had a kind of contempt for the Negro ministry at the time. I think to some extent deservedly. I have always felt, and this may be most unfair, that the Negro ministry was one of the setbacks to a great deal of development, because they were a self-aggrandizing group; they took advantage of the religious fervor of a great many of the people, and the big churches were really institutions—the A.M.E. church was a flourishing financial organization where the members were highly paid, and the minister shuffled around according to politics. It was a really very, very deeply organized political and financial situation. My father had complete contempt for it. I, however, had gone to the Advent Church, which was right around the corner from us on Charles Street, it was onBrimmerStreet, and the Reverend William Van Allen was there, and he was very fond of me. The church was integrated, not because there was any desire to separate the people, but there weren't a great many Negroes who went there, so there was no particular reason to do anything about them. I got confirmed there. MR: Was it an Episcopal church? FOG: An Episcopal church. For a long period of time I was a very devout Episcopalian. Then, I suppose what happens to a great many people—the intellectuals set in, in the movement of doubt, a little bit of too much inquisi-tiveness into the workings of the Episcopal church, and some of the prejudices that I saw, and gradually I leaned away from it. I could honestly say that I'm not irreligious. I am definitely not committed to a great deal of﻿11 FOG: (cont) the formal religion that is the result of churchgoing on Sunday. Of course there was the famous Negro spiritual, "Ain't it a sin to steal on Sunday? Ain't it a sin when you got Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday?" I had the feeling, Isn't it a shame to go to church on Sunday, and not do anything that was religious the rest of the week? So though I'm not a churchgoer, I don't think I'm unethical; I don't think I'm irreligious; I don't think I'm immoral. I think I have a very definite code of conduct, and a code of values, which, while not directly related to any religious denomination, has certainly been a very steady and very real influence in my life. MR: When you talked about prejudice you were telling me yesterday that during your era in growing up in Boston that the prejudice, the real prejudice, was against the Irish in Boston, and you have a couple of examples of people that you were close to who endured this kind of prejudice. FOG: Well, Anna Shaughnessy, who was my close friend, was a victim of one situation. In those days, in 1917 when the question of jobs came into the college, those of us who had friends who were going to be interviewed always stayed, sat outside of Fay House or Agassiz House to see what the result was. I remember Anna Shaughnessy, who was an excellent student, later became head of the English department at Worcester High School, was being interviewed by the principal of the Winsor School, with three or four other candidates. As we waited outside, and later she came out, flung herself into my arms, she said, "Frances, what do you think happened?" And I said, "Well, I don't know, what?" Then she said, "Well, you know, the principal said, 'Miss Shaughnessy, your record is better than anybody else's, but we couldn't put your name in our catalogue.'" There was the other situation at the Massachusetts General Hospital, where Ida M. Cannon was the head of the Social Service Department. My good friend, Mrs. Ada Hinton, worked with her, and Miss Cannon had a very attractive little secretary who was going to get married. The secretary was a Boston WASP, and Miss Cannon had asked her to find a substitute for her. The secretary, without any consciousness of the whole situation, picked her close friend, a most attractive young Irish girl; when the girl came to see Miss Cannon, Miss Cannon was aghast. There were no Catholics working at the Massachusetts General Hospital. The staff and the volunteers belonged to the Boston elite. Hugh Cabot was president, the volunteers had names like Coolidge; the doctors all had names like Putnam, and it was really a closed corporation. Miss Cannon suggested to her own secretary that she try to get the girl to change her mind, but a situation developed, and Miss Cannon came out flatly, and said that she could not employ her, because she was Catholic. At that time, one of the most influential members of the Catholic hierarchy in Boston was Cardinal O'Connell. Cardinal O'Connell waited on Hugh N. Cabot, with the result—and I don't need to tell you what the result was—that the girl was hired. The ice was broken. I remember in The Last Puritan, Santayana saying to his son that the Irish, who in those days dug the ditches and manned the garbage wagons, would one day take over. Of course we lived to see that. One of the most interesting﻿12 FOG: (cont) cases was that of Mayor Curley. My cousin, or the man who married my cousin, William H. Lewis, the prosecuting attorney, had sent Curley to jail for forging the name of a person and taking a civil service examination for him. That felony was later removed in Curley*s last days, and referred to in the famous novel, The Last Hurrah. It was typical, in a sense, of the type of image that the Catholics presented to the proper Bostonians, not by any means a fair one, but one the prejudices involved kept up. I can remember again when Senator Walsh became governor; when the Harvard football team, which had been losing steadily for generations with the first families of Boston, acquired Charlie Brickley from South Boston, who had the opportunity to kick. The team won. All of these were examples of the winds of change in a very, very, very controlled climate in which I had been born and brought up. MR: You also said yesterday something to me about following this kind of the winds of change that, when you and your mother were looking for an apartment, they didn't realize you were Negro. And that many Negroes went to college, and got in because the question of whether they were white or not never came up, and you, I believe, told of Woodrow Wilson, and his remark about Princeton... FOG: ...that he was proud to say that no Negro had ever graduated from Princeton, and that amused a great many Negroes who knew two or three who had gone through Princeton as white. The same thing was true of many of the baseball teams, particularly a Negro who had played on the Philadelphia team long before the days of Jackie Robinson. The idea of the very fair was in order to get jobs to do what was technically known as "pass." Of course, in Washington and all the way down the South, where so many of the wealthy whites had dual families, this university became the place where the daughters of the wealthy whites went. You never saw such beauty and such wealth. Their fathers supported them and paid the bills. As a matter of fact, one of my close friends was named Myrtle Teal, and Myrtle Teal was the daughter of a very wealthy Carolina farmer, and her mother later married a colored man. In all fairness to Myrtle, she was very nice to her mother's husband. But in the early days, when she was in college, she had to go and visit the father, who was paying the bills. At that point, she revolted. During the Roosevelt administration, when everybody was plowing in cotton... Myrtle's mother did not plow in cotton. Of course it was this situation, in many cases, when these people came North. And in Washington it was notorious; stores like Garfinckel's catered to many, many "white Negroes," who otherwise, of course, could not have gone within its doors. They would go and buy things for other people. That was the general pattern of the age. I suppose prejudice induces all sorts of ruses. MR: Frances, but you never felt, living on Charles Street, I gather, that there was a feeling that you were any different from any of the neighbors in your childhood. FOG: No, never. I never had any feeling, and I lay that sense of security to the wisdom of my parents. There were certainly racial discussions. And﻿13 FOG: (cont) there were racial disturbances. They were not the subject of conversation with us. We had a particularly free and happy childhood. I always remember a story told of Alex Templeton, whose mother never let him realize that being blind wasn't normal. Later on in years, when of course he came to realize that blindness was not normal, he laid the sense of security and balance of a well-organized life to the wisdom of the woman who had saved him from any feeling that he was different. I think that's one thing my parents did for me. I had complete confidence in myself. It's rather interesting that in later days, I know in various cities or places I have gone, I think I have been served and accepted not because they wanted to accept Negroes, but they felt that from my manner and general approach, it was easier to handle me and let me go than to create a situation. Because I never went in anywhere, feeling that I...was not going to be served...that I was not going to get whatever was there. MR: I was going to ask you one other thing that has just slipped my mind, and I really want to remember it because it is somewhat related to this... <3h, I was going to ask you about the move to New Hampshire, the summer house, when you were talking about New Englanders and their built-in prejudice. What was your experience in New Hampshire? FOG: My experience in New Hampshire was interesting, and made very easy by two facts. When I had the severe case of rheumatic fever, I lost the use of my legs. MR: How old were you, Frances? FOG: I can't remember, but... MR: About when, was this very young? FOG: Yes, I had to learn to walk again. My father had a friend in Derry, New Hampshire, who had a farm. And he suggested that I go up there and learn to walk again on snowshoes. So I went up there, in the winter. New England winters are something again. When it got to be thirty above everybody decided it was spring. All the time I was there it was ten, fifteen below. But I got an insight into New England living that seemed to come right out of Godey's handbook—the big fireplace, the heating areas above; the vast, enormous breakfasts that were served; the farmhands who had gone out early and came in about eight o'clock, and had bacon and eggs, and fried potatoes, and pie, and doughnuts, and coffee! The other phase that interested me was the shutting off of the rest of the house. When one went into the hall of a New England house, it was like going into the North Pole. Above every fireplace was a collection of soapstones, everybody had his own soapstone; when you went upstairs, unless you were a complete idiot, you never tried to get into bed without rubbing the^sheets and all. If you've ever tried to get into a cold bed that doesn't warm up until you're ready to get up, that was New England without the soapstone. I did learn to walk. That contact was the one which made my father consider buying a place in New Hampshire, and he got it through these﻿14 FOG: (cont) people. It was rather interesting, there was never any feeling of prejudice, folks came in and met us, and nothing was ever said, and we bought the place without any question. As I told you, we got it for a song because the owner had just sold $80,000 worth of white pine from it. MR: That's interesting. FOG: I think one of the general things...most everywhere we went, we were accepted. Now, I don't like to brag, but I think that probably our attitude had a lot to do with it. I still think so. I think when you just go along, and you meet people, and are accepted, then it never occurs to me that I can't meet anybody who is able to meet me, you know. MR: I think you have a way of... FOG: Now that may be a kind of vanity, or what, I don't know. I mean I just don't think about it. MR: But I think you have a way of putting people at ease, by taking hold of the situation yourself, and you do it so naturally that you probably don't even realize you're doing it. But you do make other people feel that, well, if they might be uneasy or tense, in any kind of relationship, you simply gloss over that and go about the day's business, and I think that may have come from your parents. FOG: I think so, and I've always been able to be objective. Because I told you when I was little I was so silly, you know, talking about what I wanted to be... I mean, I've never felt that because I was Negro you couldn't mention the word "Negro" in my presence. You know what I mean? I think lots of people are self-conscious in the presence of Negroes, you know. MR: Frances, as you think over all of the discussion we've had, in addition to your rather organized presentation of the years between 1895 and 1917, do you think of anything that you might have left out that you might like to add, even though it isn't in chronological order, just some of your reminiscences, anything to do with your father, or experiences you had in or around Boston? p0G: Well, I think one of the most interesting ones which I did omit was my father taking me around the corner of Mount Vernon Street right down by the Charles River to look at Halley's Comet. I didn't realize then the significance of it. I later learned that it appeared every seventy-five years, and that in 1909, I suppose, it was the prelude to the catastrophe of 1914. Another rather interesting experience was coming into Boston to church on Sundays, and meeting Roland Hayes, who was singing at a religious service held in one of the studios in an office building there, off of Beacon Street. Later on, my mother who belonged to the Calhoun Club, which gave a fund-raising event every year, sponsored a concert at which﻿15 FOG: (cont) a man, Harry Williams, was to sing. Harry Williams developed some kind of laryngitis, or something, and the concert at Jordan Hall was in doubt until someone suggested Roland Hayes. Roland Hayes came, sang before a fairly hostile audience, but was so successful that he won over his audience and won over Philip Hale, the music critic of The Boston Transcript. Of course, the rest is history. Also, one of the persons this Calhoun Club featured was Samuel Coleridge Taylor, a native African, who came, Afro and all. I can recall my sister and I being practically hysterical over this slender, fine-featured Negro, with this mass of hair. We indicated our lack of appreciation, and my mother soon straightened us out. But Coleridge Taylor had a musical status in London. He had written a suite, Hiawatha; he had set to music four lyrics by Radclyffe Hall*, and made some rather elaborate arrangements of Negro spirituals. * One Marian Anderson regularly sang, "Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child." In Connecticut, a Connecticut musical group was presenting his Hiawatha, and Coleridge Taylor was invited as a guest; he could not conduct, as a Negro. Another situation of the same type of prejudice came to Nathaniel Dett, the musical director at Hampton. He had written a cantata, "Listen to the Lambs," which the Boston Cecilia Society presented. Dett was invited as a guest, not as a conductor, and his presence acknowledged from the box. These are not terribly important, but they* re indicative of the very, very subtle and very, very acute prejudice of the times. One of the literary critics of The Boston Transcript was William Stanley Braith-waite, a Negro, and for years his column was read by all the proper Boston-ians. He also edited eight volumes of An Anthology of Magazine Verse, which became a "must." The last one was dedicated to his friends, Dr. and Mrs. William A. Hinton. And I think I spoke of Dr. Hinton as the man who invented the test which supplanted the Wasserman. Now was there anything else that we talked about just now that you might like to mention? Then we'll do a recording of the next period from 1917 to 1955. F0G: I can't think of anything else, can you think of anything? MR: No, I'm sure that there are episodes in your daily life that...life goes on day by day, that we've probably missed, but I think we have a pretty good picture now of what life was like for a black girl growing up in Boston, but in a very, very special situation. Now, Frances, maybe you'll introduce this section, the period from 1917 to 1955, yourself, because you selected that as an outstanding period in your life. f0G: Well, I felt it was, because I still insist that you have the quality of the missionary only once in life. You go into some new job and you throw yourself in heart and soul... Well, in 1917, after I got out of college, I was able to get a job through the influence of Eva Hall. Eva Hall graduated from Radcliffe in 1903 and was teaching in Cheyney, Pennsylvania, under the principalship of Leslie Pinckney Hill, who was a close friend of W.R. Valentine.﻿16 FOG: (cont) It was a rather interesting situation. On a hill in Bordentown, New Jersey, known as "Old Ironsides," had been a school established by the A.M.E. church. The estate originally belonged to Charles Parnell. Charles Stewart, the commodore of the battleship Constitution, which was moored down on the Delaware River just below the bluffs, married his daughter. The Delaware, by the way, was navigable at that time, far past Trenton. When Charles Parnell was there, about a mile as the crow flies, two miles of the way, was another famous estate, that of Jerome Bonaparte, given to him by Napoleon after the Louisiana Purchase, with the idea that Napoleon maybe might do something about America. The estate became famous for two reasons: Lafayette visited it, and the waltz was danced for the first time in America. Remnants of the Bonaparte occupation lie in a little gravestone in the Christ Church burying ground, where Bonaparte's son, little Prince Murat, is buried. There was an underground tunnel in the estate to the Delaware River, so those two historic situations marked the site of the school where I was to spend thirty-eight years. When I came up to the Bluffs to the school in the fall of 1917, I found myself for the first time in life in a completely segregated outfit. Mr. Valentine, who was the principal, had been brought there by Calvin Kendall. Calvin Kendall, at one time, was the superintendent of schools in Indianapolis, and Mr. Valentine was a teacher in a public school there. Mr. Valentine had felt that the ordinary public school education was inadequate for the group of young Negro boys and girls whom he taught, and that they needed something else to make it possible for them to go into the world, and make a living. So he had suggested that some of them be taught shoemaking, lathe work, and that sort. His experiment was so revolutionary, in a way, that John Dewey had written him up in Schools of Tomorrow. When Calvin Kendall was called to Trenton in 1913, and asked to take over this A.M.E. school which the state agreed to subsidize, he remembered W.R. Valentine, and called him from Indianapolis, so that when I ascended the little hill in 1917, W.R. Valentine was in charge. His wife, Grace, was a New Englander, from New Haven, Connecticut, and she and I formed an evil alliance against the prejudices that we encountered. It was interesting, because the classes ran from the sixth to the tenth grade, which I considered immediately an impossible situation. After much stewing and much argument we were able to persuade Mr. Valentine to lop off the bottom and build to the top. I felt that you either had a seven-eight-nine situation, or a nine-ten-eleven-and-twelve. It took us ten years to do it. We did it, with considerable bloodletting, I must say. Then it was a question, also, of getting certification for the school. At the time that Mr. Valentine took over, there were teachers there who were earnest, but not too skilled. And the students were overage for the most part, earnest again, but I felt were not being held up to the highest standards. I guess perhaps one of my faults is that I feel if you're going to do anything, you have to do it right. Then I wasn't prepared to make allowances for anybody, black, white, grisly or gray. I didn't feel that because I was in a wholly Negro setup, that there should be a set of Negro standards. I felt that there should be standards, and that the students, if they were to go out in the world which was not﻿17 FOG: (cont) wholly Negro, must be taught to meet the standards of that world. So that we eventually got state certification for the high school course. One of the interesting aspects of it was that we were able to include a five-credit course in Negro history. MR: What year was that, Frances? FOG: I couldn't put it right on the nail, but I would say that it was probably in the late twenties or early thirties. MR: Just think how advanced that school was. FOG: Yes, yes. The textbook at that time was Carter Woodson's The Negro in Our History. I might say that I knew Carter Woodson personally, knew him over the years. He was a delightful, crotchety old man who'd been all over the world, full of all kinds of prejudices and male chauvinistic attitudes, but feeling definitely the story of the Negro had not been adequately told. I think his book is still today a classic. Also, Mr. Valentine was able, in later years, to draw people to Bordentown. We got rid of a lot of what I call old wood. He brought Lester Granger down there as extension worker; and William Hastie, who later became Judge Hastie; Ben Johnson, the runner; and several others. He was able to bring these young people—Charles Ray, who was the first Negro captain of a football team at Bates—these young people were an inspiration, because they were people who had succeeded in the same kind of atmosphere that these young boys and girls were operating in. When the great migration of the twenties came, we were flooded. If you remember, after the war, the Negroes left the South with the breakdown of old King Cotton, and came North in vast numbers. There were the great riots in Detroit, and Washington, various places. We got a large group of overaged students. At one time I was teaching boys and girls who were almost as old as I am; the advantage of this situation was that most of them realized they had a great deal to make up. We went into the organization of the trade situation, and that was very, very crucial. New Jersey had five trade schools, which were controlled by the union. The schools were rated by the Department of Education on their placement. Therefore it was very important for the schools not to train students they couldn't place, or to train them for jobs in which they were not placeable. This, of course, and the prejudiced attitude of New Jersey automatically excluded a great many students from getting any kind of trade education. Therefore the school was fortunate in setting up trades: auto mechanics, printing, carpentry, domestic science, sewing and art. A great deal has been said, and is still being said today, about the inadequate training of the trade school in many industrial situations. Some of the operators prefer on-the-job training, they feel that it is superior. In many cases I imagine that it would be. The trade schools, while they were subsidized, found it very hard to reproduce any of the situations of industry, and they never had money enough, of course, to keep up with the mechanical changes in industry.﻿18 FOG: ( cont) At the same time, half a loaf is better than none, and we were fairly successful in training. We made it a requirement that a student, to graduate from the school, must complete four years of high school and have a trade certificate. Certainly, over the years, that paid off. Our students have been most successful. And I will say, just in passing and I'll pick it up later, that in 1975, twenty years after the school closed, they gave a testimonial dinner for me, and over 500 students were there. They were all successful, and all holding onto the spirit of Bordentown, and appreciative of what Bordentown had done for them. I think, also, it's interesting, when you have a boarding school with boys and girls, that some kind of entertainment and extracurricular activities have to be set up. The boys had a military setup, which was very good for the discipline. They were interested in their officers and so forth and so on, and they drilled and had the uniforms, and so forth. But we tried, and I'm not being modest about this at all...I was very energetic in setting up as many types of extracurricular activities as we could have that would involve as many students as we possibly could. So many of these Negro boys and girls had been in setups where they weren't a part of anything. When it came to the school play, or the school paper, or this, that, or the other, they automatically knew there was no chance for them. So that the first thing we did was set up a school paper, called The Ironsides Echo. I sponsored it, and it was published without intermission up to 1948, the only omission being the year the printer was in France in World War I. Mr. Valentine, as all principals, I suppose, with a job on the line, was always cautious. But I felt that if we were publishing the school paper, I'd like to put it up against other people who were publishing school papers. So with rather disheartened approval, we entered the Columbia Scholastic Association, and won seconds and thirds over the years. Then later we went to the National Scholastic Association, out of the University of Minnesota, and won two firsts. Of course, therefore, my point of view was justified. In addition, we had all kinds of clubs. There was the Torchbearers, which was a sort of an artistic club; the Improvement League. There were various little groups of that sort where the students could become involved. We taught them how to give their little parties, and they took great pride in the decorations, and getting themes, and things of that sort. Then one of the most interesting of our institutions was the Christmas post office. We used that to sell Christmas seals. Then we set up the post office, and we delivered; we had the big groups and they would deliver the postal cards to the various people on the campus for five cents. And then we always set up something like a...this kind of gram or that kind of gram, that cost ten cents. We got great write-ups in the local papers, because we'd sell sometimes as many as 14 ~ 15,000, you see, one-cent seals. That of course involved everybody, who were the sorters, and the deliverers. And then sometimes we sold Christmas cards, because the children could get down to town only on certain days, and this gave them an opportunity. So that the Christmas post office was quite a great institution.﻿19 FOG: (cont) In connection with that, we had chapel exercises once every day from 11:30 to 12:00. That period, when I first came there, was a matter of dull giving out of notices and so forth and so on, and I had the feeling that there ought to be something else. So we did a lot of organization, and we gave every trade an opportunity to explain the trade; and when certain situations were coming up, maybe one would be a rally for a football team, when we had the Christmas post office, one would be an advertisement for the post office, and in that way, again, we involved the students. In every type of situation in which they appeared, there was this little element of pride with their followers, and their feeling that they were definitely a part of something. Most of them had come from situations where the school play was a lot of old ladies of the women's sewing circle talking at each other. Well, we went into dramatics, and we gave plays. We gave good ones. We didn't try to do things we couldn't do. I remember the first one I gave was Mary Antin's Arrowmaker. I picked it for two reasons. First, the Indians made the costuming and the relationship interesting. Then we gave several of the Negro plays, Rider of Dreams, and a good many of the others. And then we went into other things. The musical director at the time was Fred Work, who was the brother of John Work at Fisk. He handled the music. One of the teachers in the sewing department and I painted the backdrop for the harbor, and the sewing department made the costumes, and the carpentry department built the sets. One of the most interesting of the pirates was Leonard de Paur. De Paur, you may remember, went into the air force and organized the Air Force Choir, and when he came out, he took over for Hall Johnson, who did the music in the production of Green Pastures. So that we felt very definitely that we were involving the students, and with their sense of involvement came a type of loyalty and a strong feeling of working together, and I remember during the war, some of them wrote—and I'll talk about that later—about coming into Paris on trucks and all, and seeing somebody and jumping out of a truck and hailing somebody that you had seen at Bordentown. The Ironsides Echo, in addition to entering these competitions, set up a large exchange; white and Negro schools exchanged with us. When the war broke out, we sent The Ironsides Echo, over a hundred, to everybody all over the world. And interesting enough, when some of the soldiers came on back, not necessarily wounded, but on leave, they would come by the school and leave us five or ten dollars to pay for the postage, and tell about getting The Ironsides Echo when they were in foxholes in New Guinea, and having a little sense of belonging, and having the feeling that somebody cared and was interested. We started the cheering section-that was, I think, one of the interesting things. I had been very, very distressed when I came there, at what I felt was the inadequacy of a good many of the teachers. Perhaps that was a false impression of superiority, but I just felt that they were teaching with very little background. There was a minister at the time, a Reverend Roundtree, who had been a minister to Liberia, and he and two of the others organized the association called the National Organization of Teachers of Colored Children. We worded it in that way, so that white teachers who taught Negroes, if they wanted to belong, could. But our concentration﻿20 FOG: (cont) was in the Trenton, south Jersey area. At that time, schools were segregated below Trenton. You see, in the industrial areas in the North that wasn't possible, but below Trenton they were segregated. We had, really, a sort of crash program; we tried to not only get the teacher, but to get the teachers in touch with material. At that time, in Philadelphia, there was an agency that did a lot of printing of pictures of famous Negroes, very much like the Perry pictures. We bought those and circulated them. Now in this teachers' organization, we had meetings every month, and then there was a big meeting at the end of the year. At those monthly meetings we reviewed the Negro books, kept them up to touch with all the things, because most of these Negro teachers were products from two areas: one from southern schools, and others, from the teachers' schools in Trenton and thereabouts, where they heard nothing that offered any kind of pride in their race or their people. I remember that from the Trenton area, two or three of them sent over some teachers for us... Well, they never heard of Pushkin, they never heard of Dumas, they didn't know that Matzeliger had invented the shoe-lasting machine—they were completely ignorant, and unfortunately perfectly happy. So that we were able to introduce the element of doubt, which is always a first step to achievement, and some of them went completely overboard, and did all kinds of things to interest the students. Belief in yourself—in this I go back to my early parents--and some pride in your own heritage, was so necessary in these days, when the students had been brought up to feel that Negroes didn't do anything, didn't have anything, couldn't go anywhere. This was very, very important, and I can remember several little instances where children would say, "Oh, I didn't know that, I didn't know this," you know. I remember years later when I was in Russia, in Odessa, and I saw this statue of Pushkin, and the children playing around it just the way they played around the Lincoln statue in Newark and everything___you realized, you see, that coming up and living with a reality rather than a legend is so important. In addition to this organization, which I feel did a great deal, also, we tried to bring to the children people who had achieved. Mrs. Valentine had a lot of connections, I had a lot of connections, I had friends from New York who had connections. So we were able, by a series of what we used to call "monthly teas," and we put them on a scholastic basis— the students who made the best records were eligible. Among the guests were Paul Robeson; Bud Fisher; E. Simms Campbell; Elmer Carter, who was the director of Opportunity; Nella Larsen, who wrote Passing. They would come down on Sunday afternoons; sometimes they'd come down Saturday and Mrs. Valentine would put them up. We'd serve tea, and the whole situation served two purposes; it gave the children an opportunity for a gracious experience, the learning how to manage a tea, how to act at a tea, how to dress for a tea, how to conduct themselves with people that they were meeting. It served many, many purposes outside of their direct contact with people. They adored Simms Campbell and Paul Robeson, who were both very, very warm, and related to them very, very closely. So that was in a sense the general pattern. On Friday nights, there was always some kind of entertainment. The children shuddered when the word "education" was applied to entertainment, that damned it at the beginning. So the disguises for enrichment were many﻿21 FOG: (cont) and varied, but there was a large group of, I would say, perhaps upper middle-class artists, who made the circuits of the Negro schools through the South and the North, and among them was Richard B. Harrison. Richard B. Harrison was what was known as a reader, or an elocutionist, which as far as the children were concerned, meant reciting with gestures. He had had a rather stormy life; a most interesting, imposing man in stature, a little bit inclined to look on the wine when it was too red, not a particularly good family man, but devoted to reading. He used to come almost every year, and his tour de force was "The Raven," with a bare table, and a bottle, and a glass, and a great tearing of hair, and so forth and so on, as he went through "Quoth the raven, 'Nevermore.'" I, of course, was to remember this when Richard B. Harrison was chosen as de Lawd God in Green Pastures. I'm putting this in now, but I'll go back to it a little bit later; we saw, of course, the production, and I'll talk more about all the protests and so forth and so on. But Dorothy Peterson, who was my close friend and a teacher in the schools of New York, took a half-year sabbatical and went into the cast of Green Pastures. After its New York run, which was quite lengthy, it went on the road. So Dot and I decided to go and see it when it came back to New York. That Saturday afternoon we went downtown; we thought we'd go backstage and speak to Mr. Harrison. Just as we got to the door, there was Marc Connelly coming out with Mr. Harrison, who looked so stricken. He used to call us "daughters." He said, "Daughters, I'm gonna be all right." Connelly didn't want us to stop too much; we said, "Okay, we will see you." So we went up, back into the theater, and the announcement came through that Charles Winterwood, who had understudied Richard B. Harrison for five years, and was a teacher of speech at Tuskegee, was to get his chance. The manager said anybody who wanted their tickets back could get them. A few got up, and some said, "We'll give the guy a chance." Well, of course, he wasn't Richard B. Harrison. When we came out, the evening papers had a picture of Harrison. He was at Flower Hospital; of course he never made it. I thought of the wondrous things that are performed; here was a man who'd spent his life in pain and sorrow and second-class performances, finally making it big, and going out in a blaze of glory. He never lived to see lack of success any more. The winds of change, of course, come, and come fast. The desegregation amendment from the Supreme Court put everybody in New Jersey on alert in spite of Earl Warren's damning phrase, "in due time," which gave everybody a loophole. Jersey felt that it was time to do something, and one by one, the segregated school systems broke. It was interesting that, of the seven institutions in the state of New Jersey, only two were under the Department of Education: Manual Training School, and the School for the Deaf. So that while the city and towns began to integrate, the state was the last. It's always been my feeling that Bordentown could have integrated, but there was a tremendous pull of politics, and a tremendous feeling of prejudice against the integration of a coeducational boarding school. The state really made no honest attempt to do it. They invited a couple of white students into the boys' dormitory, and it lasted about a couple of days. The thing to do, of course, was to have integrated from the top. The School for the Deaf was integrated, and I've always﻿22 FOG: (cont) rather ironically felt that the state felt that if you were deficient in some respects, you could accept the integration; if you were of sound mind and sound body, it was out of the question! But they finally decided that they would close the school. Well, those of us who were involved, and had put the best part of our lives in it, were willing to have the school close. But we were not willing to accept the Department of Education's statement that they closed it because they couldn't integrate it. We felt that was unfair to everybody; it put us on the spot. The students rallied, they had great sessions in Trenton and great this, that and the other, but of couse the die was cast. In 1955 the school was closed. I think I'll never forget that commencement. I had always engineered the programs, and gotten out the printing work for the school, programs and yearbooks, and any kind of publicity work, and I designed the program for that year. I put on the program a quote from Tennyson's "Death of Arthur": "The old order changes, yielding place to new./ And God fulfills himself in many ways./ Thus one good custom should corrupt the world." When that school chorus sang the school song, it just sent shivers up and down the spine. And so the end of an educational era came for me in June 1955. It served the greatest purpose, and did the most good, and touched the most lives. Today I get cards at Christmas from students I taught fifty years ago, forty years ago. One student I'm very proud of, Helen Armstead Johnson: Dr. Johnson is teaching at York College, and an authority on the Negro in the theater, had an exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum. Helen just called me a little while ago, she came back from a conference in Munich, Germany. While I'm proud of the great successes, I think to have given the average Negro boy and girl some insight and appreciation of himself was the most important. Radios, at first, were forbidden at Bordentown and not, I'm thankful to say, for a question of electricity, but for a question of discipline, you see. But finally, of course, radio, like television, was an invention not to be ignored. And you lived with it. I think also that the controlled environment was valuable, in particular in this situation, because what you tried to do during the day was not undone at night. The public school system means that you have a child for a short period of time.^ All right, he's in the street, or he's in an unsympathetic home, where it's hard for him to study, or conditions for him to study are not well set up. We did not have that to compete with; when he was out, he was still under controlled environment. He could play and he could do; but it wasn't the street, and there weren't the temptations of the street. Therefore, you didn't have that to work against. Now there were parents' days, and I'd be stupid to say that the parents did not often complain, and feel that the discipline was too severe. I m also frank to say that Bordentown could not exist today in this era of permissiveness. But at the time that it existed, it served a very, very real purpose for a great many boys and girls. There were disadvantages of the boarding school system for the teachers—we had weekends off—but﻿23 FOG: (cont) we were a congenial group. There was Trenton, shopping on Saturday, and I used to come up to New York for weekends, and did the dreadful thing of going to the theater Friday night, Saturday afternoon, Saturday night, and hardly knowing what I'd seen, but determined to cram culture into my bones at any cost. So that it was not as unpleasant a situation as it might have been. But with the permissiveness today— liquor, drugs, so forth and so on—I feel that Bordentown closed in time. MR: How did the students feel toward their parents when they came for visiting weekends? Because I should imagine that some of these children were outgrowing their parents. FOG: Some of them were, but the...of course, you see, in that era, this is before 1955, a good many of the parents had a very, very strong hold over their children. During the war, particularly, and I'll go into that when I talk about the other phase, but it was a situation where the parents were putting up the money, and while we did have scholarships, and opportunities for children to earn money, you know—girls used to like to do the teachers' laundry, and there were, well, many opportunities for them to make odd change— parents did have a strong hold. For the most part they were not affluent in any sense of the word; they scrounged for the board money, and the boys' uniforms, of course, were not inexpensive. But there was the feeling that to get them out of the city—I can remember one parent speaking of a girl's sister, "If she can just get through high school before she's pregnant." Here was the whole challenge of the city. And so that there was a mixed attitude, perhaps, of relief and at the same time often the feeling that perhaps we were a little too hard on the little dears. I suppose the two balanced each other. MR: Are there any students that you've kept in touch with very closely over the years, since you left there? p0G: oh yes, I get hundreds and hundreds of cards and phone calls. Somebody'll pick up the phone, say, "Miss Grant, you remember me?" I correspond with adults, as I say, that I taught over fifty years ago. And they... I remember standing in front of the Martin Beck Theater one day, minding my own business, as the saying goes, and this truck came by, and they said, "Hello! Miss Grant, there's my teacher! There's my teacher!" [ laughter] And every now and then, you know, you have experiences of that sort. But I made a definite impact, I can say that, and they were all thoroughly fond of me. MR: Well, you had such a huge variety of influences on them. What subjects did you actually teach, what academic subjects? p0G: well I taught English primarily, but there was a rule in the state of New Jersey, and I guess in many other schools that you could be asked to teach other things, too. I was head of the English department; I taught American history. Then, of course, with the outside interests of the paper, and the plays and all, I was a fairly busy person. By teaching English, I touched most of the children. They used to say I could flunk them with a smile. I never let up on them. I always impressed upon them﻿24 FOG: (cont) that I'm not going to give you a B that isn't a B anywhere. I'm not going to give you a quarter that you can't spend off the campus. After they realized that that was the case, they went along with me. We did bootleg in every sense; we gave them every bit of culture and extra that we could possibly cram into their little heads and their souls. For some of them, the resistance was high. For a good many of them, there was the feeling that here was a group of people who'd made it on the outside, and were trying to give them a chance to make it. They accepted it. I really feel that, outside of the ABCs that everybody must have, that the atmospheric and cultural patterns and advantages that we gave were just as valuable. MR: I think they were more. Did you devise the curriculum, or were you bound by the New Jersey___ FOG: Yes. No, we wrote out our own course of study. And it was accepted, by the board of education, and our course of study certified. MR: Did many of the children go on to college? FOG: Not too many, because at that time, you see, there was a very strict language requirement. I did have a very special little group of two years of Latin. Fred Work, of course, had direct connections with Fisk, and we got two or three students into Fisk, and then some students went on to Howard. MR: I'm glad you taught Latin. I was really wondering what could have ever happened to your marvelous background in classics. Did many children take Latin? FOG: Well, let's say a good many started; some fell by the wayside, you know. But those that took it were ready to undergo the rigors. MR: Which you really had to, in order to go to college, then. FOG: Yes. Well, you see, of course, I've always insisted the first year of Latin was the hardest; if you can get through that because that is just simply a test of memory. It's like learning the times tables. If you don't get that, you don't get anywhere. You have to get that. And it's there where the weary broke down. MR: Do you ever see any of the faculty any more? FOG: Oh yes. I keep in touch with a good many of them. MR: Where did some of them go after Bordentown closed? FOG: Well, when Bordentown fell, that's rather interesting. Two of them— and here was again, you see, the integration—two of my close friends went into high school in Burlington, New Jersey. Charlie Ray, who was the coach, went into Freehold, and became a very popular coach there. Mr. Hunt, who was one of the teachers, went over into Pennsylvania. You see, they all were certified. They had experience, and placing them was﻿25 FOG: (cont) no problem. I was the big problem, because they wanted to place me in New Jersey, and I was so angry at the way that they had set up the situation, that I refused. I said, "I don't want any part of it." Even after I got up to New York, they kept sending me applications, and I said, "Please don't send any more, because I will never teach in New Jersey again as long as I live." This was one of the stupid boasts you make. Because when I came up to New York, I didn't have any job, and I was sixty years old. You could retire from New Jersey, if you had had twenty-five years service—I was sixty—so I took retirement, and had of course a great loss as far as pension was concerned. You have that kind of resentment, I guess, only once. So I came up here; I didn't have any job. Regina Andrews, who was in the library, gave me a part-time job in the Washington Heights branch. That really goes on to the next period. But it is interesting that your feelings and emotions sometimes get the better of your judgment. With the closing of the school, and my having an apartment here, it would have meant that if I taught in Jersey, it would be a case of having to live somewhere else and support two establishments. That seemed very, very silly. As I say, I was just furious with the state of New Jersey, and the way they'd handled the whole thing. I just felt it was so manifestly unfair. I did have an opportunity to tell Mr. Raubinger, the commissioner of education, that. One of the charges that had been made against me was that I overtaught to pupils, you know, which I was delighted about. And when I retired from Fieldston, they had a little article about me in the paper; I sent it to him. MR! How big was the student body? FOG: Well, it closed at 500. When I first went down there it was about 100, and we built it up over the years. MR: That would be a very big school. FOG: MR; MR: FOG: MR: Yes, yes. MR: Did you do any recruiting, I mean, did the people... FOG: Yes, no, the extension worker went out, and they interviewed; everybody who was accepted was interviewed. They had to file an application, and the persons went into the community, interviewed the ministers and everybody else; that was Granger's job. How far away did students come? f°G: From the state. Oh, all from New Jersey. All over the state, yes. But they were living there.﻿26 FOG: Yes. Once in a while, somebody would sneak in with a Jersey address, you know, from somewhere else. MR: I bet it was a very inviting place. FOG: Yes, it was, and we got very excellent reviews from the Princeton Survey, and various educational institutions; it was really a very unique educational experience. I don't think there was any question about that. Mr. Valentine had considerable prestige in the state. Because the school did the thing that a great many whites would have liked, you see; the student had a solid educational background, and a trade, and he could go out and earn a living. We had one girl who was very good in sewing, went into one of the big cleaning firms. Because in those days, before nylon, whenever the cleaning firms had the little rosettes and everything else, they were taken off of clothes and cleaned separately. She did that work, and sewed them back. She had an excellent job. That was a kind of thing, you see, that went on all the time. We had several who went into schools, and places like that. One boy who had taken laundry management went into a Princeton club, and handled the uniforms and all that sort of thing, and the washers and dryers. It was very interesting to see how many types of placement the students were able to have. Of course, nothing succeeds like success. If one person made it, it was very much easier to place somebody else. Mr. Granger was able to check, and we got even into the situation where once in a while somebody would come and ask us if we could find somebody who could do this, or that, for the summer. What happened to this beautiful estate that the school was on? FOG: Well, the interesting thing about the school was that it was taken over by institutions and agencies, and called the Johnstown Center, and was the last place out for students who had come through the mental institutions. So, my ironic remark that I made to you, was, "If they are sane, well, you can't integrate." It was all right for the School of the Deaf, these semi-mental patients. . .and it's not doing too well, and the people in the village in the little town of Bordentown hate it, because, you see, Bordentown held up the students. They behaved well in town, and the whole situation there was one where they weren't afraid of this vast group of students come downtown; the A & P loved it, you know, because they bought. These students now, they go downtown, they don't behave well, they're messy, and nuisancy, and people thoroughly resent them. This delights me. MR: The wheels of justice, I think, have hit! I get so interested in what you're saying that I forget that you might like to have some lunch! [ Break ] FOG: i have always had the conviction that the many attitudes or the many relationships you have with a student are not confined to the classroom. I did say we organized the cheering section, and I used to follow the teams, pass the ball, football, and drive, you know, to the places;﻿27 FOG: (cont) for I felt that if a student had a reluctance for periods and commas in the right place, but he knew that I had seen him catch the basketball, or run down the field, that he knew from my point of view he wasn't another failure. That gave me a chance to have a crack at it in the classroom, that I might not otherwise have had. MR: I think that's very important, and I think that you had the respect for what somebody could do. It makes so much difference that students weren't always being judged academically. FOG: Yes. Well, I think that's very important; very important, and I can't overemphasize it. I think if all teachers felt that the pupils they met in the classroom were human beings outside of it as well, we might have more successful teaching. MR: Did your parents encourage your physical side of development, the athletics and so on, or were they more or less indifferent to it? FOG: Well, of course, with my father playing golf,,.you see, my mother wasn't particularly athletic. When we had the place up in New Hampshire, we went up every year; we took off our shoes and had our hair cut, and enjoyed the summer! We put on shoes and came up with hair at the beginning of the year, but we had a good time. We had a little punt that we rowed up and down the brook, but we were not athletic in an organized way, but we certainly got plenty of good, hard exercise. MR: Because I think it's hard to appreciate that, if you've never had any in your life, unless you're very sensitive to what young people need. FOG: I'm taking now from 1935 to 1955, the activities that did not pertain to the Bordentown experience. It's always been my feeling that your job should not be your life. I lived a pretty hectic life outside of that. It's interesting, and I think perhaps many whites don't understand, there is a whole stucture of Negro society. I can go from Boston to New York, Philadelphia, Wilmington, Baltimore, and Washington, and find people who know me, and accept me, or know friends of mine. This is the kind of structure that makes it possible for a great deal of activity. Now in 1917 there was the war, as I said, on the previous record. It was at Camp Dix that the 15th New York Regiment under Colonel Hayward was activated. Sunday afternoons, we used to go out and hear Noble Sissle sing, "Joan of Arc, I Hear You Calling Me," and "Roses of Picardy, ' with James Europe's band. Of course, in 1918 there was the terrible flu epidemic, and I had the flu, and it was a very terrible experience. When Roy Howard, of the Scripps-Howard chain, got the false armistice, we all went down to Philadelphia and walked the whole length of Market Street, celebrating, and came home and found out that the war wasn t really over. So when the war was really over on November 11, most of us couldn t care less!﻿28 (cont) It was interesting that some of us from the school went out to teach the soldiers. Soldiers there at Dix were so ignorant, and so tragic—they'd been grabbed up from the southern area; some of them never had on shoes before; they had no idea of geography. We tried to teach them to write. This was not true only of the Negroes, but a great many whites too, and you may remember that so-called "Education Week " was later set up. But I might say in comment, and I'll comment more on it later, that in 1942 when we went out to Dix, there were still soldiers who couldn't read and write. In 1919 came one of the real tragedies of my life. When my father died, my mother had gone back to the university press, where she'd been a proofreader. She enjoyed what was perhaps a little liberation, went out into the world, and when my sister and I were both working, we tried to persuade her to stop. But she liked it. In the fall of 1919, I began to see traces of disintegration and a little bit of irrationality. A long time ago, she had had an operation for appendicitis; they cut into the nerve centers, and she'd had quite a siege. I was afraid that this was going to happen again. Well, I went back to school, and I kept getting letters from friends, "Do you know how sick your mother is? You ought to come home." And then I called a friend of mine, who was a friend and might have been more, but never developed—Dr. John Smith—and I called him, and he said, "No, don't come, she'll be upset." And so I waited till Christmas. But when I got there at Christmas, I realized that it was all over, practically. I called in Dr. Solomon Fuller, who was one of the first black psychiatrists from Boston University, who's since been honored there. He had studied in Europe with Freud. He diagnosed it as premature senility, with some traces of paranoia, and suggested that I commit her, because he was afraid that she might harm my grandmother. So I begged them to let my mother stay there till Christmas. That was a pretty tough Christmas. The day after, however, I had signed the commitment papers; we took a limousine and drove out to Foxboro, the mental hospital. When I left her there, I wanted to give her a big hug, but I was afraid I might betray myself. So I just gave her a little peck on the cheek, and said, "I'll be seeing you," knowing that I wasn't going to. On January 20th, she died. It was necessary, therefore, to break up the apartment in Cambridge, and my grandmother was to go to Washington with her son, my mother's brother, who was a Ph.D. from Harvard, and was teaching French and Spanish in the Washington schools. I got a friend to stay at the house with my grandmother until June. Then in June, we came and broke up the house. Summers, I spent with my half sister and friends, the Hintons, who had a place in Canton, and I was kind of a gypsy during the summer months. In 1921 came, of course, the celebrated Sacco-Vanzetti case, an echo of the successful Russian Revolution; there was the feeling of a great many people everywhere that there was a Communist under every bed. The two were convicted. They were supposed to have held up a payroll clerk in Braintree. We talked a great deal about the melting pot, but I'm not so sure that the various groups that came into America during these periods ever melted. There was considerable prejudice against them as Italians,﻿29 FOG: (cont) and, of course, in 1926 after many, many demonstrations of all sorts, they were electrocuted. I was in Boston that night, and the city was just like an armed camp. The next day, their relatives had come and gotten their bodies, and they paraded them through Boston. Sacco was not an ignorant man, and I think some of you may be familiar with his letters that are very often read. I had been interested in going to Europe, but during the time that my mother was alive, my summers were spent at home. And so in 1925, I decided to make my first European trip. I was to have as a traveling companion Clarissa Scott. Miss Scott was the daughter of Emmet J. Scott, who was Booker T. Washington's secretary. But he'd been lent to the government to be the assistant to Newton Baker, during the war. Claire had had all the advantages of middle-class Negroes who were comfortably off; she had graduated from Wellesley with Phi Beta Kappa, and spoke fluent German. So since my French was a little better than knowing where "the pens of my aunt:' were, I thought we could probably make it. We had most of our plans made when Ada Hinton, who was Dr. Hinton's wife, decided that the two of them would like to make some additions to a place in Dedham which they had already rehabilitated to some extent, and they wanted to leave their children in Europe. I thought this was a perfectly frightful thing to do. But Ada was a determined female, and I figured that if I didn'tAtake them, somebody else would, so we said we would. They were to go to lie d'Oleron, which is off the Brittany coast. There was a very wonderful school there, that was set up for the children of French officers during the war. And Ada had found out about it, through Marion Perkins, who was working at the National Red Cross. So we started off. Previous to our going, I had contacted Charles S. Johnson. Charles S. Johnson was the secretary, really, of the Urban League, and editor of Opportunity. He had been very instrumental with Alain LeRoy Locke, the first Negro Rhodes scholar, in bringing about what was called the Negro Renaissance. They had encouraged a great many Negro writers, essayists, poets and all, among them Langston Hughes, Countee Cullen, and the various other ones, and they gave prizes. There were also prizes in sculpture, and Richmond Barthe came forth at this time. He was a very interesting man, did most of the celebrities at the time—he had a head of Maurice Evans as Richard the Second, John Gielgud as Hamlet, Katherine Cornell as Juliet. And on 5th Avenue and 103rd Street is a statue of Arthur Brisbane, Hearst's Man Friday; and the Whitney Museum owns one of his statues, the Blackberry Woman, as one part of their permanent exhibit. At this time, there was a question of some sculptures of Negroes in mahogany. I had asked Charles S. Johnson, who knew everybody, to contact Paul Guillaume for me, in Paris, to see if we could make an appointment. Guillaume wrote back that he wouldn't be in Paris when we were going to be there, but he sent a letter to Johnson to give to me, to Herr von Ruckteschell, a sculptor who lived in Dachau. So, armed with that letter, and armed with some papers that the school had gotten me, recommending, you know, the State Department letters, to look after you, and so forth and so on, we set out for Paris on the Fourth of July in 1925. We went on one of those tubs that the French Line had,﻿30 FOG: (cont) that used to go out from 14th Street and they were one-class steamers, the Rousillon, De Grasse, the Rochambeau, and the Lafayette. And so we sailed fourteen days to Bordeaux. From there, we went up to Brittany, and we left the children. That was one of the most hair-raising experiences I think I've ever had. I can still wake in the night and hear the cries of those two little darlings when we left them, and it was just an awful thing; they stayed there two years. Claire and I were so worn out by that time, we went to a little town called Sainte, and there were some Roman remains there. As a classics student I thought I'd like to see them. So we checked in there in the afternoon, and drove around Sainte at night. Then we went to Carcassonne and from there down to Marseilles. When we got to Marseilles, we decided we'd let Cook book us to Paris. And we went along Nice, and we went into Italy, and of course did all the right places—Florence, Pisa, and Milan, into Switzerland, and of course stopped at Lucerne. Anyhow, we saw the Jungfrau. Then we went into Germany. When we got into Munich, Claire called up von Ruckteschell; he was out of town, but his wife said she'd see us. So we took a little wheezing coach out to Dachau. I've often thought since of Dachau; I wondered how von Ruckteschell figured in Hitler's Germany. He was away, but his wife was very charming, and she had an interesting story to tell. He had been sent down to Africa to paint Kilimanjaro for an insurance firm, which I imagine was going to use it in some of...the same way that Gibraltar had been used by the Prudential people. And down there he became very interested in the natives, and the beauty of their bodies, and he decided to try to make some carvings in mahogany. They were very, very successful, and he had a wonderful exhibit at the Glass Palace which we saw. Then, of course, we went from Munich to Frankfurt am Main, and here Claire was in her element as a Goethe fan. We decided to go down the Rhine, and although this was 1925, there were still remnants of the war. At Koblenz, the French and American armies got on board and checked our passports; when we got into Cologne, the English army of occupation was there. The trip from Cologne to Paris was memorable for two reasons. One, we went through areas and areas of smokeless factories, and of course saw the big troughs where the seventy-fives had fired on Paris. Paris in 1925 was the Exposition. It was also a holy year. It was also the time when everybody and everybody's cousin was in Paris, apparently. I want to backtrack a little bit: after the war, Sissle and Blake and Miller and Lyles opened a show called Shuffle Along. It opened in Burlington; we had tickets because, as I say, Noble Sissle knew Mrs. Valentine. I think the middle-class whites of Burlington were not quite up to the subtleties of Negro humor, but the show moved to Daley's at 63rd Street and Broadway, and was a hit for three years. Memorable, of course, for two reasons; one, Eubie Blake's still around. Noble Sissle, of course, died recently. Two girls at the end of the chorus made history; one was Katerina Yar-borough, who later went to Europe and had a pretty good career as an opera singer, and long, lean, lanky Josephine Baker, who made history. When we﻿31 (cont) got to Paris in 1925, all Europe was talking about Josephine Baker, and she was in the Folies Bergeres, let down on a big platter of bananas. We used to see her, too, wandering around the streets with her pet leopard. You could sit at the cafl on the Rue de la Paix and see everybody you ever heard of: Langston Hughes, Mercer Cook...the people who were going to figure later on in the Negro Renaissance. And then, of course, we did all the "suppose" things, we got in culture with the Louvre and all the other things, and I remember the Exposition, going down over the Alexander Bridge, and hearing a Negro playing "Tea for Two." It was August, and our money was running out, and we were homesick, and we just fell into each other's arms and sort of cried a little bit...and the best was still to come, because after we'd been in Paris about three or four days, Essie Robeson was in town, and she and a friend wanted to do some shopping. Paul and Essie had taken an apartment in Chelsea; he was doing Emperor Jones, with real cockneys this time, and so she was arranging for us to go to London and he would get another man, the two of us were going to...they said she didn't want to see London again, she'd let Paul take us around. So we decided to go over to London. I'm the world's worst sailor, and I'd heard all these terrible stories about the Dover-Calais crossing, so we decided we'd try Dieppe-New Haven. Well, that was bad, too. We got into London, and Paul met us, and we had one wonderful week. It's one thing to see London, it's another to see it with a celebrity. We went to the Houses of Parliament, we went everywhere; the only interruption was a little trip up to Stratford, and even poor old Shakespeare didn't fare too well after London with Paul! And then, finally, we sailed from Plymouth. We got up in the morning at six o'clock to what is generously called a meal of cold bread and butter, and lukewarm tea, and then went down to the boat tender and got on the France, which was in the misty harbor, and sailed home. Of course, as I say, when we sailed home in 1927 there was the execution of Sacco and Van-zetti, with all of the sidelights; Fuller appointing the Lowell committee, even Lowell admitting later that it was one of his less happy assignments. There were all of the rumors of depression. During these years, I had spent summers with the Hintons of Canton, and with the Nails. Jack Nail was the brother-in-law of James Weldon Johnson, and both he and James Weldon had bought places in Barrington. Barrington was the birthplace of W.E.B. DuBois, whom the older neighbors affectionately referred to as "Willie." Some of his relatives were buried in the local cemetery. James Weldon and his wife lived in a renovated barn; Grace Nail had just made over a farmhouse. So I used to spend time there. And that summer of '29, I remember, Jack used to come up weekends, and I can remember his picking up the phone that afternoon, and tearing it out and flinging it down the stairs, and saying, "Well, I'm through." That was, of course, a terrific period; when I was at Bordentown, one of the teachers at the Bordentown Military Institute had invested all﻿32 FOG: (cont) this money in Wall Street, and lost it. Then in 1932 I decided to go to the School of Education down at N.Y.U. in Washington Square. I met a professor there with whom I am still friendly, John Carr Duff. Very interesting man, and a little slanted toward what I called indulgence toward his Negro students. We had long and serious talks, and I think I put him a little bit on the right track. In later years when I had a little free time and came to New York, I always corrected papers for him, and I remember in one case, I got some papers that were just unbelievable, and I told him he'd have to grade them, that I couldn't; he said I was too hard on these people. I said, "Well, if they're coming up there for a master's degree, I think they ought to meet the standards." I am interested, however, and this was not the case in New York University and this practice the Bakke case has opened up. When I was there in the forties, I remember George Axtelle calling me one day and saying, "Miss Grant, can I speak to you?" When anybody said that, I knew they were going to ask me something that they had no business asking! So he asked me about a little girl who was sitting beside me, and he said, "Well," he said, "I don't know what to do about her." He said, "She has to have a B if she's going to get her master's and she isn't really doing B work." So I said, "Well, what's the problem?" He said, "Well," he said, "I figure that she's going back down to the South to work with people; she won't be in any open competition, and I might strain a point and give her a B." I said, "Dr. Axtelle," I said, "I don't know. I'd feel very unhappy if I thought you were going to give me less than the grade that I earned." He said, "Well, I don't consider you in the same class." I said, "I don't think that's the problem." I said, "I think she either meets the requirements or she doesn't." I said, "The more you indulge, the more you're going to have people who think they've achieved who haven't." I found out, though, that that was the general policy; in so many of the schools, they tended to favor these Negroes who didn't meet standards, and send them on back to the South, hoping to God they'd stay there. In 1928, of course, was the great trip of the Graf Zeppelin; it was October 11 to October 15, it went up in the air—the son, you know, had climbed out over the body and fixed the wing. At school we let everybody out. Then this silver thing used to come up the Delaware, and then turn right to go over to Lakehurst. It was just an interesting experience to see this ship and feel, you know, it had been in the air that long. So the Sunday after it landed, I decided to go out to see it. Well, there was a skirmish; a lot of other people had the same idea. I got there, and I was dirty and tired and everything else. But we did see it. By the way, Lakehurst was one of my favorite trips, because when the Lakehurst station was first built, it housed the army reparation from Germany, the Graf Zeppelin; it was called ZR 3 or something or other, that became the Shenandoah. It was split in half; you remember when Captain Rosendahl was on it. I used to go out there all the time and see the ships. Once in a while, I'd see one come in and land; there was the Macon and the Akron, and I had started out there the afternoon the Hindenburg burned. I got within ten miles of Lakehurst when we were﻿33 FOG: (cont) all turned back. I just figured if I'd gone up twenty minutes earlier, I might have been actually on the scene. In 1935, there was all the commotion, of course, of Mussolini's attempt to go into Ethiopia. Interestingly enough, when we were in Italy, we kept seeing these signs, "II Duce, II Duce." And I can remember the Cassandra-type prophecies that Dorothy Thompson said, "Don't worry about him, Hitler's the guy to watch," but nobody seemed to think that was important at the time. So we had decided to go to Europe, and we had recognized Russia, and I was interested in going there, and I had a friend who said she'd go to Russia with me if I would do Italy with her. So that was the arrangement. When I went to the travel agents, they were very interesting. I put it right on the line; I said, "I don't want to go on either an English or an American ship. Because," I said, "if I'm going to spend a quarter, I want twenty-five cents for it, and neither of those countries give Negroes the proper accommodations." So we sailed on the North German Lloyd liner, the Bremen, which I thought of afterward when it was chased way up around the North Pole. But it was beautiful—clean, of course, as the German ships always were—you could eat off the boards. Well, we went, and we went from North Germany into Bremerhaven and into Berlin. Then from Berlin we went to Stettin, and sailed across the Baltic again, in the areas that were to be so upset during the war. We stopped at Tallinn and Riga, and of course went into Helsinki. From there, we stayed there two or three days, and then went into Leningrad. In those days, there was no air conditioning, so most of the big liners used to go out at midnight. We had sailed out at midnight, and there were usual parties and people gave you things, and among the things that they'd been giving us outside were cigarettes, a bottle of Irish whiskey, and a book by Sigmund Spaeth called The Facts of Life in Song. On the cover was a picture of Helen Morgan sitting on a piano. Well, I remembered, when we got to the customs in Russia, the customs official looked at this book with very keen suspicion; I don't know whether Helen Morgan upset him, or whether he really understood what Sigmund Spaeth was trying to do. He took my book, and I hadn't had a chance to read it, and I've always wondered what he did with it when he got it! When we got into Leningrad, of course, here was the great city that had been St. Petersburg, and we saw all the various things, the Peterhof and the Hermitage, where the greatest collection of moderns is; the second collection, of course, belonged to Albert Barnes, of whom I had spoken before. He was the doctor who had invented Argyrol; and the Zonite people paid him $2,000,000 when it vas worth $2,600,000. So of course he'd been to France, he knew Paul Otillaume, he bought up the Renoirs, the Matisses, the Picassos and everything else, when they were dirt cheap. So then we stayed in Leningrad and then went on to Moscow. Well, Moscow that year—this was 1935—all of the liberals and everybody else were there; Paul Robeson's son was there—Paul and Essie were down in Africa. One of the most interesting things to me was the exchange in Moscow. What those people could do with an abacus I have never before seen in my life. I think you can talk about your computers and everybody else,﻿34 FOG: (cont) but you could stand there and people would be coming in from all the countries of the world and going out from all the countries of the world; and of course, as you know, it's hard to get coinage from various countries. So I was standing there, and I was going into Poland; someone was there, he'd give me any coinage that he had, you see, he was glad to trade it off. It made it easy when you got on the little stops to spend your money, to see what was going on, so that was a part of the picture. Now it was the McCarthy era and that whole background was going strong; and Counts, George Counts of New York University, had planned a summer school in Moscow. Well, Hearst, McCarthy and everybody else, had him down in Washington, they told him he couldn't have it. But Russia wouldn't give the money back. So they decided they would send all of these students through Russia on third-class trains, and spend the money on it. So everywhere we went, we kept running into people. And there they were, sometimes they cheated a little bit, and the authorities would give them second-class accommodations. But when I got to Moscow I fell over something in the street, and sprained my ankle. And it used to puff up like nothing, you know, and I'd go to bed and get out of bed, but I said I hadn't come three thousand miles for that. But I met a friend who was lots of fun, Sam Dorsey, from Howard. Sam Dorsey was definitely red; he'd been in Russia, and he'd done some writing, and got paid in Russian rubles. He was an awful soak, so I told him I'd give him some Irish whiskey, about 100 proof, if he'd give me his cane. And he did! So, I traded this Irish whiskey, which I was sure would take my tonsils out, and gave it to him (and I think his tonsils were in better condition), and got the cane. And so then, as I say, we went all around. We went through Kiev—we planned to fly from Moscow to Kiev, but the weather was bad. I thought I'd like to see the Ukraine from the air, the old bread basket of Roman days. But we got into Kiev, went to the monasteries. One, of course, of the interesting sidelights of the trip was this heavy dose of anti-religion which you got in Russia. Suddenly to be plunged into Italy as we were later, with all of the softening and deadening influence of Catholicism, was really a pretty interesting experience. We finally got down to Odessa, and there, of course, two striking things I think I might mention. One of course, the big steps down which Potemkin was supposed to have been thrown by a disillusioned Catherine, and there were blood stains on the steps to prove it. Then the other was the taking over of some of the beautiful summer houses of the Russians, for rescuers of the miners. And there they were taken in and they were given toothbrushes for the first time, and all, you know, it was a rather interesting experience. Arid the Russian border was closed, so we had to go up through Poland. So we, interestingly enough, took the full itinerary that was exactly that followed by Hitler when he invaded Poland in 1939. We came up through Lwow; I got a wonderful pair of gloves there, and came on through to Vienna, you see, and I thought about it so much afterward . You know, you couldn't help thinking.﻿35 (cont) We got into Genoa. Well, Genoa, of course, was interesting because it was one of the big ports of call. The Italians were going into Ethiopia that year. I was traveling with a girl who was very, very fair, and the two of us were wondering just what was going to happen, when they saw us, whether they would think we were Africans on a safari, or something. We didn't encounter anything. And Genoa was most interesting, as I say, from that point of view. We came on into Rome. Well, of course, Rome was my, I suppose my meat, and I enjoyed it, every inch of it, every minute of it. The only thing that distressed me was having to go by that awful monument to Victor Emmanuel to get to my beloved Forum, a trip that we made almost every day. Then, of course, we went down to Naples, on the Amalfi Drive, and when we made one stop in the middle of it, we got the news of the death of Wylie Post and Will Rogers. Then, of course we wound up at Herculaneum, Pompeii, and so forth and so on. One of the sights I think that I'll never forget was going out from Naples in an afternoon about three or four o'clock, and as we headed out nearing Gibraltar, here was part of the British fleet on the way to Malta. That thin gray line of ships against the setting sun was really a sight to remember. When we got back, of course, the Spanish War broke out in 1936 to 1939, and here was the European war really waged in microcosm. I remember Quentin Reynolds's book, I'm sure you do, called Rehearsal, which sized the thing up perfectly. We got back to America saner and wiser. World War II was an entirely different proposition. It was total war, it was grim, and it was dangerous. I'm not going into the history of it particularly, because everybody knows that, but after December 8, 1941, I found myself at Fort Dix again. This time the setup on the fort was very different. There was the USO organization, United Service Organizations, which picked up the YMCA, the YWCA, the Travelers' Aid, the Catholic organization, the Jewish organization, and the general pattern of service organizations. Each unit was represented on the fort, and with the segregated situation in the army, the USO at Rifle Range was for the Negro troops on the fort. Presiding over it was Dick Lockett, who had been in charge of the YMCA in Atlantic City, and I had known him and his wife during the years that I was teaching there in Bordentown. So when I suggested to him that some of us from the school go on out to help, he was delighted. Three or four of us went out every Wednesday night, from 1942 to 1945. We got these special stamps for the children to make cookies, and we took cookies and we acted as hostesses. We set up various types of programs. I became the regular hack pianist, because the soldiers would come in there with their music, and if they played the cornet from their music, I had to transpose it on the piano, but I figured if we got to the last note at the same time, all was well. Troops that came into Fort Dix on this occasion were an entirely different group from those in 1917. In the first place, they were better educated. In the second place, they had a different attitude toward war, they knew what it was all about. And in some cases, they were﻿36 FOG: (cont) actually quite militant. It was true that they responded to the programs, and we had, I must say, in all fairness, a particularly open situation. There were no restrictions on what we could discuss and a lot of them came in there to air their gripes. Once or twice the officers would come in and listen to the program groups, and they were very interested because they got an insight into some cases, as to the soldiers, whom they commanded. I remember one captain particularly who took the New York Age, Chicago Defender, and several other Negro publications. It was very interesting to me, in this whole war situation, to go back to World War I. I couldn't help comparing the sort of restrained declaration of Wilson on April 2, 1917, with FDR's impassioned "Day of Infamy" speech on December 8, 1941. The troops who were there really knew no one in their adult life but FDR, because this was his twelfth year in the presidency, and they had grown up thinking probably there wasn't anyone else who could be president. When he died in May 1945, just a month before V-E Day, the whole United States and the whole world mourned, because here was a man who really had changed, not only the map, but the thinking of the world. During his period—I'm not going into the history because we all know that—the important thing was his development of the atomic bomb. It's interesting that while all of these things were going on, few people realized that we were going into a new age. V-E Day came in May 1945, and I thought back: November in 1918, when Foch was so harsh and unbending to the Germans; 1940, when Hitler danced on the pavements in the Compiegne Forest when he made the French sign; and in 1945, a very quiet ending, of World War II, with the signing at Reims. Both Hitler and Mussolini, by this time, of course, were gone. When Truman came in, it was a question of settling the Japanese situation. Interestingly enough, when we declared war on Japan, the Japanese were referred to in all the press as "yellow monkeys," and it was suggested that it wouldn't take long to put them out of commission. History, of course, showed not only the Americans, but the English and the French, that this was not the case. And the Japanese put up a very long and tedious fight that most of us will remember, in Guadalcanal, Caledonia, and the big sea battles. When the bomb exploded on Hiroshima, the idea of total war was fully realized. Up to this time, even in World War II, we did not wage war on noncombatants, but Hiroshima represented a wholesale destruction of a people, and a city, and anything that lived and breathed within sight. Hiroshima represented something very close to those of us in Jersey, because a captain of the Enola Gay, which was the airplane that dropped the bomb on Hiroshima, was a native of Borden-town. I had known people, other people had known him, and he went into the army and became a captain. When we hear of the generals and the presidents decreeing this and that and the other, it's very hard for us to realize how this affects what we call "the little people." And Hersey's story of Hiroshima gave us a chance to see what that wholesale destruction meant to Japanese people: girls maimed for life, people dying in unbelievable horror; and for the first time, the United States and the world realized that this was something that must never happen again.﻿37 FOG: (cont) In 1945 the Japanese surrendered, and here again, I have to go back in history. My father had taken me to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, 1905, to see the Japanese and the Russians sign the peace treaty, and here forty years later on the deck of the Missouri, I saw the Japanese, not as victors this t ime, but as the conquered, signing in the presence of, of course, General MacArthur and General "Skinny" Wainwright who had been the hero of the death march at Bataan. It's interesting, as one looks back, to feel that these two wars were the only ones. I'm not commenting on the Korean or the Vietnam war. In one sense, I wasn't actually involved, and as I grew older my direct relation with the troops became, of course, more remote. And in the Korean and the Vietnam war, I was concerned mostly with the children of my close friends. But as you realize the courses and results of wars, you think back and realize that we take certain attitudes, and then we slip back into our old habits. Hitler had been responsible for making the world stand up and be counted. You were either with him, or against him. And after the end of that war, his attempt to abolish the Jewish race struck horror in the minds of many, many people. But now, with the struggles in the Mideast, struggles in Ireland, and the struggles in Lebanon, everywhere else, we realize that the gains won by one war are not wholly sustained as history goes on. We don't ever quite go back to what we had, but we slip back very easily into former attitudes. I think that probably the best example of this comes in a personal relationship which I had with a soldier. As I told you before, I had communicated or kept up vigorous correspondence with troops, with the boys who left school, and with the boys at Fort Dix. And there was one young chap that I had taught, I'll call him Paul, interesting boy, who had been a junior, when he was drafted. He was retarded, he was about a year and a half behind. Had he been in the senior year, he could have been deferred. But he was drafted. And I had had great dreams for Paul. I felt he was really going to make it. But he went into the army, and I heard from him at Kilmer, then I didn't hear from him for a while. And then I got two letters that were so cut up by the censors that I really didn't know where he was or what he was doing. And then I didn't hear at all. Then finally, in the last part of 1945, a letter came postmarked Atlantic City, and it looked like Paul's writing. I opened it hastily, and saw at the top, the Hotel Traymore, and my heart sank, because the government had taken over the Hotel Traymore for amputees and traction cases. Paul said he was there, and he'd like to see me. So I wrote back and fixed the date, and one afternoon I drove down to Atlantic City. The Traymore was one of those big, posh, 300-,400-room hotels that had typified the best of the plush, prosperous era of Atlantic City. And I drove up to the door and went into the lobby. Only traces of its former splendor were there. I was told that Paul's room was on the tenth floor, and I went up on a noiseless elevator, and was dumped on a richly carpeted floor into a corridor. I walked up and down and saw these tractions, people with all kinds of limbs and everything, and I finally got to Paul's room. There were two beds there. One was empty, and the﻿38 FOG: (cont) other was occupied by a young blonde whose left leg was in traction. He told me Paul was down in the recreation room playing pool. So back I went on the elevator, downstairs, into the recreation room. The recreation room had been the solarium of the Hotel Traymore, and traces of splendor were in the very, very elaborate curtains and wicker chairs, but these were soon pushed aside by heavy military furniture, pool tables, and numerous patients, pajamaed and bathrobe-wrappered soldiers who were playing and talking and laughing. Paul saw me, and he came over and rushed and gave me a hug, and took me over to introduce me to his friends. And then we sat down and talked. I had been trying to get my courage up and when I saw Paul, I almost gave up. He had had his left foot and ankle shot off at Anzio by one of those .88 German guns that shot around corners and did everything no respectable gun should do. And he told me all about it, and haw he had finally come back here. And he was going to be fitted with an artificial foot and ankle. One had already been tried on. And that he hoped to be away in about two or three weeks. He wanted to show me the stump of his leg but I demurred at that. So finally, feeling weaker and weaker, I decided it was time for me to go back. So Paul walked out to the front door with me. And I told him, I said I was glad to have seen him, and he said, "I'm so glad you came," and all. And I guess something must have been in my face that he recognized because he put his hand on my shoulder and he said, "Don't worry, Miss Grant, it's going to be all right." And when he said that, I suddenly realized that our roles had been transformed. I'd come down to console Paul, and Paul was consoling me. And I went away feeling that if someone at the bottom of the spectrum, a young boy of eighteen, who had had his leg, half of his foot, blown off, could say, "It's going to be all right," certainly there was nothing for me to worry about. I might add to this one point in terms of the integration of the army. When the soldiers first came into Dix, they used to kind of scoff at the guys who were sent overseas. They were gun fodder. But when these guys who'd gone overseas got attention, and some of them came back, then the ones who were left began to squirm, and there was a little feeling that perhaps in later days they might have to tell their grandchildren that they fought the war at Fort Dix. The first break came in the consolidated mess hall. All the soldiers ate in one place. And then finally came the integration of the army. And the USO on Rifle Range Road had a reputation for being cozy and warm, and when the white soldiers came in there we welcomed them just as we welcomed everybody else. And they enjoyed the warmth of the atmosphere, but when one of the...some of the soldiers who'd been overseas came back, they said to me, "Where's our USO?" I said, "Listen, where have you been?" I said, "This is what you've been fighting for, this is what we want." "Yes, I guess so, but it was nicer the other way." And it makes me make the comment which I made again and again and again, that one of the problems of minority groups is that most of them want the best of both worlds. You can't have the best of segregation and the best of integration. You've got to choose one or the other. And finally, some of those soldiers﻿39 FOG: (cont) realized what I was saying, and they fell into it, and in 1945, Fort Dix, and the United States Army was integrated. In 1954* of course, came the great desegregation decree from the Supreme Court, and I've touched on that before, but of course we came back to the schools and there was an, oh, beginning of the attempt, at least, to integrate in places where there had not been integration. In 1947 I had decided to make a trip to the West, and a friend of mine drove way out to Wilberforce, Ohio, where a friend of mine was married and living at that time. A lot of material about that, but there's too much to go into now, but among other things, of course, we went to Antioch and Yellow Springs, and saw the whole outfit there. On the way back, I stopped at my friend Grace Nail's. I'll never forget this. After Labor Day, I was going to drive into town, and stay with my sister. At this time my sister and a friend had an apartment in New York; she was teaching in the public schools. The morning before we left, Grace got up and said, "You know, a picture fell down." And I said, "Well, that's interesting." Then a bird flew in. Well, those were terrible signs for me. I didn't realize it at all, but anyhow when I got into town and put my key in the lock, it wouldn't turn. And there was a chain on there. So I figured, maybe Helene was asleep, so I thought, well, I'll walk around the block. I didn't think that at all. I waited and waited and waited till about two o'clock. I went down to Frank's, and got some crab salad, which I couldn't eat. I came back and then finally I went to the super, and asked him to break in. He broke in and I found her dead. She had a cat that adored her, and the cat had torn toilet paper all over the apartment. I figured perhaps I got there in time, because he might have maimed her. The doctor came; we had to wait, of course, for the coroner. She was warm when I got there. Of course, the police came in; they brought an inhalator which was sent away. That wasn't any good; then the police wanted to take over a letter which I had written to Helene, saying that I was coming in, of course, as proof, so then they wanted to know all the relatives. This kind of thing just tears you to pieces. Anyhow, we had to wait for the coroner. I got in about two o'clock—the coroner didn't come till twelve. Then he called me there and said he had three or four more calls to make. So he gave me a choice. Helene did drink, but he said, "I can give you a diagnosis of cirrhosis of the liver, or a coronary occlusion." I said, "Well, to protect her, I'll take coronary occlusion." So he did. And that again was a very, very terrifying experience. I think anybody who goes through coroners and all, I mean I don't need to go into that. Here was a situation that was, again, going to disrupt me, because when Helene and Georgie had the apartment, that was my home. I didn't want to go in with Georgie, I wanted a place for myself; as a matter of fact, I had wanted an apartment of my own, but Helene had not wanted me to have it while she was alive. So I went back to school, and that year I was just all to pieces. So in 1948 to 1949 I decided that I would take a leave and go back to New York University, and try to forget by doing some work, and see if I could find an apartment. Well, at that time,﻿40 FOG: (cont) Langston Hughes, with whom I'd been friends over the years, had made some money with Elmer Rice in a production of Street Scene. He had lived at 634 Saint Nicholas Avenue, but decided to buy a house way over on East 123rd Street "to be with his people," as he commented. He surely was with them over there. So he let me sublet the apartment, and there I'm still ensconced. So that was the end of that saga. In '49, as I say, I spent that year at N.Y.U., got a master's, and came on back to school. Commuting. When the school closed, I think I commented on the fact that Raubinger was one of these half-baked middle-class whites who were prejudiced without wanting to admit it, and I had written a couple of letters, one to the governor, and one to him about the way in which I felt things were managed. So that when the school was closing, we had two or three interviews; one, of course, they wanted me to accept some job in New Jersey, which I refused, and then Raubinger said he wanted to have a talk with me. Well, you know, there's nothing like having a talk with somebody when you don't have any job, when you're fired, and you can say anything you want to say. He couldn't fire me. I was like the baseball manager who's been thrown out and gets his money's worth before he leaves the field! So I let Raubinger have it. He was very, very amazed at the information I had about the school and the various attempts to take it over, and so forth and so on. Of course, when we finished, he offered to shake hands with me, which I wouldn't do. I had told one of the others that I felt that though they destroyed the school, you couldn't destroy the spirit of things; and that I felt that all the trophies and all should be preserved and turned over to grads. Of course, with the fire in my eyes, they all agreed, but I didn't think they were going to keep their promise. Not until this year have we gotten all of the things back, finally. With Raubinger I told them that the state of New Jersey had put their seal of approval on the diplomas, and that I didn't want any funny business; I told the seniors that if they wrote for their transcripts I expected them to get them. And he said "Oh, yes, yes, yes." What happened that fall when I came on back to New York, when I was working, I came in about November, and I found this letter from a boy who'd graduated that year, and he'd written back for a transcript, and they said they couldn't get it. So I took pen in hand, and wrote Raubinger. I told him I would not accept that. Well, he must have been scared to death, because I got a letter back in two days, and although it was only November, he wished me "Merry Christmas," and said I wouldn't have to worry any more; and I understand they sent somebody up there to handle the transcripts from then on. In 1955, when the school closed, I was very, very glad that in '49 I had gotten the apartment, because I had a place to go. At times when you're angry, you probably do a great many things that you wouldn't do if you were a little more sane. And so when I got into New York in 1955 with no job, and decided to look around, I realized that at sixty, this wasn't as easy as I thought it would be. But I had a good friend who worked in the library, Regina Andrews,﻿41 FOG: (cont) who was the first Negro who was head of a library in New York, and she was up at the Washington Heights library. So during the time that I had been off, sometimes I'd go up there and work with her, and she said that she'd give me a part-time job, but with my age, of course, the library wouldn't hire me for full time. So I went up there, and I worked and I did a lot of things. I got a good introduction that was very, very helpful for a kind of assimilation into the New York Public Library attitudes. You see, during my trips in Bordentown, everybody was Methodist or Baptist; you didn't have to worry about any kind of religious convictions or anything of the sort. There'd been a kind of freedom, which I realized when I got into the New York Public Library that I no longer enjoyed. It was situated at 160th Street and Saint Nicholas Avenue. At that time, it was patronized by Negroes, and a large group of Jewish intellectuals; they had French and German books; and we had a very interesting group and we had study groups and all. When it came to Christmas, I'd always been able to draw, but Regina said I must stay with Santa Claus and the wreaths, and so forth and so on, which I did. I enjoyed the work in the library, and then I went to the Educational Bureau and applied for a job. There one of the folks who interviewed me, I understood, had a great deal of influence with the private schools, and this job came up for Fieldston. It was supposed to be a temporary job. June Andrews was going to take a year's leave of absence. I went up to talk with Mr. Tate, and we had a very interesting talk, and as I think I told you before, he said, "You know, we're under great pressure to have a Negro teacher in the upper school." I said, "But Mr. Tate, I do hope somehow or other that you hire me because you think I can teach Latin, not because I'm Negro." I stayed there eight years. Those eight years were very, very wonderful years. I think probably my whole educational experience has been wide, because I've taught the dumbest and I've taught the brightest. I think that's interesting, because you have to make adjustments on both ends of the scale. I've never felt, perhaps fairly or unfairly, that I was able to bring to Fieldston half of the kind of things that I could have done, that I did do at Bordentown. Perhaps that's a matter of judgment. The students accepted me, the faculty accepted me, and when I left in '64 the students gave me a wonderful party, and they dedicated the yearbook to me. In connection with the dedication of the yearbook, I'd like to read a poem that Vivian Berger wrote. At Fieldston there was an English class called a seminar in which the privilege is senior year's work with Mr. Lenrow. One of their regular exercises was to write a description of a person after the pattern of Chaucer's Prologue. Some of them were very, very interesting, so when it came to the dedication of the yearbook, when Mr. Lenrow was consulted, he suggested that the class use Vivian's. And so we wrote Vivian, who had since graduated, and she said that we could. So I'll read the dedication. It says, "With deep affection we dedicate this book to Miss Grant."﻿42 FOG: (cont) An educated woman is she, who takes Her chief delight in crossword games. Mistakes Are quite unknown in her discerning mind, As esoteric words she seeks to find And pithy phrases from the Immortal Bard. She speaks good French, as taught at Harvard Yard. Since college entrance tests are God's decree, Her hapless class she crams most eagerly With sight translations, ablatives absolute, English derivation and Latin root. Of likings she has many, dislikes few: The Dodgers have in her a disciple true. In short, a parfit gentle teacher she, Whose "joie de vivre" is a joie to see. Our callow minds she ever does enchant; Caesar is dull, but not Miss Grant! Vivian Berger, '61 MR: That's really lovely, Frances, I'm so glad you included that! FOG: And so I left Fieldston. And in that next year, I was off. In the middle of the year the substitute which I had recommended didn't work out, and Mr. Tate called and asked me if I would come back the next year, while they tried to find a person. Of course, I simply could not refuse that. So from 1965 to 1966 I returned, and picked up the whole Latin schedule: two first years, two second years, and a fifth. The school excused me from study period and all other studies, but I tried to take a class in Virgil. Well, I started, but I wasn't quite able to do it, and so I had to drop the Virgil class. From 1966 to 1967 I worked on the fiftieth anniversary*booklet with a friend. She has been an editor of Woman's Home Companion, and when that phased out, she had done short spurts of editing; so she was in charge of the book, Edith Coombs. I was in charge of all the questionnaires; they bring out the worst in everybody. Most people never follow directions. When you got those questionnaires, it was a question of trying to collate them in some fashion. People were asked to write short biographical sketches, and they ranged from everything from a set list to compositions which were absolutely ridiculous. We worked on them really the whole year. We finally got the book out about one month before the actual reunion. And of course, the reunion was interesting; I'm not really a joiner, and I'm not really too fond of reunions. It's good to see the good old friends, but my contention is, the people you like you keep in touch with anyhow, and there were lots of people I didn't like in the class of 1917, and I knew perfectly well I wasn't going to like them any better in 1967. So that when we finally got up there... *Radcliffe College class of 1917﻿43 To Cambridge, that is, directly. Yes. And when we got there in the dormitory, it was rather interesting, for the whole period of nights we were there, the ones who had done everything at Radcliffe sat up and drank and talked and planned all the activities, and the nice little dumb ones went quietly to bed. So it was just the same way that it had been before. Then, when I came through and came back, it was a question of what to do. Well, I said again, it's very hard when you retire, and you spend all of your life preparing for something, suddenly to find that your skills aren't useful to anybody, are not wanted, so I said, "Well, I'll play one more shot." I got this job teaching Latin One, Two, Three, at Ramaz, a yeshiva on East 86th Street. That was a real comedown from Fieldston, for two reasons. In the first place, the morning sessions were given over to academic subjects; the afternoon sessions, to Torah and Hebrew. The teachers got after the children, that if they didn't do their regular work, they wouldn't pass the College Board; and the rabbis told them that if they didn't get their studies they wouldn't go to heaven, so the poor children were really caught in the middle. One other perfectly ridiculous situation was the fact that only two languages were offered, French and Latin. Everybody who couldn't make a French "u" wound up in my Latin class. The class was made up of people who really wanted Latin, and refugees from the French, and it didn't work out at all. I was called on the carpet for marking too hard, and not being sympathetic, and that year ended. While I was there, I decided that I'd record for the blind. So I registered there and I worked there for eight years. We put six books of Virgil on tape, with notes and vocabulary, and did some of the little Barnes & Noble review books. I am eighty-two, at the end of what I feel is a pretty eventful life; I've probably left out as much as I put on tape. Full of joys and sorrows...I think probably if I were to speak of any particular philosophy, I think the real purpose of life is your relationship with people. I flatter myself that I've been fairly successful with that. I've been able to relate to people of all kinds and classes and races, and we have been able in a very happy way to communicate. That, I think, is probably the most important contribution I've made. I think this has been one of the most important contributions you've made; it's just been...my enjoying the privilege of listening to you. I think that what you've said is just fascinating. Every bit of it. And the variety of your life and the relationships, and the values, and the absolute steadfast unchanging values in all kinds of difficult situations. I think it was just marvelous, Frances, and I'm so glad that I was able to do it. [ Break ] Tell me about the organization of college women. Well, when Lucy Snow was dean of Howard University, she conceived the idea of organizing a group of college women to put pressure on some of the Negro colleges that we all felt were not living up to traditions. And we founded in Washington the charter organization of the NACW, the﻿44 FOG: (cont) National Association of College Women. And the idea was to do what the AAUW had done—to put pressure on these colleges where the prestige of the masculine was not making proper provision for Negro women. We made the stipulation that nobody could belong who didn't come from a college where certain conditions were made. Now the big colleges did, Atlanta, Virginia State, Fisk; but a great many of the smaller colleges, from whom members would be not too naturally drawn, did not make the proper provisions for the facilities of Negro women students as such. This organization had enough prestige, by meeting in various places, to put pressure on these organizations. At one time, I was director of the Northeast, and in addition to the pressures, we did a lot of work in places where there was prejudice in counseling. I'll take an instance in Paterson, New Jersey. If it was a Negro student who came through a regular college course and did excellent work, he would be steered toward vocational interest. If we asked to have him transferred to a college preparatory course, his grades would invariably drop. Now, in all fairness, it would be very hard to prove that the student was inadequate. It was very hard to prove that he could measure up. There seemed to be a growing tendency that we found in our several cases, because the whole counseling in north Jersey at that time was extremely prejudicial. Now that students were definitely steered toward vocational coursesi any attempt to steer them into college preparatory courses was certainly not looked on with any kind of approval by the powers that be. MR: Did you have any way, when kids did get to college...were you able to see that they were perfectly able to meet the standards? FOG: Yes, when we went to bat, and we did go to bat in several test cases... you see, this is the kind of subtle prejudice that was very hard to combat. But when we did get students finally into college, we found that they could measure up. You see, there was Rutgers, and other places where they could easily go. So that as the conditions improved, and of course they improved, the whole organization phased out; it was a matter of some ten or fifteen years. I feel that it was a very, very valuable contribution that was made. A lot of us were very, very eager and very, very emphatic. During that period, I had several offers to leave Bordentown, and a great many people thought I was very stupid not to. And I was interviewed at the National Educat ion Association way downtown, ^v a woman named Miss Reed who graduated from Reed College in Oregon. She interviewed me; there was no question about my credentials. Well now, in Atlanta, and a lot of those colleges, things existed. A great many white instructors who became of age in their own situations went down to these southern colleges and worked. And the faculties, or a good many of them, were very mixed. So she took pains to explain to me two things. In the first place, that while we enjoyed all the facilities of agreeable exchange on the campus, when we went to Atlanta, the attitude of the Negro-white setup there, of course, would exist, and we could not go into Atlanta together or function together—that that would have to be true. In addition to that, that I would not be entitled to the kind of freedom that I enjoyed in New York,﻿45 FOG: (cont) of driving my car anywhere I wanted along the streets; through the countryside would be most unsafe. But by the time that I had gone through this whole interview, I decided that this was not for me. MR: Who needs it? FOG: But this was part of a very interesting period. Then I had an opportunity for the deanship at Fisk. And the same thing was sort of true. MR: Where is Fisk? FOG: In Nashville, Tennessee. I really believe, though, and I don't think that...perhaps overflatter myself, but my real value as a person was as a teacher in the classroom. I've always felt that my relation with the student was the area in which I could do the most for the most. An executive position with my name on a plate on the desk separated from "the madding crowd" was not necessarily the place for me. As I look back on it, after a great many years, I think my decision was right. MR: I think that this brings up the question that I've been wanting to ask you...was to go further into your Fieldston years. When you talked about an evaluation of you as a teacher. I think it would be interesting for you to say some of the things you said to me about the attitude of the faculty toward each other at Fieldston, and then I'd like to tell you my feeling about you as a teacher. FOG: Well, when I came in to Fieldston, there were two things I noticed immediately. I came in there at the age of sixty. And I was very agreeably surprised to find some other people with white hair, Miss Chubbuck and some others. The faculty was not in my age group, but they were certainly not too far from it. But the one thing that did impress me was the air of quiet competence of the faculty. Here were a group of people, all authorities in their own group, dreadfully competent, excellently equipped to do the job, and yet with no particular side, with no desire to feel that they had to prove anything to anybody. I think this quiet competence was a great asset to the students. They were not overpowered by it, but they recognized it. And they were not ones not to take advantage of it. I think that they felt, at least in the daily context with people who had succeeded, and more than admirably succeeded in their own fields of endeavor, that they were encountering a group of people who could make a distinct contribution to any of the ambitions which they had. MR: One of the experiences that I had working in a different school was that somehow, I always felt that the parents in that school regarded me as a sort of help, servant, in a different class of citizens from them and their children. And I'm sure I've heard this from friends of mine who taught at Brearley, or who- taught at various other private schools in the city, that there was a definite class stratification between the teacher and the actual parent body and the students. And I was invited on many occasions to students' houses for dinner, and Bob was always very supportive, and he would take care of our kids, or he would eat alone so I could go to somebody's house in Bronxville for dinner, and I was always the teacher who came for dinner. It was never among the friends﻿46 MR: (cont) of their own social circle. It was always a special dinner that you have when you had your teacher; it wasn't quite the same social level. And when I got to Fieldston, that changed. There was not one trace of that in the parent body. I felt that there was a kind of... they dignified the profession for me, in a way, that...of course, I'd never had any experience with any other private school...that other Bronxville, upper-class, full tuition-paying student body kind of school where I was...that's one of the reasons why I never wanted to be the principal there. I thought no matter where you were, you were always making concessions; you were some kind of a servant in this picture. As soon as I got to Fieldston, it was complete acceptance of everybody. It took me a long time before I was considered even a colleague, if anybody accepted me intellectually; but Spencer Brown had warned me about this, and when I came, he said, "Nobody'11 talk to you in the common room for at least a year." I think that the acceptance was socially equal—^a va sans dire— I mean, that just was. And you asked about an evaluation of you; I think there were two sides to it that are sort of amusing, when I think of them now. I've never thought of it before. The first was, that as a teacher, my children, at least the one you taught, was very much afraid of you, because you had a kind of penetrating perception of kids who were bright but lazy. You forced on our daughter the kind of work that she was able to do, and you didn't make it easy for her, and she respected you even though she was a little bit afraid, because you could always figure out whether she'd done the homework or if she hadn't. And because of your respect for her intelligence (and I'm sure this was true of Vivian Berger and other students that you taught), your respect for her intelligence was so remarkable that it elevated her to a kind of self-respect that most adolescent girls don't have. I think this was very good, and I'm sure this was a little microcosm of what happened to a lot of other students you taught. The other thing that I thought was interesting was my own feeling when I was sort of the lowest level of employee or teacher at the school, and when you came up to me and put your arm around me and said that you were glad to see me at the Christmas party, or something, it just did me no end of good with people that were a little skeptical about whether I really belonged there. FOG: Well, it's interesting, I think, that so many of the faculty did accept me. And I remember the first Father's Day and Mother's Day; I was very, very nervous. MR: On display. FOG: Yes, and when they came into the Latin class, and the English class, I found a willingness to go along with me. And then later, a complete acceptance. And I was very interested in one parent who came to say, "Miss Grant, I wanted to see you," and she said, "I'm telling you this because my boy said, 'I want you to meet Miss Grant, my teacher,'" And she said, "You know, he just described you," she said, "he never said that you're a Negro." He never offered that as a means of identification. As I went through, I formed some close associations with parents which I﻿47 FOG: (cont) still enjoy, pleasant relationships. There was a tendency which you said existed in other schools that rather considered the teachers as graduated governesses, and not much above that. I think I've felt at Fieldston that people accepted us for the intellectual capacity which our employment there testified to, and also to the willingness to accept their own children's evaluation of us. I've always contended that I don't care how dumb anybody is, he knows whether he's being taught or not. He may not want to learn... MR: I think that's very true. Mm hmm. FOG: ...but he knows absolutely whether the person who's trying to teach him is competent. I think that that was the feeling that pervaded a great many of the students, and I formed very close, and very lovely friendships with the parents and many of the teachers, which I still retain. I think that is definitely a tribute to Fieldston rather than to many of the other private schools which you have alluded to. And that was brought to me very clearly by the case of Delight Tolles. When I came to Fieldston, Delight Tolles was the Latin teacher, and Delight and I were very close friends... MR: She was the one I was trying to think of. FOG: Yes, and Delight, after a couple of years, came to me, and she said, "Frances, I want you to know," she said, "I'm going to Brearley." She said, "I specialized in Latin and Greek, and Fieldston has dropped Greek, and I would like to keep it. So I'm going to Brearley." After she went to Brearley, I used to go over there at least once a year, visit her Greek classes and Latin classes,have lunch with her. The atmosphere at Brearley was entirely different. Even the attitude of those in authority toward the teachers, I sensed. And since then, since Delight has not been well, I was very much interested in the attitude of the faculty and the parents toward it. There seemed to be no particular stretching out of feeling toward her as a former teacher. And she is very, very ill, with a terminal cancer condition. I went by to visit her, and I was so surprised; no cards, no seeming expression in any way. Not only of the faculty, but of so many of the children with whom she must have come in contact. MR: Well, I think this is rather interesting, that you avoided those relationships; I mean, one did in the school that I was in. But one of the things you said that I think you should develop a little more is your feeling that you didn't do anything tremendous. I mean, you don't have a whole series of appointments, or elected offices, or a long catalogue of triumphs, and I think you should talk a little about on what you put the values in your life. FOG: Well, I think everybody has to decide upon the basis of the values he operates on, if you want to put it that crudely. I have known many friends who've felt that success was measured by a desk with their name in front of it, and the capacity to direct a great many people. I think everybody, if he is honest, can really evaluate the areas in which﻿48 FOG: (cont) he feels he can serve most. I was particularly fortunate in the number of teachers whose influence had changed my life, and who met me in the classroom, and on the classroom basis, made the contributions that meant so much to me. I've always felt that the classroom was my place. That there I had contact with young people, and I could establish types of standards. I know one of the greatest compliments I ever had was from a little boy who wrote in the yearbook; he said, "You gave me to understand respect for knowledge and respect for achievement." I think that if you do that with young people, a lot of things that happen to them afterward take care of themselves. So I've never regretted that I wasn't dean of this, or executive of that, or president of something else. It may seem a rather humble, lowly stand to set for one's self, but I feel that in the classroom, in a relationship with students, where we both shared the joy of learning and achievement, that I have made what I consider my greatest contribution. MR: And I think it's been a very great one. I think that the administrators— and this was one of my favorite themes at Fieldston when I was an administrator—must spend some of every day in the classroom. I don't think you know what goes on in the lives of students unless you are actually involved in the teaching of it. FOG: Well, that's my objection to the board of education. They sit over there at Livingston Street and hand down courses of study that bear no relation to a classroom situation, with which they are entirely unfamiliar. And of course, perhaps, you realize that increasingly, they're asking deans of administrative offices to take classes because that's where, I still insist, the learning process exists. And you remember it was Mark Hopkins, as I said, noted that all you need to do was allow a seesaw, with a student one end and a teacher at the other, and you had all the processes you needed for education. MR: What are you doing now? What do you do with your time now that you're... I mean I never view you as retired, I think you're working all the time, whatever you're doing, but... FOG: Well, I think I'm probably a very lazy person in one sense. I have always enjoyed home. I enjoy home, I enjoy even dusting every now and then, polishing silver, washing glass, you know. Doing the little things around the place, little things that I like. I'm an inveterate letter writer. I have an increased correspondence with everybody, and I sit down on Sundays and write six or seven letters, and get letters. I keep in touch. I've always been able to sustain friendships, and I think friendship is a two-way street. In addition to that I play bridge a good bit, and then I visit with a lot of people to whom cards are anathema. I go to the theater. I shop. I market. I'm something of a gourmet cook, but not too much of a one. MR: You're too much of a one. FOG: I love to entertain; I like to have people in for brunch, I like to have them for dinner. I've always had people for Thanksgiving and Christmas, because when I was sort of a stray, people were very good to me. And I've always tried to share my home with people that I felt would﻿49 FOG: (cont) enjoy it. So that in a completely uneventful, probably, and a completely innocuous way, I find my days very, very full. MR: But you're so youthful and so vigorous and so solidly serious, that I think it's interesting that you should even think that you...I mean, that you would even use the word "lazy," because to me, you're so enormously energetic. And a wonderful cook, and you have a lovely home. And you still maintain the high level of straight thinking and serious commitment. I think one of the things you said that was rather interesting is that you were telling me how you did the crossword puzzle and called Bert Lenrow to check on the words. Vivian Berger refers to it in her poem. And the. serious bridge playing; bridge isn't a game which you just play, like gin rummy, it's as serious as the chess kind of experience. FOG: Well, I always feel if you're going to do anything, you want to do it well. And I'm not content to be a fourth at bridge, the person you call up when you have three people who want to play bridge and you need one more. If I was going to play bridge, I wanted to learn it and I've studied the game. Bert Lenrow and I have a delightful situation over the crossword puzzle; we work on it on Sundays. He has had serious bouts with Will Weng and Maleska, and I may say most unsuccessful ones, because his letters are the kind that they don't want to answer. But we carp at what we feel is an increasing disregard for the rules and abbreviations,and things of that sort, but we realize that we're going into an entirely different world. I talk with Bert an hour, and we discuss the movies and the various things on television, the places and the various ones, and we compare them sometimes with the literary background that we have. We talk about Barchester Towers, and we've seen a production of it on Broadway, and we have a good deal of conversation in that way. And then on Tuesdays I talk with Eva. And she checks with me on the puzzle that she wasn't able to do, or if she got stuck on. So that those two days are devoted to the puzzles, in a sense. I think that the Channel 13 has been a challenge to us all. Now on Sunday begins "I, Claudius." And I had a rather interesting experience in connection with Graves. My doctor, who is Negro, but who is a very skilled doctor, lectures at Columbia and has a villa on Majorca. And so I was talking with him the other day about some friends of mine who had been there and had tried to see Graves, and the wife or mistress, whoever she was, had said that he wasn't there, and then when they came down they saw somebody gardening and thought it was he. He said, "Well, it probably was, 'cause I've known Graves for years," and he said, "we've talked a good bit." But he said, "I'm very much distressed, because his mind is failing." MR: I've heard this too, FOG: And he said that it seems so terrible, in a man of such brilliance, and he said he really is very, very senile, almost. But he said that he was getting ready to send off a group of poems to someone, and he said, "I didn't read the poems, and I don't know what they were, but I have an idea that they weren't at all up to his caliber." But the circle﻿50 FOG: (cont) of so many things rounds itself out. Here I was, interested in the classics, "I, Claudius." Go to a doctor, and find out that he's been on Majorca and knows Graves. And this is the way life goes. It crosses and crisscrosses in so many ways that you don't realize, in many ways, how close the world is. MR: You know, there were two things I wanted to ask you. One is, you never have mentioned in any of this discussion how you've made out financially, how you've been able to support yourself all these years. And you obviously do it with some comfort, because you live nicely, you dress nicely, and you do all the things... FOG: Well, I tell you, in connection with the Fieldston thing, I was most unfortunate. I missed Major Medical. I retired the year before they gave the "900" raise. So I never benefited from those. But in the Jersey situation, I made a pretty good salary. But I tell you, it's rather interesting. I think people who spend a good deal for a great many things don't realize the capacity of people who live in moderate circumstances to make do. I've never had, in any sense, a great deal of money. But I've always been—I suppose that's my New England background— a great manager. And I have always taken the long view of things; we were taught to do that. We bought things that lasted. We made investments that were solid. And now, at this point, I would not say that in any sense I'm financially secure; a deep illness or something could wipe me out completely. Then I'd have to go on relief. On the other hand, I feel that by care and consistency, I have the things I want. I said to Vivian, as we were driving, I've never worn out a dress in my life. I come into the house, I take off the clothes that I have on. I buy wisely. I'm wearing a suit that I paid $159 for, five years ago. But it's a suit that I call a "middle season" thing; I can wear it in the spring when it's late, and wear it in the fall when it's late, and then I just hang it in the closet in between times. The same thing is true with coats. The coat that I had on today is eight years old. I take care of things; I was taught to take care of things. I have them cleaned, and I'm a great mender. I think that the exercises in thrift that I cane along with have stood me in good stead. I buy as wisely, I'm much more indulgent with myself now than I was twenty years ago... MR: Well, I think you kind of deserve it. FOG: At eighty-two,it can't make too much difference. So when I went downtown the other day, and I wanted some real cheddar cheese—it was four dollars and five cents a pound—I bought a piece that was a little less than half a pound, and I've enjoyed it thoroughly. As opposed to that Wisconsin breed, that there's no resemblance to cheddar or much anything else. And then, the same thing is true about other things. I like good wine, I like good whiskey. And I don't stint myself. I'm not a glutton in any sense of the word. I am restrained, but I still like the nice things of life-^-my nice china, my nice glass, I use every day, I can't see any reason why I should save it for anybody else. The same thing is true in the case of the other things around the house. While, as I say, I'm not in any sense rich, I'm not in any sense improvident, I've been﻿51 FOG: (cont) able to maintain a standard of living that was pleasant and agreeable. And I can entertain when I want to, stay home when I want to. I think that by careful planning, I have been able not only to sustain life, but to provide for myself with some of the amenities which, I feel, are part of living too. MR: I agree. I'd like to hear some of the...hear you talk a little bit about your weekend reunion at Libby Sanderson's with your Fieldston colleagues just because of the long time... FOG: Well, I went down...Lib, I have known since she first came to Fieldston. And I became very endeared to her because of a stand I took. Algernon Black, whom I disliked thoroughly, had precipitated the situation. There was a course in reading, in which students who were deficient in reading were referred to Mrs. Sanderson. And Algernon Black, who occasionally used his ethics class for purposes other than ethics... MR: That's the understatement... FOG: ...had a situation in which the children had complained to this class, as being a sort of a dumb kind of class. And he had allowed them to, you know, to express themselves rather freely. And the thing got back to Lib, and she was very much upset. So I went to Mr. Tate, and I told him, I said I thought this was an ethics class, and I thought it was most unethical, and I felt that since he had hired her, and... So Mr. Tate, who had a lovely sense of humor, quoted the Scripture, which got him out of a lot of difficulties, "All those who say 'Lord, Lord,'shall not enter the kingdom of heaven." I said, "Well, you can say that twice." So he got Black in, and of course after that, Black and I didn't do so well. But Lib was very appreciative, because she was really very hurt. She was a very shy person, in a very queer way... Then I made the acquaintance of Mr. and Mrs. Russell Makepeace. Russell Makepeace is the head of the Ocean Spray Cranberry Company. And incidentally, this is again the life of a cycle. When he was a young person he was stationed in Bordentown, because the great cranberry bogs were down near Atlantic City. So he knew all of that area that I knew. So, as Lib's friend, they accepted me. But I was able to return the compliment. Ruth Landiss's son was in Beirut, Lebanon, and Zelinda, the Makepeaces' daughter, was to go there to teach the children of the Americans there. So I asked Ellie Makepeace if she would like me to make a connection with Ruth Landiss's son, and she said she would like it. So he invited Zelinda to his home, and she was quite happy. He was helpful in getting her out of there when the great break came. So my position with the Makepeaces has been solid ever since. This is the way in which life goes. They all knew Harvard Medical School people, and this was a case of solid old New England, and, well, I was accepted. So I've had a very wonderful time there. For one time, of course, Jane Hazard lived in Wareham with Bill Reed, when he was working at Polaroid. Of course, I always saw them when I came there. And then Bernie Werthnam, a teacher at Fieldston, bought this﻿52 FOG: (cont) place at Orleans. And so there were reunions. Well, last year, of course, most unfortunately, after we had the good reunion, Bernie died suddenly. So this year, when we went, I felt very sorry for Margaret; she was a darling, she came, and Ida and Jane and Pat were visiting each other. So when we sat down for dinner on Saturday, there were seven of us. And we just yak, yak, yakked, everybody trying to get a word in edgewise. I wrote a little note to Marg, and told her how much I appreciated her gayness, because I knew it wasn't easy. I've been through that period, when you say, "Last year at this time, you know, I remember." It's very hard, that first year when you get over these anniversaries. MR: It is, I think it was very nice of you. It is hard. FOG: Yes, yes. And so I wrote her to tell her that I appreciated her gayness, and I knew that she did so well, and I knew it wasn't easy. But, that has been a most interesting deviation, shall I say, of the Fieldston pattern. Because there is something about New Englanders; it sounds very, very crude, but...it's thicker than blood. I mean, like white, grisly or gray, if you're a New Englander there's something that you have in common. One of the best papers I ever wrote, that I got a wonderful review on by Hughes Mearns, was a paper in which I wrote that Amy Lowell and I were both New Englanders who had gone wrong. How we came back to the New England tradition. I think this is true. I've certainly shared a great deal of the so-called New England conscience, if you want to put it that way. Yet when I cross the Massachusetts state line, there's something in the breath of the air, the cleanliness of the white buildings with the green blinds, or something or other, that just reawakens something in my heart. I feel as Amy Lowell did when she came from abroad and saw the white lilacs of her own home,as opposed to the Japanese lilacs, that this was it. And I always feel a kinship and realization that I've come home, that I've never felt in New York, strange as that may be. MR: I was going to ask you, do you ever feel that you would have liked to have stayed in Boston? Have you liked your life in New York? FOG: No, no. No, there was an insularity about the whole Boston situation that I was very glad to escape. I've never realized it so intensely as I did when I came back and Sacco and Vanzetti, they had found the very smug acceptance of those standards. I think that you have to leave New England to appreciate it. You have to get far enough away from it to appreciate the very essential worth of many of its standards and its attitudes; but also, far enough away to appreciate the insularity that it still boasts. I think that by being brought up in Boston, and living in New York, I've shared the best of both worlds. MR: I always have the feeling that it was a very lucky thing that I came to New York; there's something... some people just seem to flourish here. I know I would never have flourished anywhere else in the same way. FOG: Yes, well I think that's true. In the flourishing, there's no attempt﻿53 FOG: (cont) to denigrate, you see, in any way, your roots. I think that we all need perspective; I guess that's the whole essence of living, you see. When you become so deeply involved that you can't see the woods for the trees, something very deleterious has happened to you. I feel that the many experiences that I have had, outside of Boston and all over the world, have given me a perspective that's made me a much broader person, than if I had stayed in Massachusetts. MR: I feel somehow that in New York, you can be a dozen different people, you can have a dozen different social lives... FOG: Exactly. You can have what you want. But at the same time you can enjoy privacy. MR: Right, and you never need to mix them, actually you don't. FOG: No, and as I say, I play bridge with people who love bridge? I know people who don't know one card from another, you see. I don't feel, as I had one friend who did, she always liked to mix people up, and she had the most unsuccessful parties of anybody I ever knew. You have to have people who have something in common. She felt that she was going to knock down barriers. You don't knock them down, you see. I think the success of living is association with people who, for the time being, let's put it that way, share some of your precious feelings. MR: Do you have anything any longer, Frances, to do with Radcliffe? I mean, do you have any contact with people in your class, and things? FOG: Well, yes, I do. In the sixtieth, I didn't go. But I had a long letter from Bessy Rudd, who was at Pembroke, you see. She wrote me a letter and sent me one of those awful pens that don't write...but outside of that, once in a while I talk with Edith Coombs. But my closest association is with Anna Hoyt, who graduated from the Girls' Latin School with me in 1913. And we still correspond. MR: That's really interesting. I thought maybe that, before we stop, we might like to hear some of the early tapes that we already did. Would you like to? No? All right, I just thought maybe you would like to, before... FOG: What I would like, as I say, and maybe I'm a little unfair about that... I had this poem. I don't know whether you want me to read it or not, it was written by an admirer in the thirties. MR: Oh, I'd love to have you read it, yes, indeed. FOG: "So Little Have I" So little have I of you: Two tiny notes, written and inscribed, "Hastily yours;" One letter - a word of thanks;﻿54 FOG: (cont) One hour of a dark brown afternoon Spent in riding steadily toward the dying sun, And then, homeward by a path That curled itself, like a sleeping kitten, Beside the river; Two handclasps, one in meeting given, One in parting. So little have I of you! Yet when I walked along a wooded path, It was your dark brown hair I saw Among the vanishing leaves. An organ chime rang out, And in its note I heard The deeper music of your voice. Today I stopped and bought A blue green vase from Italy Recapturing in the sight A moment spent in fingering jade That preened itself because its beauty Had touched your fingers And had hung around your neck. So little have I of you! Yet forever earth and sky and sea Hold fast some wealth of brightness, Some touch of infinite beauty, Seen, and acknowledged Because one day I lingered near a stream, And that day - met you. MR: That's beautiful. Who was that from? FOG: "W.H.," is all I can say. MR: I see. Well, that's quite a treasure. I'm very glad you read it. FOG: And the other one, of course, that I appreciated very much twenty years after the school had closed. The alumni, which has stayed together, and for whom I had fought so hard to get the possessions that belonged to the school (and they finally got most of them) attended a testimonial dinner for me. There were over five hundred there, all in their forties, you see. But they gave me a plaque, and I think the plaque said it all:﻿55 FOG: (cont) "To Frances Grant, November 25th, 1975, in appreciation of your service, love and dedication to the students of MTIS*." MR: I think it's a wonderful way to end. But I hope this is the beginning of a very nice and happy friendship that goes on for many years between both of us. FOG: I hope so too. MR: It's really... this has been an exciting...a real privilege for me, Frances. And I want that on the tape, so that whoever transcribes this years and years from now realizes that it was one of my most important educational experiences that grew out of Radcliffe College and the Fieldston School. *MTIS: Manual Training and Industrial School﻿FRANCES GRANT..