 Merze Tate: This is October 31, 1977, in Saint Louis, Missouri, at the Stouffer Hotel, 220 Fourth Street. The lady being interviewed is Miss Frances H. Williams. The interviewer is Merze Tate, member of the Advisory Committee of the Radcliffe College Black Women Oral History Project. Miss Williams, you cannot realize how happy we are that you agreed to become a part of this project of Radcliffe College. They were all very delighted when your name was suggested, and of course, you must know I was delighted when you agreed to be interviewed. Generally, Miss Williams, we start with our ancestors, and of course, since Haley's Roots, that has become even more significant. So if you wish to just tell us something of your parents, grandparents— great-grandparents, if you're able to go back that far; some aren't—where they lived or from whence they came to Saint Louis, and something of your early childhood, in any way that you wish. Frances Williams: Well, the interesting thing to me about my grand- parents has always been that both my father's mother and my mother's mother were anxious for their children to go to school. And Papa and Mama met at...when they were attending Berea. They did not know each other before. Merze Tate: And what were their names, their respective names? Frances Williams: Fanny B. Miller and Frank Landsford Williams. My father's mother's name was Harriet. She was a slave and belonged to people who lived in Missouri. After the Dred Scott decision, the family who owned her promised her her freedom, but took her with them to Kentucky. They didn't give her her freedom, that was just to get her to go. And of course, freedom did come after the Civil War and she and Father...her idea about Father was that he should get an education. Now first I must tell you about what she did about herself. You know, the big problem that faced women in those days, or men too, was how to earn their living. And she decided that everybody﻿2 FW: (cont.) needed... they didn't have laundries, everybody needed their laundry done, and so she would do a specialty. She only ironed men's shirts. And the ladies had to bring the shirts to her house and come get them. She didn't have time to pick up and deliver. But she studied these ladies, and so one day she said to one lady, "Missus So-and-so, I would like Frank to come to your Sunday school." And the lady had never thought about this little brown-skinned boy coming to her Sunday school, but she said yes. And then she said to another lady, "I'd like Frank to come to your evening school." And so, when Father was a little boy, under ten, she had integrated him into these white___you know, just sent him by himself. She died when he was fourteen. I don't know how many children she had, but Father was the oldest, and when she died, she had plans for every child. She told the neighbors what to do, and then she said, "But when it comes to Frank, he will know what to do with himself." I suppose she had... By this time she was quite acquainted with him, but of course he would have known what to do with himself anyway. But she just made clear they were to keep their hands off of him. She knew he was going to be different . He met Mother at Berea and, of course, he was fascinated with her. She came from Danville, Kentucky, and her mother had — she had a lot of sisters and brothers, a lot of them. I forget how many there were. I was so interested, one of them lived openly with a white man in Danville,and he sent her and her children to Lexington and promised to help support them, and I always thought that was a dramatic bit of history, you know. And when I went to bury my Aunt Lil, who was the last living person in our family in Kentucky, I stopped by Lexington to see this cousin of mine. I told her how much I'd always been fascinated with her family, and she said, "Oh no, it wasn't Mother. It was Aunt Susan," talking about my grandmother. She said, "She had the nerve to marry a Negro man and start a family." And I never thought about Grandmother that way...'cause Grandmother did marry a Negro man, and I knew... I picked up his checks—you know, he got for being in the Union. Afterwards they got paid all the time...I picked up a check of his one day. But I thought of her, I thought what kind of person she was to have hit that path. He didn't have the refinement, he was quiet. He came home one night from work, and he worked for... Oh, he came back from work one night, and he brought in a little bucket and he said, "Now, don't you touch that. That's for your grandmother." I don't know what he called her, but he made it very clear to us, you know, he had...certain things were hers, certain things... But, now that's about all. I could tell you a lot about my grandmother—this grandmother, Susan—because she made all my clothes when I was a little girl. I had the prettiest clothes, and my doll clothes were exquisite, with the little tiny buttons, little...everything. She was very fond of Mother, and I guess she liked the boys. She had two boys, there were Edward and John. Ed became a doctor... MT: And what would his last name be?﻿3 FW: Ed Miller, and John Miller. John became a caterer, and we have lots of his silver and stuff. My grandmother had a great capacity... When I was at Mount Holyoke one day, oh, she said to me... I was in Danville. She said, "You know, I met one of the French boys uptown the other day." Now the French boys must be related to us in some way or other, I don't know. Evidently, she and this French boy had always been friends, and she said, "I said to him, 'I have a granddaughter at Mount Holyoke."1 And she said, "You know, he's never spoken to me since." [laughs] I thought that was so funny, you know. When I went to probate closing of the property when Aunt Lilly died, the judge was a French boy. He sent word back by my lawyer, who is the young white attorney in the town, asked me my age. He won't get me all... I said I couldn't be sure that we were all related. Elizabeth Herring and Betty Rogers, they were two girls. One, Herring,was in Vassar and Betty Rogers was in Wellesley. They worked in YWCA when I was on the YWCA staff, they laughed at me. They'd say, "You're the funniest girl. You claim not to know any of your relatives." I said, "I don't know any of my relatives 'cause my grandmother drew down the curtain on those irresponsible people, and she never told me anything about it." They said, "Everybody else in Kentucky knows who you're related to." I said, "Well, that's too bad about them, let them go on with knowing." And I never asked them... MT: These are people on the other side? FW: Yes. And wasn't it funny? I didn't ask them. MT: Well, that's all right, because you were concerned about where you were going. FW: And you know, Grandmother just told me this one little tale out of all of the tales she could have told me. Now my Aunt Lilly told me other tales. Now, for instance, when I was in college, my fourth year was the year, 1919, they had the flu epidemic. MT: Yes. FW: I caught it at the very end. I nursed girl after girl, and wrote mamas and papas about their daughters and everything, but I just got really ill myself, and the doctor, the college wrote Mama and told her they just didn't expect me to live. This nearly killed Mama. I suppose at Mount Holyoke they didn't realize how long it took a letter to get to Saint Louis, you know, in those days. MT: Yes, that was before air, and the trains were slow. FW: Well anyway, at that time I was at Mount Holyoke, there were four girls, white girls, from Danville there. And one of these girls told my Aunt Lilly-she was in the hospital the same time I was—how many distinguished people came to visit me. I suppose Mother's telephone calls [laughs] ...at Mount Holyoke, they paid a great deal of attention. I didn't know anything about that. All I remember is getting out of a couch. I was on a couch one night. I said, "You get me a specialist tomorrow and a private room. I will not stay in here." The next day I had the special... Mama's letter had come and I decided, I went to go pay my bill, and I went to the office to pay the bill. They said, "Miss Williams, there is no bill." They felt so embarrassed for having worried my family to death.﻿4 MT: Now you have mentioned, you've gone from your grandparents and your mother to Mount Holyoke. But where did you do your elementary education and senior high school studies that would qualify you for Mount Holyoke? FW: Well, you see I began going to school in Covington there because my father, Papa, was principal of the school in Kentucky, in Covington, but at the same time he took his master's at the University of Cincinnati. And all these years I never could understand why it was Mr. Blewett and Papa were such great friends. Mr. Blewett was one of the great superintendents of schools in Saint Louis. He moved Saint Louis on, and he and Father were such good friends, and I didn't know why this was. All I knew was Father had gone to the education meeting up in Cleveland and he went—he was nosy—so he went around to the Missouri headquarters and they said, "Oh, you're Frank L. Williams. Well, Ben Blewett is looking for you." And then he found Mr. Blewett and Blewett wanted him to come out here and take the Sumner [High School], you know. But I never knew why, but it was because Ben Blewett and he had been classmates at the University of Cincinnati. MT: And it was Ben Blewett? FW: Ben Blewett. MT: Yes. Benjamin. FW: They had been classmates, so of course he knew Father, and Father came up one morning at the Sumner... Mr. Bryant, who was the head of Central High School, the aristocratic high school, and he said, "Mr. Williams, before we go down to see the superintendent, we principals always get together, and we never invited you because we never invited the Negro principal. But we think we'd better invite you." Father said, "I think so, too." MT: And this was in Kentucky? I mean Missouri. FW: No, this is in Missouri, after we came to Saint Louis. MT: Yes, we know what his position...I mean, you will tell us his position here. FW: Yes. Well, after he'd gotten his master's and was working on his doctorate, that was the time Blewett asked him to come on, and he came on... MT: To Saint Louis. FW: Um hmm. MT: And then he became principal... FW: ...of the Sumner High School. MT: Sumner? I thought it was Vashon. FW: No, well, he ended up at Vashon.﻿5 MT: Oh, I see. Because I was invited to teach there. FW: Yes. Well, when he came, there was just Sumner. And Sumner was down across from the jail, so the students could stand and see where they hung a man, they could see him hanged. But right away, they planned to build the Sumner, and the Sumner was built. And I always thought the Sumner and the Soldan were exactly alike. They look exactly alike, except Sumner's a little smaller. So one day I said to Father, "Well, there's one place where we didn't get gypped by segregation was Sumner." Father said, "Well, of course we got gypped there." I said, "Father, what?" He said, "Mr."—I forget the name of the man who was the architect—"sat down and showed me how they cut down. The outside of the buildings are exactly alike." MT: Like the white high school—was it a high school? FW: Yes. The Soldan. MT: The Sumner was for the colored... FW: And Soldan was for the white. But you see, they cut down on little things, and he showed Father those things. MT: Now the name of the white high school was Soldan? FW: Of course, it's now a colored high school. MT: Because of the inner city becoming Negro? FW: Yes. And of course, when we came here there were just about an eighth of the population Negro. Now we're almost fifty percent. MT: And when did you come to Saint Louis? FW: In 1908. MT: I see. So you have seen many changes in this city. FW: Yes. MT: Now how long was your father principal at Vashon? FW: Well, I don't remember that. I've got a book at home that tells how long he was at Sumner. MT: Well, about. FW: I don't know, he was at Sumner... He built Sumner up. MT: i know his name is indelibly associated with... FW: He built up Sumner. Then he was named principal of Vashon. __They built Vashon after the population began to increase, and Mr. Marsh'* was made principal, and they thought there was something wrong with the building 'cause * Mr. William A. Marsh, Jr.﻿6 FW: (cont.) there was so much noise in the halls. Meanwhile, Papa had gotten into a row with them about—I forget what the row was about. Father was in two big fights in Saint Louis. MT: And didn't lose his position? FW: No, he didn't lose his position. He was assigned to the Franklin School which was nothing but an empty grammar school. It was supposed to be a vocational school for Negroes, to parallel the Vashon. But see, Papa and Mr. Blewett somehow or other, I don't know how they did this, they equalized the salaries of white and colored. So when they transferred Father to this empty school, they had to pay him a thousand dollars more, 'cause they paid the head of the vocational schools a thousand dollars more than regular high school. MT: Oh, I see. But they did what they had to do? FW: They did what they had to do, and so then soon they transferred him to Vashon. Then he lost his thousand dollars, but that didn't matter to Father. MT: it was a renowned high school in the teens and twenties, I know this. FW: Oh, yes. You mean, Vashon was. Well, of course, he built Vashon. Father was a real educator. He called the children to a meeting one day and he said to them, "What do I do? What do you see me do?" "Well, Mr. Williams, you walk around the hall, and you say, 'Shush, don't talk so loud,' and, you pick up the paper." "Mm hmm," Father said, "that's right. Now is that my business? Am I principal in order to go around and tell you to keep quiet?" The students said No, that wasn't his business. He said, "Well now, what's your business?" "Oh, it's our business to pick up the paper and our business to keep quiet, talk softly." "Mm hmm," Papa said. "Yes, I think that's your business. Now could we both take care of our business?" And they said yes. And Papa said, "Well, we'll have a little exercise. I'll go out of the auditorium. Then I'll come back in. You all take care of your business and I'll take care of my business." So he came in, and as soon as he hit the back of the auditorium (he had to walk), you could hear a pin dropping. So when he got up to the stage, he said, "You did your business too soon. You don't need to keep quiet till I come and raise up my hand." [laughs] Because you know, the children just were so anxious to. You see, Papa told me, he said, "Every time I go on a new job, I think of some different way to attack the old problem." He said, "When I came here to Sumner, they had a reputation of running away any teacher they wished to run away, so I took over all the discipline, so the teachers had no discipline to do whatsoever. I took it over on myself. And when I went down to Vashon I told those teachers, 'You will now discipline your children. I will not receive.' And when I did these other things..." MT: What was your position among your brothers and sisters? There were four children in your family?﻿7 FW: There were four children. There was Susie and Maurice, then my brother, and then I. But we were a divided family. We were the little children, my brother and I, and Susie and Maurice were the big children. And we were always psyching them. We tried to get the better of them all that we could. For instance, we didn't get the better of Susie very much, but Reesey, Reesey was scared, so we would scare her. MT: That was her name, Reesey? FW: That's what we called her. Her name was Maurice. MT: Maurice, but you called her Reesey, yes. Now your brother died early? FW: My brother died when he was eighteen. I was supposed to go to college that year, and I stayed home with my mother and father. MT: Why did you chose Mount Holyoke? FW: Oh, Mother did that. Do you know, my mother raised me on the theory that she and Father knew what was best for me to do. And I let her manage most of my life because I wasn't interested in the things she wanted to manage, and it made her happy to manage them, so I let her take care of that. Now I did not like the University of Cincinnati at all. I went there my first year. I didn't like it; I almost flunked out in a course, and I told the Latin teacher...1'd been sick and come back, and I talked to him about making up the work and he said, "Well, there's no need for your working, because you aren't going to pass the course." "Oh," I said, "I've got to pass the course. Father will die if I don't pass the course." [laughs] I said, "Father will die." "Oh no, we can't have Father die." MT: Were you able to make it up? FW: Oh, of course. The man wasn't going to let Papa die! MT: So you passed the Latin. FW: Yes. And so when I came home, neither parent said anything to me about my marks. Now I'd gone through high school always — I was valedictorian of my class, you know. MT: And which high school was that? FW: Sumner High School. MT: Sumner High, and valedictorian. FW: Yes. But they knew there was something wrong with that school and me. Mother kept sending East to all of these colleges and she decided on Mount Holyoke. I didn't pay any attention. I didn't read a Mount Holyoke catalogue, nothing before I went there. I just knew I was... MT: Did you have any difficulty being admitted with this almost failing grade in Latin?﻿8 FW: No, I didn't have any trouble being admitted, because I was admitted primarily on my high school record. You see, Sumner was an accredited high school. .. MT: And not on that one year at Cincinnati. FW: They took three credits off on me for that...my marks were low and they always in transferring students to a college...so they took three credits off me and I just made those up myself. MT: I see. Now, I know what happened at Mount Holyoke, but let's record it. FW: Well, you see, when I got to the station, going to Mount Holyoke, a teacher at Sumner was there and she said to me, "Frances, you ought to make Phi Bete at Mount Holyoke." And I didn't say anything to her, but I got on the train, and while I was on the train I got to thinking about that. "Well, I bet these people up here are not mean. I think they will give me a Phi Bete." I knew there was some talk about Susie should have gotten Phi Bete from University of Cincinnati when she was second in her class and she didn't make Phi Bete. I didn't understand that either. But just suddenly it came to my mind, "Well, these people won't be mean, so I think I'll get Phi Bete." And I didn't think any more about it, 'cept I did, in my orderly little fashion, went around and found out how do you make Phi Bete. You make Phi Bete in a very simple way. You always...the things you're good at, you never study. The things that are hard for you, you study. And so you never have any low marks to pull your record down. You get Phi Bete on an average. MT: But it's a high average, it has to be... FW: It has to be a high average, but if you spend all your time on the things that you are poor at, you're bound to pull those up into B and B-pluses and A-minuses. MT: i see. FW: Now you see, there were three girls in our group who I really felt should make Phi Beta, two others and myself. One would make A-pluses. I never made an A-plus the whole time I was at Mount Holyoke. MT: But you made some A's. FW: But I didn't make any A-pluses. But she would make a couple of C's. Why did she make C's? Because she wasn't interested in it. It didn't make any difference whether I was interested or not, granted I was going to make Phi Beta Kappa, I didn't have any of that. MT: Well, you also received a prize there, a prize fellowship, in addition to making Phi Beta Kappa? FW: I got one of the...they gave two graduate fellowships to the senior class. One was in chemistry and one was in sociology, and I got the one in sociology. I went to the New York School of Social Work.﻿9 MT: Yes. Now I recall, it was in... Was it in 1919 or 1921 that you made Phi Beta Kappa? FW: 1919, I think. MT: 1919. You see, that's early. That's not in the thirties, it's not even in the twenties. That's the end of World War I that you became...I noted that, as Phi Beta Kappa, in 1919. Now, one or two years at the New York School of Social Work? FW: I was there two years because it was a two-year course. The scholarship from Mount Holyoke was small. It was in terms of little New England, you know, and I could manage very well on it, but the New York scholarship was a big one, a huge one. I just had a wonderful time there. I loved it, I loved it more than any school I ever attended. You see, I didn't learn anything new at Mount Holyoke. MT: You didn't learn anything new? And you're Phi Beta Kappa? FW: My father had started me...you know, Papa tells a tale about my...I remember doing this, lying flat on my stomach on our library floor in Covington, pulling his educational books out of it, and reading them, and then discussing them with him. I said, "Papa, how could I discuss Dewey and Thorn-dike and all the..." He said, "You did very well, baby, you caught some of the points. Some of them you missed, but some of them you got." And Papa sat up there just as serious, as...he never let me know I was doing anything unusual. MT: So you didn't really study hard for the Phi Beta Kappa, you just used your judgment about where you... FW: ...where I spent my time. But you see, nothing was new to me. MT: i see. FW: it wasn't until I got to the New York School of Social Work that I ran into new ideas. MT: Interesting. It's the most interesting Phi Beta Kappa graduate that I have known. [laughs] FW: Well, I loved Mount Holyoke. I loved...Miss Woolley was wonderful to me. MT: Oh, it was during her presidency. FW: Oh, yes. Miss Tarbar, a French teacher, lived across from me in my dormitory, and I just foolishly one night told her about them cutting my three credits, and I wanted to take them the next term I was there and get rid of that. And she said, "Now I'll tell you what's going to happen when you talk to Miss Green. She's going to say no. You say yes. She'll say no. You say yes. She'll say no, and you keep on until finally you wear her out and you win." And so that's just what happened. If she hadn't told me to do that, I never would have done it. But Miss Green said, no...﻿10 FW: (cont.) So I took the three extra hours and so I wasn't bothered with that any more. MT: I see. Now after the School of Social Work in New York... FW: Oh, I have to tell you that, because this was a wonderful school. The first year I was there, I acted just like I did at Mount Holyoke. You see, at Mount Holyoke I never opened my mouth in any class. When the teacher asked me a question, I always said I didn't know. They went entirely on your exams, your marks on your exams. You see, you get five weekly exams. And they went totally on that, so after...the morning after they announced the Phi Betes, the teacher asked me a question and I said, "I don't know." The class just burst out laughing. See, I never told any of the girls what good grades I got. I never thought about 'em, I just keep them up, you know. But they didn't know I was going to make Phi Bete. MT: Well, I must say that you're the most unusual Phi Beta Kappa person I've ever met. But I agree, you must have earned it, or you wouldn't have had the key. FW: Sure I've earned it. I didn't have any low marks. MT: Well, that's it. It's very interesting. Now at the School of Social Work you weren't competing for a key. FW: No. I went there and I listened to all the teachers. And so I wrote to Miss Hughes at Mount Holyoke, because Miss Hughes was the one... She met me on a walk one day and said, "Frances, what are you going to do next year?" I said, "Oh, I'm going to do something for my people." And she said, "Why don't you go to school?" I said, "I haven't got any more money. My father's spent more money on me than he has on anybody else in the family. I can't go." She says, "Suppose you got some money. Would you go?" I said, "Sure, I'd go." So I got the scholarship and Mother was against my going to...she told Father, she said, "You know we've put too much money in Frances, and she shouldn't go." Papa said, "Where's the best school to go to, baby?" Papa was always like that. What's the best school? I said, "New York School of Social Work," so that's where I went. So the spring of that year I was... Oh no, I wrote Miss Hughes just before Thanksgiving. I said, "Miss Hughes, I've been to every class, I've read every book, and I listen to everybody, but I don't understand what these people are saying. I don't understand what they're talking about, so I'm going home after Thanksgiving. So don't send me any more money." She used to send me a check every month. I said, "Don't send me any more money because I'm going home." So I had this back: "Dear Frances, I'm so glad to hear you're doing so well," [laughs] and a check for the rest of the scholarship for the rest of the year. MT: So you had to use it. FW: Now what could I do? So I went on my way, in the spring of the year. One day the assistant director met me in the hall and he said, "You came up as a subject for discussion at the faculty meeting last night." I said, "What﻿11 FW: (cont.) are they doing, discussing me?" Said, "You know, we're now grading in the class, one, two, three, four, and a couple of us graded you number one in the class. I did and Miss Ralph did," a teacher of... But the director of the school rated you very low, and so it came up for discussion 'cause there was such variance in opinion about you. And the director said you'd been in his class a whole year and you hadn't opened your mouth once in the year. It was clear to him that you understood everything that went on in the class, your papers, everything. But you couldn't talk, and a social worker has to talk, so there was no need in investing any money in you." So he said, "I said, 'Well, we can teach her to talk.'" [laughs] So that's all he said to me. And I thought, oh my goodness, I'd better... So I didn't say anything, I just went on home, and they sent me a scholarship. And a big one, you know. So I went back and I had a class with Mr. Lee, the director, you know, and I knew I would have to speak up.If I ever spoke up before in my life, I had to speak up that time. He had given us a book to read, and in this book there is a woman who had made up her mind to tell the minister that she" lived a lie 'cause she wanted to do something that he wouldn't let her do. She talked and then she made... But in the midst of the interview, she suddenly turns around and she tells him the truth, and then he lets her have her way anyway. But Mr. Lee asked us, "What did the minister do that made her change her mind?" We were to get that out of this novel. Well, we were sitting, thirteen of us in a round, see. Mr. Lee was over here and others over here, and I was in the middle, as usual. I always made very close friends with people, you know, individually. Didn't talk out in the group, you know. And he came up to me, and my knees just shook. Oh, and I read my paper through, though it wasn't like anybody else's paper, and he just said, "That's fine, Miss Williams." That's all he said. I never knew whether he thought it was fine I'd found my voice, or whether it was what I'd said was good, I never knew. But after that, along about the second half of the year, I was sick all year, really I was. You see, I'd had flu the year before at Mount Holyoke, and I didn't have quite enough to eat. I lived at the YW and I didn't eat enough. So the second year I decided I have to stop school for two weeks. So I went into Mr. Lee's office, 'cause he was paying my bills, and I thought he was owed an explanation. I said, "Mr. Lee, I don't know whether you know this or not, but I don't come to school except half the time." He said, "No, I hadn't noticed it particularly." Well, I said, "I don't come 'cause I've been sick all fall and the doctors now think I should stop." I told him I was going down to Pennsylvania to this friend of mine from college who had a big farm down there. I finished talking. He said, "Now Miss Williams, I think those are very good plans. I think you should do just like that." He said, "I would like to make one suggestion to you." I said, "What's that?" He said, "The next time you're in trouble I think you should let your friends know earlier." Well, that didn't...I just thought that was sweet of him, you know. I up to that time thought that all the school required of you was a straight A, and I could do that and stay home half the time. Because I wasn't well enough. But that gave me an idea that they were interested in me as a person.﻿12 FW: So when I went to work for the YWCA on my first job, those people really turned me against the church. They were mean to me... MT: This was after you finished, and your first position, job? FW: First job. You see, I got the job easy, because Miss Bowles just asked me on the street whether I'd like to work for the YW, and I said, "Yes, Mama worked for the YW at home, Papa worked for the YMCA," you know, and then they gave me a fellowship. Well, then the woman, head of the school, sent for me. She said, "Why aren't you living over here in our building, Miss Williams?" I said, "Well, I'm living over in Brooklyn where I lived all these two years I've been in New York. I get along better over there." MT: And was this a mixed neighborhood, or primarily colored or primarily white? FW: No, this was a colored YWCA I lived in. And she said, "Well, we gave you that scholarship 'cause we want you to live here." And then she went on to say, "You lived with white girls and you know how," and it made me mad. I said, "Why on earth should I spend my money on...I don't have to show off I can live with white girls." You see, as a child, my buddies for playmates were two little German boys next door to us in Covington where we... Their mother was so lovely to me and I just thought they went to the school where their father was principal, just like I went to school, you know. I didn't understand about this segregation. I knew we passed the white school along our way to our school, and I don't know why that was. But it didn't, no one explained it to me. Father, only once did he even make a racial remark to me. I went to the door in Covington one day and came back and said, "There's a white man at the door." Father said, "What did you say?" I said, "There's a man at the door." He said, "All right, what did he have to say, baby?" He would not let me say there was a white man at the door. So you see, I didn't get it. He only caught me up on that once... Well, anyway, when I went to work for the YW, they spent the summer telling us what we were to do. We were to be student secretaries. Well, they didn't have anything to say. I listened all summer, I didn't hear anything. And so I went down to start on a new job, not knowing much; I suppose they thought they'd trained me, but I didn't get anything out of it. MT: Now this was when you were at the colored area, or not? FW: I moved into the white YWCA. MT: Yes, now you moved over into the white area. FW: But I was being trained with the white children, but they didn't have anything to tell the white children, they didn't tell me anything. I knew much more than they talked about. And so I went down South and... MT: Now, before the slight interruption, you had been transferred from the Brooklyn YWCA to New York. FW: No, I transferred myself over there.﻿13 MT: Yes, over to the national headquarters of the YWCA. FW: 'Cause they said I had had experience living with white girls, they thought therefore I should spend my money living in their building. I didn't wish to live in their building. MT: Yes. Now that was at 52nd and Lexington Avenue. And now your experiences there would be interesting because this is all prior to going into government. FW: MT: FW: Well, I accepted the lessons and didn't learn anything, and so I went down South and I looked at the children, and they made me so sad... Now you say you went down South—in the southern part of the United States, or southern part of the city? Southern part of the United States, 'cause I was assigned to the southern staff. MT: Oh. And what became your headquarters? FW: Your headquart ers was always New York, but you traveled in the South. You went to Birmingham, Atlanta, all these various places, and I met all these marvelous girls. There was nothing wrong with the children, they were just, some of them weren't dressed very nicely. I decided that they lived in too small a world, so I started them reading newspapers and sending them back and forth to each other in different... And I decided the other thing about them was—I forgot, there was two things wrong with those children. They didn't have any fun in life. So I began giving parties. MT: Mixed parties? I mean, with men? FW: No, just with girls, till I got on to Mississippi. I went to Alcorn and the president of Alcorn A & M College asked me, would I give a party for all the children, his boys and his girls? He had heard about my parties, see. And I thought that the only place we could have them was where I had given parties before. The church had pews and I thought it would be a little difficult to give a party, but I gave a party just the same. MT: In the church, in the pews. [laughs] FW: Yes. I gave a party. So after I did this for a year, the head of my staff, Miss Blanchard, came down to the YWCA conference and she said to me, "Why do you give the children stones when you can give them bread?" She called my little parties and things stones, see? I thought, "You don't know anything about life, lady." I was so sure I was right on the right track. And recently I met Myra Logan, you know... MT: Yes, I've heard of her.﻿14 FW: Myra Logan. I met her as a student, and I asked her, "Why don't you join the YWCA?" She said, "Why should I?" Shows how smart she was, she just looked me straight in the eye and said, "Why should I?" I said, "Why, you might get some fun out of it." And then she became, oh, she was wonderful. And Grace Hamilton, you know, she was...and when Myra Logan... Oh, there were loads of fine girls. And one thing these white girls had against me was that I would ride Pullmans all the time, so they decided to make an issue of this. So they went to one colored girl on my staff, you know, the kids elected this colored girl and she was very dark, so they went to visit her. They said, "Don't the kids object to Miss Williams riding Pullman?" "Oh," she said, "object to us? Why, Miss Williams won't let us ride in the Jim Crow. She says we must always ride the Pullmans." That was the truth, you see. I thought when they rode on YWCA money, they should have the very best. Now there was one white girl I worked with who tried to take up with me one time about spending so much money on the... I told her I didn't give a darn how much money I...I was going to take them all, even if I had to hire a whole Pullman car. I remember once we took fourteen of 'em up from Talladega up into North Carolina, so I sent Myra ahead with seven the night before. Myra had a good level head on her, you know. And I could trust her, and I sent the better behaving girls with her. MT: Seven of them, by Pullman? FW: With her. Then I brought seven the next night, and I took the bad ones with me, you know. One, for instance, had had her bag taken ahead to the Jim Crow car, and I had to send up and get it back. And I had another little colored girl, she kept running up and down the aisle all the time. But I could take care of that stuff. I used to take colored girls and go through their clothes they were going to wear. I'd have them all try on the clothes, you know, so I'd see they look all right. I had a lot of fun. MT: Now all this work with the YWCA was between, of course, the Phi Beta Kappa graduation, the School of Social Work, and before government. FW: This is the first thing I did, and I must tell you this one story, then I'll get off the YW. They made me feel very badly, talking about me, you know. They wouldn't talk out loud, but they'd whisper about me and I'd hear. And so I went down to see Mr. Lee one day... MT: Now Mr. Lee... FW: ...was head or the director of the New York School of Social Work, you know. MT: That same Mr. Lee, yes. FW: The one who thought I never spoke that day. I told him all the things they'd said about me, everything they said. And then he said to me, "Now Miss Williams, I do not know anything about colored people, but I know a great deal about you. I want to tell you, you do not think you're better than anybody else." And he went on, he said every nasty thing said about me, and told me it wasn't so. Wasn't that wonderful?﻿15 MT: Yes. But I understand that you worked to bring about the integration of the YWCA. FW: Well, of course, I did, but I did that down South. But you know, when I'd come back up North, these northern people would...I don't know whether the southerners were in it or not, I don't know, but the fourth girl I worked with in the South was Betty Webb, and she was the cause of my going to government. When I went to the government, she was the cause... MT: Yes. That is, she mentioned you in high places. FW: She told Harriet Elliott, "You ought to get Frances Williams," yes. You know, Betty Webb was a wonderful girl. Her father was a congressman from North Carolina and her mother died early, and a Negro man really almost raised Betty more than anybody else I ever heard her talk about. He had a daughter who went to Fisk and graduated. But Betty was wonderful. Betty, when she was still in college, one day was sitting underneath a tree writing a service, a vesper service, and she looked over and she saw a Negro man walking down the road. She said to herself, "Now that's what the world fellowship's all about. That Negro man. It's the way I relate to him." You know, Betty's just that smart. She didn't need anyone to teach her. MT: Now to whom did she make representation.. You say her father was a congressman? FW: Her father was a congressman and the first time I saw her, we were in New York City and we were having...a colored girl and I...Betty was speaking for the white girls. She was still a student then. And I worked with this colored kid, but Betty could outstrip us so far, you know. Betty just had brains. MT: Her father was a congressman? FW: Well, yes. She knew Miss Harriet Elliott, who came in as...and she talked to Miss Elliott about me. MT: Now what position did Harriet Elliott hold at that time? FW: She was brought in, and she brought in seven people with her who knew various sections of the country, and Betty suggested me for the Negro group. MT: But in what office? FW: She was the consumer adviser. MT: Yes. That's how I remembered her. FW: And then they, you know, then they had Mr. Leon Henderson eat her up. You know how they do, the dear old government, how they eat up people? Then Mrs. Bethune had Mr. Hill in her office and she got mad with Mr. Hill, so she got rid of Mr. Hill, and in order to get rid of Mr. Hill, she had to get him a job. So she looked over the rolls, and she saw we had no racial adviser, okay, so she sent him over to OPA.* And of course, Mr. Bowles just took him. * Office of Price Administration﻿16 MT: Because she sent him over? FW: Because she sent him over. Well, of course, we were getting along very nicely, you know, in OPA. One day the labor boys met with Mr. Bowles... MT: This is Chester Bowles? FW: Chester Bowles. And they said they didn't like this one, they didn't like the other one, and finally one white boy said, "And I don't like that Mr. Hill, that Negro. He came down South the other day, and he said>>#» and so and so and so. So then another white boy said, "I know who does all the work on research. It's Frances Williams." Mr. Bowles said, "That's right. She does do all the work." And he said, "You know, when I came down here, I had my cousin come down here and survey the agencies and find out how we were doing on race, and I know she does all the work." The boys said, "Well, why don't you give her the job?" "Oh no, she's happy, she's happy." See, the work was going on. He didn't mind keeping Mr. Hill on the payroll. So then it happens that there was a Negro boy on the labor committee who hated Mr. Hill's guts, and he decided it was his opportunity to get rid of Mr. Hill. And so he said...he just pounded on them till they got rid of Hill. See, Bowles admitted I did the work, you know, but he didn't want to change anything. So they spoke to me about it. I said, "I'll have nothing to do with it. I've got a job. Let him go on with the job. I don't think we need any racial adviser." MT: Now racial, what were you saying? Racial adviser or expert on race? FW: Yes. All the agencies had them, so they left it with... Anyway, finally they got him to resign and leave, and then I said, "You can talk to me." And then they talked to me and I went up to be Mr. Bowles's racial adviser. MT: Racial adviser. FW: Now it was like this. He had a whole lot, he had a lot of advisers, economic advisers,I don't know what...we had all these people. And he sent for me when it was all clear, Hill was out of the way. MT: What was Hill's first name, you remember? FW: T. Arnold Hill? MT: T. Arnold, yes. T. Arnold Hill. Yes. FW: He was a nice man, there was nothing wrong with him. Mrs. Bethune just had to get rid of him. MT: I know, I can understand. They didn't make it. FW: She had to get him out of the job. But I was not going to put him out of the job. But this Negro boy remembered something nasty that Mr. Hill did to him one day, so he decided to get rid of him. MT: Yes, I see. Now you're the adviser on racial affairs to Chester Bowles.﻿17 FW: And I go in to see Mr. Bowles, he says to me, "Miss Williams, where will you sit?" Now there are three places in his office to sit and have a conversation. This was an interesting thing to me because I'd never been in an office that had so many places to sit. But I was in many of them since then, and it's always a test of whether a man is secure when he'd say, "Miss Williams, where will you sit?" And so I sat down and he told me. .. MT: Where did you sit? FW: I chose a sofa and he pulled up a chair. MT: Yes. He came out frotn behind his desk. FW: Oh, his desk was over there, and there was a long table over here, and here was this long sofa over there. So I chose the sofa. Paul Porter, you know, he became administrator of OPA before it closed up. I went to see him. He couldn't get out from behind his desk. [laughs] It's always amused me that these people who can't ®,et,..they have to have their desk to protect them. Well anyway, Chester told me about all the men he had brought up with him, advertising men. So then I told him about the men who had been in the agency and knew the agency before he got there. And as I was getting up to go, he said, "Miss Williams, when you have time, I'd like to learn about the South." Now that, that was a wonderful statement, 'cause I knew he knew about the colored South, but he was talking about the white South. And every white southerner I knew in OPA at that time was this silly kind of southerner who goes around and wrings hands. What good are they? They're no good. So I thoughtj ITve got to do something. Chester wants to learn. So I began, I summarized all the books, the best books I'd read on the South. And he'd write me back just a little note and then say to whom he'd sent a copy of the... There was this word, Steb always was in on that. Steb was his wife. MT: What is her name? Hok would you spell that? FW: S-T-E-B. MT: And that was his wife's name. I guess a short name. FW: His wife. That's his second wife. He married twice. His first wife and his second wife were roommates at Vassar. MT: I see. FW: But he married her and she is a wonderful woman. Oh, she's a wonderful girl. I could tell you a lot of stories about her. She's just a wonderful girl. I'm tired now of talking. How long have I been talking? [MT: We stopped here and I made tea, served it with cookies and fruit, which I had brought along with an electric hot plate.] MT: Having finished our cup of Constant Comment tea, we will continue our constant comment on your project with OPA and gathering information for your chief on what white people thought about Negroes, is that it?﻿18 FW: Yes. I knew Mr. Bowles knew the black South, because his family had given money. But he wanted to know the white South. My years of travel in the South had made me know that there are various kinds of Souths. I suddenly heard that the woman from Texas who took over the staff when they... Henderson took over Miss Elliott and all, I had heard... I was on her staff and I knew her to be a genuine person. She was coming to town, so I invited her to come to my house to dinner with Bowles, and then I called up... Oh, I went down to Bowles's office and saw Mr. Brooks, who handled his appointments. He listened very carefully and then he said, "Well, that's a wonderful idea, Frances, but you know Chet just doesn't have the time for that." So I walked down the hall, I thought, "That mean thing." I said, "The man has got a wife." I suddenly remembered this Steb, all these times. I said, "He's got a wife and she's smart. He'd never send her the kind of stuff I'm sending if she wasn't smart." So I got a dime out of my pocket-book and went to a pay phone and called Mrs. Bowles, and I said, "I'm Frances Williams." I said, "You don't know me, I work for your husband." "Oh," she said, "yes, I know you. Chet has told me about you." I said, "Well, I wondered whether you could come to my house for supper on Tuesday night." And she said, "Well, unfortunately we have people coming to our house for supper on Tuesday night, but I'll uninvite them and come to your house, because it would be so much more interesting." I said, "Well, all right." She said, "But I'll have to wait. There's only one man who's replied and said yes, and I don't know him. I have to find out whether Chet knows him well enough to tell him to come another night." So she said, "I'll call you tomorrow morning. Chet'11 be in tomorrow morning." So she called and she said, "Chet says we can't uninvite that man 'cause he doesn't know him either." She said, "But we wondered, why can't you have your dinner on Monday night instead of Tuesday night?" I said, "I could have it better on Monday night." She said, "Well, that's fine." I said, "I knew he was out of town, I thought I'd give you a little chance for respite. It's all right with me." So they came to supper. I had Betty Webb. I had lived with her in Washington. I had gone and gotten myself an apartment by this time, but I had her. Chet, I told him about everybody who was coming, first, and who they were and background. So he first put this Minnie Fish, this Texas woman, on the stand, and then after she and her husband had gone home, he puts Betty on the stand. And he just dug into her to get all sorts of stuff. It was fine. So then I gave another party. I had the Negroes in to see Chet. I decided he ought to know Adam [Adam Clayton Powell] and Dawson... MT: Which Johnson was that, do you remember? FW: No, it was Dawson, who came from... MT: Oh, Dawson. FW: The congressman. MT: Yes. Congressman Dawson. FW: And then they had a recorder of deeds—I forget his name—I had the three of them.﻿19 MT: Oh, for years there in Washington. FW: Yes. I had had those three in for supper. And X had a couple of labor boys from our labor...Negroes. And I had them. But the day Adam was to come, that afternoon the phone rang and it said, "We understand Adam's coming to your house for supper tonight." X said yes. They said, "Well, you know, after last night..." I said, "Last night? What happened last night?" "Well, he was supposed to come" up to Howard and he didn't come. We're trying to have him tonight." MT: Now was that Adam Clayton Powell? FW: This is Adam... MT: Powell. That Adam. FW: So I said, "All right. If he gets here on time, I'm having supper on time and he can get up..." They said, "We're sending a car for him. He'll be there at 8:20." I said, "All right." So then Steb comes in early. She comes in early because she has no more gas stamps, so she has to come in on the bus. And so she comes on in the bus and I tell her about Adam's trouble, you know. I said, "Now we've got to get him out of here, 'cause that's ridiculous, him not going last night." So, all right, the dinner party is supposed to be quarter of seven. Ten minutes to seven Chet gets there. Chet had lost his address and he had to go down to OPA and find his... So he was there. But Adam hadn't come. Adam gets there five minutes to seven. MT: Well, that was good for him. FW: Why yes! MT: Good for Clayton Powell. [laughs] FW: It was so amusing, when I invited him. I went to his office and I said to him, "I think these white men who go around town telling about Negroes need to get acquainted with a few people, and I think it would be nice for you to know Mr. Bowles," and he thought so, too. He said, "Just tell my secretary." I sat there and I didn't move. He said, "Don't you know my secretary?" I said, "No, I don't know her. Why should I go and talk to her?" So he got up and took me in and introduced me to his secretary. Said, "Any time she calls, let me know." MT: This is his secretary? FW: Yes. So anyway, you know, the supper went on fine till we were finished the afterdinner coffee,and Steb's sitting... See, I never invite any women at these affairs except the guest of honor's wife. Have her, and I said, "What time is it?" I said, "He's got two minutes." The doorbell rang and I went downstairs and I came back and I stood up behind my chair and I said, "Adam, your car is downstairs." I didn't know what he meant, except for me to sit down. I sat down and he said, "Would you give me another cup of coffee? Will you give me another cup of coffee?" I give it. Said, "He's finished his coffee, he doesn't need any more coffee." So he has﻿20 FW: (cont.) another cup of coffee, gets around, tells everybody goodbye and finally goes downstairs. It just made me so mad at him, you know, it was so unnecessarily rude. And of course, the Bowleses never had him back. They had everybody else back, everybody else back, but they never invited him back. And he could have been useful to them. MT: And they could have been useful for his purposes, too. This was long before his last trouble. FW: Well, yes. Now when I worked for Lehman, I went to see Adam a couple of times. And the first time I went to see him,I tried to get him on the phone. I couldn't get him on the phone, so I just took a book over there, and his secretary was sitting there and X said, "I came to see Mr. Powell, and I intend to stay till I see him." X said, "I brought a book along to read, so I will amuse myself and sit here and wait till he arrives." And he came in. Oh, he was so gracious, you know. I don't know how this girl, she just must have thought...I don't know what she thought. Well anyway, I stayed over there and I... Of course in dealing with me, Adam was always lovely. Lehman wanted to know the vote on a certain thing that was coming up. He gave me everything just exactly, and then he walked across the campus with me—I mean across the [Capitol] Hill. Well, that's enough of that. Now the thing about OPA that was fascinating was that it was my first and only chance to do an administrative job. You see, in the first place, everybody at OPA was bright. It was a whole new agency, very, very bright people, and willing to move. Of course, not...the whole agency was not like that, but that was the sweep of the agency. The first thing I did when I took the job was to go down and see personnel. I'd never been to personnel before, and I asked where the director was. He wasn't in. So Everett, who was his assistant, said, "Well, I'll introduce you to some placement officers, if you'd like to know them." I said, "I don't want to know anybody down here. I don't want to know anybody but Wally Sayre. That's the man, isn't he? He's the only one here I want to know." MT: And what was his full name? Wally Sayre. I said, "Why should I want to know..." Then I was about to go out, and I said, "Oh yes, I want to know, who is the girl who receives everybody who walks in that door and asks for a job? I want to know who she is." "Well," he said, "I don't know. She's a little girl from Texas. She seems very nice to us." I said, "We've got to know more than that. We've got to be sure about the way she handles the Negroes. I want to know that. I don't want to know anybody else." But you know, that was just a lucky streak because Wally Sayre was one of the brightest people at OPA. One day I went down to him and said, "You know there's a..." There was a white girl in OPA, she handled the business committee. You know, she was bright. She came to tell me they were tired of too many Negroes down at coffee hour, and so I went down and told this to Wally. I said, "I don't know, I never go down to coffee hour, so I don't know whether they're down there or not." And he said, "Who told you that?" I told him. He says, "Let it rest." This was a white girl who had been to Fisk. I knew she'd been in love with a colored man down there, I knew all about her background.﻿21 FW: (cont.) She never knew that I knew it, but I did know it. But I knew she thought when she came to me, she'd take advantage of putting the Negroes in their place, I suppose. I don't know. But with Wally backing me up, I just let it rest. MT: So I can understand how you did enjoy your work... FW: Now, for instance, one person, who was head of a little staff to keep everybody happy at OPA. Everybody had to be happy so they could get their full day's work out of them. And he kept worrying me about when I was going home for Christmas and what time my plane was going, and I kept worrying, "What on earth is wrong with this man? He wants to know what time my plane goes, and all those private matters, and my business." And what I found out, his family were Norwegians and Swedes and whatnot, and... they were baking Christmas cookies with a great deal of their family, and they wanted to send my mother and father a box of their cookies, and they had to know all about this time so they'd have them there at the last minute. OPA was wonderful 'cause it had people like that in it, you know, that were imaginative and that. Now of course, we had some dumb ones. We had one dumb man, he was head of our rent department... MT: Which department? FW: Rent. He had on his staff a boy, Frank, who came from Harvard, and Frank had been out a long time and he was very smart, but he didn't care anything about race and he didn't care anything about the... I talked to Chester about the rent department and Chester said, "Frances, they tricked me the other day. They did me such a dirty trick." He said, "I don't know what we're going to do with those people down there, you know they're just negligent." I looked for this man, because Frank was in trouble. He had gotten cancer on his knee and they were going to chop off his leg, and I knew he was in trouble. I went down to see his boss to tell him for once he wasn't in trouble on the race question. This was a clear administrative matter, no race involved with me. I wanted to tell him to relieve his mind, you know. And of course, he hid from me. I knew he was hiding from me, so the fourth day he came up to the office. He said, "You've been looking for me for three days, haven't you?" I said, "I have, and you've been hiding." He says yes. I said, "I want you to tell Frank there's nothing racial in this." And you know, he sat down and he talked. He said, "You know, Frances, I never before was in a place where there were any Negroes, and this has all been such a surprise to me, and if I haven't done right, I'm sorry." It was interesting. Now we had another case. A young Negro lawyer went out to Cleveland and he got himself into a great big jam, talking to newspapers about the agency's business, which he should never have done. So when he came back, I went down to see his boss. I said, "Now you be sure to dock that boy. Give him a low grade, 'cause he's bright and he can learn. But he will never learn what he did wrong out there unless you all call his attention to it." No, they paid me no attention, they gave him a good rating. They were so busy keeping people happy. So when OPA was closing down, they came up to see me one day, his bosses did. They said, "You know, we're in trouble 'cause this colored﻿22 FW: (cont.) boy is now the only person left. He'll be in charge, and we don't think he's got brains enough to close up this shop." I said, "Well, I pointed that out to you some time ago and you could have taken advantage of it, and you wouldn't...you knew so much." And they said, "There's a Jewish girl underneath him who could do a beautiful job on it, but we're afraid if we don't give it to him without your backing...if you back us, it'll be all right." I said, "I'm not going to back you, gentlemen, I'm just not going to let you... Clean up your own mess." So the OPA was wonderful in many things. I'm going to show you the thing that Chester wrote in one of his books about me. We did have four people on our staff making $8,000 at a time when Robert Weaver was in housing. He was the only person, Negro, over there, making $8,000. I remember Charlie Quick came in one day. He said, "You know, Frances, I got my $8,000 today, and I don't know what you do, but you must do something. I deserve my $8,000," he said. "Don't think I don't deserve it, but I know I got it easier than if you hadn't been here." It was interesting, you know. Now Bob Ming, you know, he was...I always wondered whether or not Dick, I don't know, Dick Field... somebody...head of all the legal lawyers. I always wondered whether he recognized what different boys these three boys who all were $8,000. MT: Who were they? Robert Weaver, and who were the others? FW: No. There was Bob Ming. MT: Bob Ming. FW: And Charlie Quick, and Jefferson—I don't know what Jefferson's first name was. MT: Charlie Quick, hmm? FW: Now those were the three boys. Now I went to have lunch with Dick, the head of the legal staff, at Harvard, when he went back to Harvard to teach. MT: This was... FW: ...after OPA closed. MT: And who went back to Harvard? FW: The head of our legal department. And he said, "You know, those were such interesting boys we had." He said, "Now when we wanted a practical lawyer who could see all the facts of life, we sent for Charlie Quick. When we wanted someone with just a keen legal mind and nothing else, we'd send for Bob Ming. But when we wanted an all-round lawyer, we sent for Jefferson. He had all three promoted underneath him, but he promoted, looking at them as individuals. And I was very pleased at that. MT: Yes, that's very interesting, that analysis. It shows that one can draw the best of information by realizing the qualities and the abilities that differ in different men.﻿23 FW: Yes. MT: That's very interesting, and I know some of them. Robert Weaver, of course, and Bob...I came to Washington after these people had made their names. It's interesting to recall... FW: Well, you know, it interests me that Charlie Quick was the only who felt he had to come... He felt I had something to do, and of course what they didn't understand was what I did. MT: Well, finish that. That's interesting. FW: You know, I had a lot of people telephone me and say, "Frances, you know me. Help me get a job at OPA." I said, "I'm not going to help you. If you come down here and you can't get a job, then you call me up and I'll come down and do battle for you. But you come first and apply for it, 'cause you ought to get in here without any question. You have the qualifications anyway." And you know, some of my friends got mad. I said, "Well, suppose I come down and they see I've come with you. They'll give me perhaps seventy-five jobs, but that's all they're going to give me. They'll think I have too much power. But if you each come by yourself... Where are the Negroes that I don't know? How are they going to get in OPA if I'm going to take them all down there by the hand?" So you know, I wouldn't let them stop me, I wouldn't let my friends stop me on this. And you know, I think we had either three hundred or five hundred Negroes in the national office. MT: Three hundred to five hundred. FW: Somewhere around that. MT: Yes. You see, I wasn't here at that time, but I knew about it from reading and hearsay, that it was the agency where Negroes could get a break. FW: They called it "nigger heaven." MT: "Nigger heaven." I didn't know that. FW: Yes, they called it "nigger heaven." One day I stayed at home in the morning and some of the boys, I don't know who called me up and said, "Come down here, Frances. You gotta come down. Something terrible has happened." So I went down there and I got down there, and Poole, she's the prettiest little colored girl, she's on the press section... MT: What was her name? FW: Poole. Poole was her last name, I can't remember what her first name was. MT: That's all right. But she was colored, she wasn't Chinese. FW: She was colored. She was as pretty as she could be. She said, "Oh, the white boys used to always..." I said, "How are you today?" "Oh, keeping cool, Poole." [laughs]﻿24 Keeping cool with Poole. [laughs] So anyway, Poole said, "Oh, Frances, it's terrible, oh, she looks terrible. She needs a corset." I said, "Uh huh. She needs a corset? I'll appoint you head of the corset committee. You see that she gets a corset if she needs a corset. You see that she gets one." So I went around, I found some of my friends, and one was a boy who...* Miss Williams, you stated that you are at peace with the world, that you have accomplished some of the things—no one ever accomplishes everything they would like to do—but you've accomplished some. So just give your concluding thoughts. I would say there are things that I regretted not accomplishing. For instance, I think it was too bad when I was at the State Department I couldn't have stayed; but on the other hand, now I see it would have been impossible for me to gain, to ever make it in that area. So it was just as well I left. So I feel whatever comes now is all right with me. But I really settled that matter years ago. I remember, first time I went to ride on a plane, the plane wasn't ready to leave for Chicago from New York. They worked on it all day long, and I said, "Well, why are you getting on this broken plane to ride to Chicago?" I said, "Because I made up my mind to go that way, so I'm going to just wait and if I go down today, I've accomplished everything." Or at least accomplished something up to date, so why worry about it? Well, that's a good philosophy, and I hope that you will have—I wouldn't say, many, many more years of this satisfaction. I feel that just living, just being alive is not important. But as long as your brain functions as it does now, as long as you're able to enjoy life, you have the physical necessities near you, you can have a peace of mind. Now that's what I find with your sister. I think it's wonderful to come down to old age and have what you need. Yes, and she has. It was so interesting, while I was there the people who would ring the doorbell and bring a basket of peaches, a small basket, or some would bring in eight or nine beautiful tomatoes, you see. But she had told them the day that I was coming not to ring the doorbell, but this was the second day. They would come with their little gifts. I think they wanted definitely to bring her something; they'd been to market or they'd been down in the country. But they also were interested in the recording happening there, that Mrs. Jones was being interviewed. She enjoyed it, and I certainly enjoyed being the person to interview her and the same is my feeling in having come here. It's been a joy for me to see you. I, of course, had seen you two or three times at Bennett, and I'm going to ask Mrs. Jones for two or three pictures that I know she has, to loan. One entire tape failed to record properly. We were unable to retape this segment of the interview.﻿25 MT: (cont.) One is with you with President Jones, and we submitted that under her interview, but we can also use it. Then one I didn't use, because I was hoping that you would be included in this project, is in your office at OPA. And I didn't put that with Mrs. Jones, 'cause it was yours, but I had it in mind, I thought perhaps you would have a copy. But I'm going to write and ask her if we may borrow that one and it will be returned to her. Now do you have in mind perhaps some other pictures or materials that she might have, that I could use as a supplement? FW: I have two pictures of myself here. I think I have the one taken in OPA, and the one taken the year I got the award at Mount Holyoke. MT: Oh, that one would be fine. FW: I forgot about them. Well, they're at home, they're right up there now. I could go and get them. MT: Well, I'm leaving, no, I don't want this on tape, but I am leaving, I'm checking out before twelve. FW: Today? MT: Yes. But you can mail them to me. I'll tell you what I'll do. FW: I'll mail them to you. MT: Because I don't like to have them separated from the tapes, I'd like for them all to go in together and I'm not sending the tapes in right away because I'll wait until Mrs. Jones sends me whatever she may have. If you haven't a great deal but those pictures... FW: I have just those two pictures. MT: But that would be excellent, excellent. None of your childhood? FW: No, I haven't anything. I have a cute picture of me and my little brother when we were little. It's the cutest thing. MT: They'll return it. FW: I'm sure Susie has that. MT: Well now, I have one of the four of you, and you couldn't tell your brother from the girls, except he had a black piece, a black ribbon. FW: We were a little larger in this one. MT: That would be fine. FW: But I think Susie has that. MT: She has the one of you...﻿26 FW: ...and my brother. MT: Just you and your brother together? Well then, I will ask her for that, because they will duplicate and return them, but they will be returning that to Mrs. Jones, probably. But whatever you send me, and be sure you put in some cardboard, or something to keep the picture from being damaged. FW: Yes. On both sides, I will. MT: And I'll be happy to get that. FW: Now are you going to be all right? What are we going to do about this woman we were going... MT: And the conclusion to this will be the quotes from Chester Bowles's interesting, very interesting book entitled, Promises to Keep. I was interested in it because, you know, later on in life, not much later, he was ambassador to India, and he caused some headaches there. FW: Did he? MT: Because he wanted to be democratic, he rode a bicycle to the embassy instead of going in the limousine, and that meant that others who were accustomed to going in a car wouldn't dare to do so, and so they had to walk or ride the bicycle to the embassy. It was quite a problem. FW: You know, he opposes... He made his first million before he was forty. And so he decided to quit making money and to just... He said to Steb, "Now if we're careful, we can live on this the rest of the days of our lives." MT: A few million. FW: Just the first million. MT: Oh, the first million. FW: "We can live on this if we're careful." And so he just did everything. For instance, I went to see him one day and they had about a dozen kittens, see them crawling all over him, little kittens. They were as cute as they could be, you know. And they had great big white sheepdogs. And to get to their house, you went through...oh, it was a long, long driveway and... MT: Now, in what place was this? FW: This is in Essex. MT: In Essex. Oh, you mean in England? FW: No. Essex, Connecticut. And I went to see, you know, while I was at OPA, Grace Hamilton was on his consumer advisory staff, and she and I went to see him several times. We were there when he was running for governor,﻿27 FW: (cont.) and he and Steb had to go out and speak one night, so we stayed at home with the children. And the children were telling us all about the campaign, and one of them came in, and she was squeezing this plastic... You know how oleomargarine, how you squeeze...here she was... MT: Before they colored it? You mean, before they permitted you to use the yellow coloring? FW: And here she was, squeezing and I was afraid she'd squeeze it out...it burst out all over the Bowles's front room furniture and everything. But I was scared to say anything to her, because they were so busy telling us what a good time they had, you know. MT: With their parents and with running the campaign. FW: Yes. Running the campaign. MT: How old were the children then? They were under teenage? FW: Oh, they were under teenage. MT: Yes, they were school age. FW: Well, then when he was governor, Grace and I went up to New England, and we decided that every time else we'd been to see him, we were in... In Essex, there was no place to stay except with him. Now he was governor, there was some place else we could stay. So we would go in early and get ourselves established in a hotel, which we did. Then we called up the next morning and we asked for Mr. Bowles and couldn't get him. Finally we got Mrs. Bowles. She said, "Where are you?" I said, "At the Bond Hotel." Said, "Don't you know [inaudible] ..." I said, "No, I didn't know that." She said, "He is, so get your things packed and come on up here." So we get packed, we went out to the mansion, the governor's mansion. And we find out that the governor's mansion, there are four bedrooms on the second floor and four on the third. Well, she had hoped the children would all want to stay on the third floor. But no, the children preferred the second. So they took up all the guest rooms. And so she told them, "Each one of you have to move one night when we have a guest," see now. "It'll be your turn, Sally." When we got there, it was Sammy's turn, and all night long he was coming back and forth to our room." [laughs] MT: Getting things out of the room. FW: Yes. [laughter] Oh, they're so funny. They're the funniest children. MT: About what age was he then? FW: Oh, he was about nine. MT: I see. Didn't have any inhibitions, FW: Oh, no. No inhibition. But you see, they had to move, their mother insisted on their moving.﻿28 MT: They had to give up the room. But he had to come back and get his shirt and get his soap and get his toothbrush. [laughs] FW: That went on all night long. [laughs] MT: It would have been better if you had slept on the third floor, you wouldn't have been interrupted. FW: Then the next morning I woke up and I looked outside across the hall at Sally's bedroom, and she was making up her bed before she went to school. And I thought, "Now, that's the Bowleses' training. Here there is a staff to make up their beds every morning. But no, Sally must make up her room before she goes to school." You know, they never let anything lie around. And when I went downstairs to get my cup of coffee, I saw a colored girl. She was one of the permanent maids in the house, and I said to her what a nice place it was. She said, "Oh, you've never seen it in its glory, because Mrs. Bowles went through the house and took all the valuable stuff and it's all packed away on the third floor so the children won't break it, because she can't govern the children. She isn't one to say, 'Be careful, don't break that, don't break...'" you see. She didn't want, she just wanted the children... MT: She wanted the children to enjoy life. FW: And not be taking care of the governor's mansion all the time. MT: So after they left, they put them back? FW: Yes. MT: Well, I know he was a concern to government people in New Delhi by riding a bicycle to the embassy. And in that heat and humidity that one has in India, how could his subordinates drive up in a car if the ambassador came on a bicycle? FW: I can see that, I can see that. How embarrassing that was to them. [laughs] MT: And they put on Indian saris. But the ambassador who was there when I went out on my Fulbright, the second thing that he said to me in my interview in New Delhi, was, "Of course you'll not wear Indian dress." FW: Who was that? Was that Galbraith? MT: Yes. See. And he didn't let his secretaries. And in India, of course, if you could wear this cooler Indian garb, it would be more comfortable. I thought maybe he would figure if I, being colored, wore Indian dress, it might mean that I was trying to cover up being colored. But he did not permit it with his secretaries. They were American and they wear American dress. FW: Well, I wondered about Galbraith and what he was like. I just knew with the Bowleses'that certain things were right for them. And that they intended to go on doing them regardless of what else was...﻿29 MT: Well, this is interesting. The quotation that I will cite as a conclusion to this from Chester Bowles makes an interesting carry-over. And it's an excellent conclusion about your contribution at OPA, and that was your great period, of course, in Washington, even though it extended beyond that. Well, this has been a great joy to me, Miss Williams, and I know the administrators at Radcliffe, even the president, who will eventually know about this, and the director of the Schlesinger Library, who is very enthusiastic over this project, she will someday hear the tapes. Then we have a coordinator for the committee, and we are very grateful that you consented to be a part of this project. This is living history and it's on record for all times, and will be in five or six other repositories in the United States. It's really been a pleasure for me to come here and see you looking so well, almost like when I saw you at Bennett, and that was quite a number of years ago. FW: Well, it's been very pleasant for me also. MT: Miss Frances Williams's life span bridges two centures, since she was born in Danville, Kentucky, in 1898, still in the Victorian era, and the end of the Spanish-American War, and the new American imperialism. In spite of a stroke from which she recovered beautifully, and later a fall, resulting in a broken hip which mended quickly, and her seventy-nine years, Miss Williams is still a brisk, dynamic, and vivacious lady. I, Merze Tate, the interviewer, will include in this recording a couple of paragraphs from Chester Bowles's Promises to Keep, My Years in Public Life, 1941-1969, pages 63, 64. Mr. Bowles writes: To improve the morale and the effectiveness of the Washington office, we insisted on high standards of performance and strict adherence to principles of equality in recruiting personnel. For example, fourteen percent of our Washington staff were black at a time when the percentage throughout the rest of the government was no more than one percent. Several blacks filled key positions, which at that time was practically unheard of. In large measure, this record was due to the efforts of Miss Frances Williams, a remarkable black woman from Saint Louis, whom I asked to assume responsibility for interpreting our organization to minority groups, and who served as my special assistant. Our personnel standards required all our offices totally to disregard racial or religious questions in hiring new people. On several occasions when district directors persistently ignored the regulation, I decided they should be replaced. But before any action could be taken, Frances would ask me for authorization, first, to visit the district and attempt to persuade the director to consider the situation from a fresh perspective, and on each occasion, she succeeded. Later, after the OPA organization had been disbanded, I received letters from several former directors, saying that through Frances Williams's patient efforts, their minds had been opened to new dimensions of democracy and that this would always be a memorable part of the OPA experience.﻿30 MT: (cont.) As a brief afterword on Chester Bowles, following his services as national OPA director, heading control of wartime rationing, of rents and prices, he became director of the Office of Economic Stabilization. In 1948 he was elected governor of Connecticut. Later he was named United States ambassador to India and created some consternation in the embassy in New Delhi by riding a bicycle to his office, after which his subordinates could not feel comfortable in a limousine. Moreover, Mrs. Bowles and the daughters donned Indian saris. Chester Bowles's predecessor in the embassy, on my arrival in New Delhi in November 1950 as a Fulbright professor, made clear that I was not to adopt Indian dress. He did not permit the secretaries in the embassy to wear the cool, loose, comfortable sari. No wonder that Miss Frances Williams reflects on those exciting years in Washington as special assistant to Chester Bowles and as research assistant to Senator Herbert Henry Lehman of New York with some nostalgia. Merze Tate signing off, November 1, 1977, in Stouffer's Waterfront Tower, Saint Louis, Missouri.﻿FRANCES H. WILLIAMS..