 Marcia M. Greenlee: This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Ro sa Parks. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Parks's office at 6080 Woodward, Detroit, Michigan, 48202. The date is August 22, 1978, and the interviewer is Marcia M. Greenlee. Mrs. Parks, you were born on February 4, 1913, in Tuskegee, Alabama, to James and Leona McCauley. What was your mother's maiden name? Rosa Parks: Edwards. Marcia M. Greenlee: Edwards. Could you tell me something about your family background? Rosa Parks: My mother was a teacher in the rural schools in Alabama, and my father was a carpenter. When they married, they moved to Tuskegee and started keeping house, and that's where I was born. Shortly after I was about, maybe not quite two years old, my father wanted to go to the North to live and work and he... they broke up housekeeping. My mother came back to the rural part of Montgomery County, Pine Level, Alabama, to live with her parents my grandmother and grandfather. This was when my brother was born. Marcia M. Greenlee: This was Pine Level? Rosa Parks: Yes, Pine Level, Alabama. It was in Montgomery County, about thirty miles south of Montgomery, the capital of Alabama. I can remember when I was quite small my mother was teaching in a one-teacher rural school...various places in the county. Sometimes they would be the church buildings where she would hold classes, with one, two.. It was through the sixth grade, I believe it was. Marcia M. Greenlee: All in the same room? Rosa Parks: In the same room. Marcia M. Greenlee: What was the year your brother was born?﻿2 RP: My brother was born August 20, 1915. MMG: And what was his name? RP: His name was Sylvester James McCauley. MMG: MMG: So then you stayed in Alabama in the Pine Level area until you married? Is that right or did you move? RP: No, I attended school in Montgomery, the city of Montgomery, from the time I was eleven years old until I finished—well, I didn't finish high school—until I had to leave high school. MMG: Did you live with relatives then, or board or... RP: I lived with my mother's sister most of the time, and sometimes other people. I stayed once in a while with one of my mother's girlfriends. But most of the time I spent was with my mother's sister. What are your memories of that early schooling? RP: Well, it's hard for me to recall. The school that I was attending was an all girls school with white women teachers and principal, women who came from various parts of the North to teach, and they were all unmarried women. I suppose they must have had dedication, because at that time, being white and teaching black children, they were separated from the white community. They lived in a building next to the school building—that was their dormitory where they lived. We were taught, aside from just the regular reading, writing and arithmetic, we were taught home economics and sewing—I guess home economics would be the same thing—cooking and sewing. It's a little difficult for me to express any special interest, because I know Miss White, the principal, was a very strict disciplinarian, and she always saw to it that the girls were not liars, or that they dressed neatly, wore no jewelry. She frowned on—we called it bobbed hair, at that time—cutting of the hair, and so on. MMG: Sounds like it must have... RP: We wore uniforms, the blue dress with the white dots. MMG: Must have been kind of like being in a convent? RP: I think at school it just about was. Of course, we did have some recreation, played a little basketball. One of the younger women taught basketball. MMG: Were there subjects that you especially enjoyed? RP: It seemed worthwhile, just about all the subjects... At that time I seemed to enjoy reading so much that almost any subject was interesting to me. MMG: What was the name of that school, do you remember?﻿3 RP: It was called... Well, people called it Miss White's school, but the actual name of it, Montgomery Industrial School. MMG: Did the women who taught there come from a particular church affiliation? RP: I don't know about their individual church affiliation, but I think that she was Congregational. MMG: This is part two of an interview with Mrs. Rosa Parks. The inteview is taking place in the interviewer's room at the St. Regis Hotel, Detroit. The date is the twenty—third of August, 1978. Mrs. Parks, we were talking yesterday about your family and your family background, and you were telling me about where you went to school and what the situation was like there. What do you remember about leisure activities when you were a girl? RP: I didn't have too much leisure. Well, first of all, when I was going to Miss White's school, it was a private school, and there was a tuition fee. I can't remember what the amount was, but my mother obtained what was called a scholarship, where I could clean two classrooms after school and sweep the floor and dust the desks and tidy it up for the evening. But it really meant that I didn't have to...that she didn't have to pay tuition for me. At that time, I lived quite a long way from school, so I was walking home from school. Then, going to where I lived, there would be general chores around the the house, getting my uniform washed and cleaning it for the next day, and doing other things around the house. I lived with my aunt, she was quite ailing in health, she worked at that time at the Jewish country club. Because she was so ill she would take me along with her children to the place where she worked, and you know, help her do some of the work that she couldn't do, cleaning and doing dishes, and so on. And we did a great deal of work under her supervision, it was a job. And there were times when we would go just walking along the roadside through the woods, b ecause this was not right downtown, this was out on the edge of the city, and pick berries. And occasionally we would, if enough of us children could get together and we'd have a little time, we might play a little ball. But I never had a whole lot of leisure time just to play. There was always duties and things to do. When we were in Pine Level, however, I used to go fishing with my grandmother a great deal and I rather enjoyed that, because we'd catch the fish and then we'd have some fish for supper when we got home. MMG: I don't know if I asked you, what was your grandmother's name? RP: My mother's mother was named Rosa Edwards. She was married to Sylvester Edwards. MMG: Were you named for her? RP: Yes, I was. And also, my father's mother was named Louise, and I'm named for her, too.﻿4 MMG: Oh, I see. Did you have contact with your father after your parents separated? RP: No, not very much. I do remember him visiting our home for a few days when I was about, I think about seven years old. Either five or seven. I was quite young, first time I ever saw him to remember him, and he didn't stay very long. I didn't see him anymore until after I was married. That was quite a few years ago. MMG: What part of the North did he come from? RP: Well, several places. He was in New York part of the time, and Ohio. Many states. I don't know just how many he lived in, but I guess you'd call him a person who didn't, wasn't stable enough to settle for a long time in one place. MMG: What was your aunt's name that you stayed with? RP: Her name was Fanny Williamson. She was a widow. MMG: Well, do you... It sounds like you had a lot of work, you've been working all your life. RP: That's true, I have. Oh, that's right. That's when I learned to sew, and one of the things I liked to do was piece quilts. We took little squares and we sewed them together to make a quilt. And I liked to cook. My grandmother would permit me, and I thought It was a great privilege to cook, help her with the cooking,and what not, and set the table, wash the dishes, things like that. I remember, I could milk the cow when I was quite young, do the washing, a lot of things that I did that I think was because... Much of what I did was because my mother was away a great deal. She was also in kind of frail health. She wasn't a very strong woman. I did just about all that I could to keep things, to make things as light as I could for her. Of course, my grandmother being ill and a semi-invalid... Also my grandfather, who passed away when I was ten years old, I had to look after him as well as I could. MMG: When you were young, were you ever thinking about what you might do when you grew up? RP: There wasn't a great deal to think about when I... There were not too many opportunities. My mother had hoped, I think, that I would be a teacher, but life as a teacher in a rural community seemed so very hard that it didn't appeal to me at that time that much. I was concerned with trying to get an education and be prepared to have a career. I thought very strongly of nursing when I was real young. I suppose with so many ill members of the family, I felt a sympathy for ill people. Of course, I myself was not too strong. I had suffered tonsillitis when I was still a baby, about two years old. I think my tonsils were removed at the age of eleven, just before my mother put me to school in Montgomery. After that I didn't get into any nurse training, I had a lot of experience with the family and friends...﻿5 MMG: RP: MMG: RP: MMG: RP: MMG: RP: MMG: RP: You had been doing that. ...I sewed quite a bit, although I didn't feel like I wanted to sew for a living. I found myself doing quite a bit of that for myself and my cousins and others. I remember I did sewing for the family of a friendy and I often remember that she was very economical with material, and she could have a piece of material and make a dress for myself out of one, she made for herself and some of the neighbors. What was the role of the church in your life during that period? Were you much involved with church activities? Yes, church, and Sunday school also, all the time in Montgomery. It was one of the events that I could look forward to. I have always liked to attend church...all the people in the church would be singing and praying. I can remember enjoying hymns, singing hymns, say the Lord's Prayer, you know, even when 1 was a child—it was just a part of my life. And we are members of the A.M.E. church—that is the African Methodist Episcopal church—and we had a group called the Allen Christian Endeavor League, that would meet on Sundays, just before the night prayers. And I enjoyed that because it was where I learned of Bishop Allen and ... Which led to the foundation of the A.M.E. church. Yes. It is the organization of the A.M.E. church. I have always felt— I don't know just when it began or how, maybe if I thought a little more about it I could,... And that's sort of in my family background, too. The Lord's power within me to do what I have done... Were there, apart from your family and your church, any other persons or events in those early years that you would say were important influences on you? Do you mean racially, or just as a person in any way... Well, of any nature. Of any nature, including racially. I believe...well, my mother was my teacher while...part of the time when I was in rural school. I think about three years... I remember my mother's teaching very well, that she was very sincere... She didn't just put the work before the youngsters. If they needed any help, she would take time out to make sure that they were learning what she was teaching. One of the things that I always appreciated about her was if there was anything that came up of a racial nature, she never impressed upon me, that even with segregation and going through a schoolhouse that was just a little shack—you might call it a shack, a building with no glass windows—that it was the way it was supposed to be. And sometimes my grandfather and grandmother, also— these are my mother's parents—I learned what it was like for them as small children during slavery and before Emancipation. In our family, that's how we referred to the time of Emancipation as when the Yankees came through... The hardships, the struggles, before the Yankees came through, to let the people know, the slaves know, that they were free.﻿6 RP: (cont.'d) I felt that I was fortunate not to have been a child during that time, and that there was such a person as Abraham Lincoln who signed the Emancipation Proclamation. But I couldn't understand why, if we were free people, that we had to be deprived of the better things, like a building. MMG: Were your grandparents also from Alabama? Were they born there? RP: Yes, they were. I think, though...I don't know whether my grandfather was born in Georgia or his people, they were, when they were bringing slaves over, X think the first place they landed was some place in Georgia. And some of them came from Georgia, but as far as I know, my grandparents were born in Alabama. Now my great-grandfather, my grandmother's father was brought from the old country. He was born...he was of Scotch-Irish descent. But I at a certain time didn't know he was not a black person. I thought he was just a light skinned person... I found later in life, in talking to people, that he was not of African descent at all. But my great-grandmother, his wife, was completely... Rosa. My mother's grandparents... MMG: What was their name? RP: My great-grandfather was named James Percival, and his wife, before she married him was Mary Jane Noble, it was Nobles. So they were raising a family before Emancipation, and when the third child was born, the baby at the time...There were already two children. My grandmother was the first child, and the next one was a girl, the next one was a boy. MMG: So you saw Mr. Percival? Pictures of him, or what? RP: Oh, I remember him because he died when I was about six...I believe about six years old. Six or seven. But I remember him very well. MMG: So you didn't know he was a white man. RP: No, I didn't. And he was a very likable elderly person. He died at the age of ninety-six. But his wife, my great-grandmother, died in 1915, same year my brother x^as born, so I don't remember her. I wasn't quite three years old then, I just remember talking about her. MMG: Well, since we're talking about grandparents, I should ask you again about your father's people. Were they also from Alabama? Did you know them? RP: They were from Alabama, but not from Montgomery County. They came from Abbeville, Alabama, which is in Henry County. That's where my grandfather and grandmother raised their family. My fath er was the oldest son, and the second child; there was one sister older. They had a very [large family]. I think my mother said she was visiting mv grandmother., actually, my mother said there were about twenty, but some of them didn't survive. But at her death she had ten living children. She had lost almost half. I think she lost one son before he was in his teens. Out of that large family, I have one aunt, the youngest daughter of that family, and my uncle, who was next to my father.﻿7 MMG: Only [an uncle]. They still in Alabama? RP: Yes, next door. MMG: What are their names? RP: Anderson McCauley is my uncle's name. And Every Ward is my aunt's married name. MMG: In 1933 you married Raymond Parks. Is this in Tuskegee? RP: No, I didn't marry him in Tuskegee. And we married in 1932. MMG: Oh, 1932. RP: It was in Pine Level, my mother's home. MMG: Oh, I see. Would you tell me a little about your husband? RP: Well, he was a barber in Montgomery, Alabama. I was eighteen, he was maybe twenty-two at the time. He was also an orphan, he didn't have a living mother or father. He was living in Montgomery, working in a barber shop, the Atlas barber shop. One of the things that interested me most [about him was] the fact that he was very neat, very thin, very serious behavior. His interest was with the Scottsboro case, working to free them, so he would tell me about the trial, what was going on, what was happening. And he would tell me some of the things that happened to him as a child. He had been deprived of an education and yet in appearance you would never believe that he was an illiterate person. In fact, I don't think he was illiterate, because he taught himself to read when he was in school. He would tell me about his grandmother, his grandfather. His father and his mother did not remain together—they had separated. He never knew him. His mother was dead. Some of the tragic things that he... Well, he came from Randolph County, Alabama, the little place that he was born was called... where he lived in Roanoke, Alabama, some of the experiences that he had. He was from a community where there were very few black people. One of the reasons that he didn't attend school until later... There were no schools at all where he could go unless he could go to a white school, but the nearest what we called, colored school, was too far away for him to get there. So at that time, he was- about ten years old, his grandfather and grandmother both were ill and he had to do what he could, try to work to help them, cook for them. I think they'd have wished that he spent... About 1913, when he was ten, and I was just a baby—and he didn't have shoes, didn't have food much of the time, [didn't] get enough food, he had a rough time of it. When he left Roanoke and went to Tuskegee, and he went...I think he said he started school—that was after his mother, she had another child... At her death, he moved in with a cousin and he started going to school when he was twenty-one years old. MMG: And he was starting out then at the beginning? RP: Yes, going to school, I think he advanced to the seventh grade of school. He went to Tuskegee Institute, he got to go to school there—﻿8 RP: (cont.'d) not that that... Somewhere, either at Roanoke or somewhere he tried to pick up a trade as a barber. But [he did] other work: farming, mill work, janitor—what we called a sexton down South—of a white church. Tuskegee for a while, then he decided to go to Montgomery but he had planned to attend school somewhere in the vicinity of Montgomery, but didn't have the time. However, he went to Montgomery and became a barber there. MMG: How did you meet, the two of you? RP: Well, he... A mutual friend of ours was a woman who knew him, she also knew me, and she wanted us to meet. So finally it came that she told him about where I lived, and he was going down,you know riding, and trying to find our house and he saw my mother standing on the porch. She had long hair, and he seemed to have been attracted to long hair, so he said he thought he'd stop and inquire about me there, and he was asking for Rosa McCauley, that he couldn't find the place where I was. I think he inquired at some other places along the way, but couldn't get any information. It could have been because he was so fair that some of these people who even knew me wouldn't tell him where I lived, they might have thought he was a member of the opposite race. But he did, we did meet and started visiting, and we talked a lot. As far as I know, he's the first man I have ever talked with about our racial situation, what was going on, the hardships. MMG: So the two of you shared the commonality of early hard experiences, hard work. Even though you were young people, you had heavy responsibilities, both of you, and interest in the racial situation. Did you have other interests in common? RP: I think we did. I'm sure we must have, because I enjoyed, I just en- joyed listening to him. I didn't talk a great deal. I was rather quiet, and he, I enjoyed listening to him talk about whatever he wanted to talk about. One of the things that... He was a very gentle person, very polite. I didn't know exactly what to say, I guess, because I hadn't been, I hadn't... The few boys—not too many—that I had been in the company of were of a different disposition and they were all right, I guess, but I suppose it didn't matter. MMG: Well, you and your husband moved to Detroit in—what was it—1957? RP: Yes. MMG: How did you make a living together in the South before you came to Detroit? RP: Well, he was a barber, and some of the time I stayed home and did sewing at home, very little money because living expenses were high. And then I did some work for [insurance]. Finally in about...well, during the war time, I started working at night. Sometimes I'd do some sewing and I left that and started doing insurance work, so I worked for the [Metro Life] Insurance Company, had a small [position]; then I gave that up, and started working for an office as a clerk.﻿9 MMG: Was life hard,as you remember it? RP: It wasn't always this... extremely. It was hard enough, but as we didn't have any luxuries,... MMG: You were active in the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP. When did you begin work... RP: That was the early 1940's. I think it was 1943. I found myself secretary before I even... I had read about it, the Scottsboro case. My husband was active before I was. People considered the registering to vote... MMG: Well, what were some of the projects that the NAACP was involved in once you began work with them? RP: When I first started as secretary, at the early date, we were not doing that much. Well, mostly having meetings, I remember discussing the segregation issue, but it doesn't seem like we were actually doing anything special. I think the very first things I remember working on was a rape case involving a young black serviceman in Georgia whose father lived in Montgomery, and a white woman whose brother had been... from childhood. We didn't have any legal representation in Montgomery, and if we could get a person who had been violated in any way to sign an affidavit, they would have to apply to the Department of Justice in Washington. MMG: There were no black attorneys to represent them. RP: No, and no white attorneys in the early years, except there was one that I remember. In other words, if one would take a case for a person, the white community ostracized [them]... MMG: On the first of December, 1955, you refused to give up your seat to a white passenger on a Montgomery bus. Your action and the subsequent developments from that action resulted in a Montgomery bus boycott, which in turn launched a new phase in the civil rights struggle. Other black passengers could have refused to give up their seats. The person next to you on the bus could have remained seated beside you. But everyone else dutifully acquiesced to the white bus driver's demand that they move. Only you stayed in your seat. Why? RP: I think it was because I was so involved with the attempt to bring about freedom from this kind of thing. I had seen so much within reach on the basis of the Whitney Young experience under the same situation that I felt that there was nothing else I could do to show that I was not pleased with.... People have said that I was a great democrat, people say things like that, but I was not conscious of being... I felt just resigned to give what I could to protest against the way I was being treated, and I felt that all of our meetings, trying to negotiate, bring about petitions before the authorities, that is the city officials, really hadn't done any good at all. And as long as we continued to give them our patronage... I recall Mr. Eddie Mitchell saving that he had a committee that had gone before the bus company﻿10 RP: (cont.'d) for the extension of the bus line to the same area and the community where most of our people lived, instead of them having to walk an hour, or whatever length of time it was... And then came the [time] to propose it, and they were told that as long as they thought... was there any need of them extending the line? This wasn't conscious in my mind at that moment, but so many incidences where I think that always make it appear that if a few of us form a committee, which [try to ] have this thing remedied ...make it appear that that was what we wanted. And they were pleased that they didn't have to extend it, as long as we accepted it to be that way. At this point I felt that, if I did stand up, it meant that I approved of the way I was being treated, and I did not approve. MMG: Had you ever broken any segregation laws or practices previously? RP: I had not, to a great extent, but I hadn't...I started to think about some of the times...I, this to me... First of all, I wanted to say that at this point on the bus ride, I didn't consider myself breaking any segregation laws that I wanted... because he was extending what we considered our section in the bus. I had refused on any number of occasions to give my fare at the front of the bus, and then go around to the back to get in. That was another thing that some of the bus drivers would do. See, all of the bus drivers did not practice the same...it was not uniform. There were just certain bus drivers that would insist on you going to the back after you give him the fare. You would step up in the bus, get in the bus, and then step back off the bus and go around to the rear to enter. And neither did all Q'f them ask you to stand up if there was white people standing. So it seemed like each driver was at his own discretion. MMG: And this was a zealous one that you encountered that night. RP: It seemed to be. MMG; What was the reaction of the other black people on the bus when this happened? RP: They didn't any of them say anything to me. Some few did get off the bus, and I know some of them asked for a transfer, and then some just got off by main door. But during the time when I was there, all remained the same exactly where they were. MMG: Nobody tried to interfere with what was going on between you and the white driver? RP: No. MMG: Did you resent that in any way? RP: No. MMG: Did you expect some support? RP: No, I didn't. It didn't even enter my mind. Because I knew the attitude of people. It was pretty rough to go against the system﻿11 RP: (cont.'d) to the extent that you might not... There was one man who was on the bus, he lived next door to where we lived, and he could have if he'd wanted to, gotten off the bus to let my husband know that I was arrested. My husband thinks kind of hard of him for not at least telling him what had happened on the bus. Because he knew him very well. And then there was another man who got on the bus, and he got on just after me, 'cause I spoke to him as he was stepping on the bus. He asked me a few days later if I had needed him as a witness, and I said I didn't even remember... MMG: Did you ever find out the name of that bus driver? Was there ever any direct reference to him in the legal matters that developed later? RP: Oh, yes. I remember his name very shortly. His last name was Blake. I can't remember his initial. MMG: What does he think about the incident in retrospect? Do you remember what he said? RP: I can't remember exactly what he said. As far as he was concerned, it was all in his duty. MMG: What was your family's reaction? Your mother and brother and husband? RP: Well, my mother was pretty upset when I called her. She answered the telephone, and I told her I was in jail. And I don't remember exactly what my brother said to me, he was here, in Detroit, not Montgomery. I'll have to find out, better than I, if she can remember anything special. I know he was... I don't know if he was so suprised or not, but he was pretty upset, too, I'm sure. He didn't want us to... MMG: During any of this time, just after the incident occurred, and you were taken off and arrested, and broken arrest, yet did you ever feel fearful? RP: Well, it was a strange feeling because you always feel that something could...even before the incident of my arrest, I could leave home feeling that anything could happen at any time...harassment. I think the hardest days I had were when I was still working in the department store. I would see some of the people who worked in the store, and I don't know whether there was anything personal to it, I could see their attitude, the attitude they had. Some of them were very...well, they didn't say anything to me, but they were just, they'd ignore me as though I wasn't there. MMG: Were you ever involved with the Montgomery Improvement Association, or the boycott that followed, in a policy making capacity? RP: I was on the board—I'm trying to think, board of directors—and I sat in on some meetings, but I didn't have too much time to be in the actual planning. But I did for a short while. But at that time, while so much of this was being fought, and so many plans were being made, I was being invited away from Montgomery quite a bit. I don't remember—it's hard to remember now, except that I did as many as I could, if I could, and if they called on me, if they had any marching or anything, if I could.﻿12 MMG: How did you come to Detroit? RP: You mean, how did I travel? MMG: Well, no, not that so much as what made you decide to go ahead and come RP: Because my brother was living here. MMG: MMG: And you and your husband felt that conditions just weren't going to get better immediately where they were? RP: Well, they were not any too good. Of course, it was quiet before there was any disturbance or any harassment at that time. And my mother wanted to spend as much time as she could with the two of us and she couldn't spend time with him if she remained with me there. And if she left me there, then she felt uneasy, I think. Part of our..., she and my brother got together more so than I did, and found a place for us to move, for us to live, and we came. What was life like for you and your husband after you moved to Detroit? RP: Well, it was not any too easy. Well, shortly after I moved to Detroit, I was offered a job and accepted one in Hampton, Virginia, at Hampton Institute. I earned a little money, and he was working in a barber school. He didn't have a Michigan license or anything, so he had to pass the examination, be officially [licensed]. He was working in a barber school for a man of our [race], teaching some apprentice barbers the work and training them. MMG: Did you get any, ever get any specific support from civil rights groups during this time when you first went to Detroit? Did they try and offer you employment or see that you were taken care of or anything? RP: I didn't get any work, but I went to a lot of meetings, and sometimes when they would take up contributions, but that was never high. MMG: Ten years after you came to Detroit, there were race riots here in the city. What were your feelings about the progress of the civil rights movement at that point? RP: I actually...1 mean, X would see that... X would associate the activity of the burning and looting, and so on, with what I had done and would have done. And yet, on the other hand, if you looked beneath the surface, we could see the frustration of some of these people, they could see the deprivation. I guess for whatever reasons it came about, I felt that something had to be wrong with the system. MGG: So you could understand it, although it might not have been the way you would have gone about it. RP: That's true. But it did...it was a very, very severe blow to my husband, who wasn't well at the time. It was just something he just﻿13 RP: (cont.) couldn't deal with at all, especially right near us, because we were within a half a block, a short block from where quite a bit of that was going on, and this particular grocery store that was looted so very much by some of the people right around us, and then some we knew and some that we didn't know. It upset him very much because when he was working, these people had given him quite a bit of work, and had been his customers. And that upset him a great deal, he just couldn't, it was such a severe thing to him, that he couldn't eat or sleep. They had a curfew, and he wouldn't stay inside, and he was threatened by some of the officers, I think the National Guard, because he didn't stay inside the house. All the time, he would be outside looking, seeing what was going on. Took him to the doctor, he had to have a sedative to quiet his nerves, and it was hard on all of us. MMG: Do you have any preference among the terms "Negro," "colored," and "black"? RP: Well, I've gotten into using "black"quite a bit, and I never really cared for the particular word "colored." Years ago, "Negro" was considered proper. But I actually would prefer it if I didn't have to use any kind of racial terms...more concerned with humanity, and not be so much involved that every person has to be labeled racially. MMG: I wanted to ask you a couple of questions about integration. Do you see integration as open access to institutions, or does it also involve social contact with white people? You know, being with them, or just being where they are, in their schools, or also in their homes, at parties, in their churches, that kind of thing. RP: I haven't given it too much thought, other than the fact that I feel that people should be free to associate with any person that they choose, without having to think in terms of their race, if that's what they want to do. I don't think anyone should be ostracized or circumscribed or denied association or contact with another person as long as they're part of the world. MMG: Do you think that there's any danger to black institutions such as churches and schools and some clubs from integration? RP: I hadn't thought of any. MMG: Is there any reason that all-black institutions, some of them, should be preserved if they want? RP: I hadn't actually thought of that either. Well, it would be good to be able to appreciate their heritage. I don't know whether that could be done if there were finally complete integration or not. I hadn't gone into that in my mind too much. MMG: Well, just a couple of last questions about the women's movement— is that all right. It's 11:30. I just wanted to ask you what you thought of the women's movement.﻿/ 14 RP: In the past few years, it's been so popular. That's another thing that I hadn't searched my mind too closely on. I have been involved so much in kind of family matters, illness and death of my husband, my mother's illness. MMG: When you hear talk about liberated women, does that mean anything particular to you, or do you feel you've been pretty well liberated all your life? RP: Well, I feel to some extent in my mind that I have been liberated, not physically always, but at least my thinking. MMG: There was a film on television recently on King. Did you see that? RP: Yes, I did. MMG: And what did you think of the depictions? RP: You mean, the actors? Yes, and the way that the movement was represented. MMG: RP: I felt that the representation stressed more violence and conflict than the actual peace and harmony and love that Dr. King would have wanted it to be. And the person who portrayed him, a good actor, to my mind, did not capture Dr. King's manner as I remember it, his position, actions, the way he spoke. MMG: How about the way that you were represented? RP: She did quite good. As I remember it, she spoke the words that I did. When she got up and left the bus, she didn't look around at anybody to see... I remember doing that. I remember just walking right off the bus, with the officers when they told me I was arrested, not looking at anybody or noticing what anybody was thinking. For her part, she was good. Very quiet, she didn't get excited or use any extra words. MMG: You have become a symbol of the civil rights movement. There are great demands made on your time, such as this interview. You're asked to visit and to speak all over the country, all the time. Has this created problems for you in the private life that you must lead? RP: Yes, it has. To a great extent, I feel that there are many other things I would like to do and need to do, that I can't get to. I don't feel like I really have a private life. There are many other things that need my attention. But on the other hand, I always have to refer to something Dr. King once said, in the early days in Montgomery when his first child was very young, demands were made on him, and he was thinking in terms of his not being able to be the father and husband he would like to, he would like to spend more time with his family. But at the same time, he would have to speak about this, and he was called on, and he never had any time at home, or when he was home, he was always being called there. Then, of course... community with people, and how they were working together﻿15 RP: (cont.) towards freedom and what they were doing, contribution. He asked the question, "Why should I expect personal happiness when so much depends on any contribution that I can make?" But I find myself asking myself, "Why should I expect personal happiness, if people want to find out what, who I am or what I am or what I have done...?" MMG: So you've really been, you've given yourself. RP: Yes. Somewhat resigned to whatever contribution I can make, if I'm making any contributions to, especially with young people, where I go to schools to see if I can do them any... There are timeswhen I feel I can hardly get up and go, and once I get there and I see their reaction, I feel somewhat rewarded. MMG: What kind of advice do you give young people today? RP: I try to get them to look within themselves to find out what they're trying to do in any given situation, and to look around them and see the opportunities that they have, and do whatever they can to make the best of the opportunities, to develop their potential, as they grow up, to get the very best they can in education, get the very best they can as human beings, and to above all have respect in God's eyes, for themselves and other people. MMG: How do you see the racial situation today? Do you think it's better than when you were working in Alabama? RP: I would have to say it is better, even with all the problems that they have. Because if you go back to the days of old, the incident of my arrest in Montgomery and shortly after the Supreme Court decision on racial segregation in schools and...many things. I'd have to say, with all the problems they have now, that there's still much racism and reactionary attitudes among people, but you'd have to say it's better, and it should be even better still. MMG: What gives you the most satisfaction now, as you look back over your life and your accomplishments, all that's happened to you? What pleases you? RP: The fact that we have acquired enough freedom to be able to be vocal and to say what we wish, act as human beings, and to make... politically to see many of our people in top positions in the government, all the way from Washington to local government. MMG: I want to think you for this interview. Thank you very much.﻿ROSA PARKS..