 Ruth Edmonds Hill: Florence Jacobs Edmonds: Ruth Edmonds Hill: Florence Jacobs Edmonds: Ruth Edmonds Hill: Florence Jacobs Edmonds: Ruth Edmonds Hill: Florence Jacobs Edmonds: Ruth Edmonds Hill: Florence Jacobs Edmonds: Ruth Edmonds Hill: Florence Jacobs Edmonds: Ruth Edmonds Hill: Florence Jacobs Edmonds: Ruth Edmonds Hill: This is Ruth Edmonds Hill, and I'm interviewing my mother, Florence Lewis Jacobs Edmonds, for the Black Women Oral History Project. I'm sort of excited about doing it; I don't know how you feel. [laughter] I guess we'll start with your birth, and then we'll talk about your parents and grandparents, and then get back to you and your growing up, and so forth. So, where were you born, and when, also? I was born the twenty-seventh of March, 1890, and in those days, you were born at home. Did you have a midwife? No, we had a doctor. Midwives weren't known around here at that time. Not in the North, but they probably would have been in the South. I was the second of six children—I had two sisters, and there were three brothers. Then we might as well get their names and, if you know when they were born and want to tell us something about them, that would be nice, too Well, we were born in the same house. The house where we are now? Or the... No. ...other one back there? The other one in the back. When my mother got married, her father built the house in the rear of the yard, for them, and we were all born in that house. Incidentally, my mother and father both died in that house. As I said, I had two sisters, one older. She is ninety-one years old So she's a couple of years older than you. To be exact, eighteen months older than I— twenty months. Twenty months? Almost two years.﻿2 FJE: Twenty months older than I am. My younger sister was born in August, and I think she's in her seventies. REH: She was the baby of the family? FJE: No. There was a boy younger. There were three boys, and all three boys are dead. And the three girls are living. The oldest boy was named Maitland, and he died in 1938. He served in the First World War, wouldn't it have been? REH: Yes. I remember seeing some pictures. I don't remember whether it was he or the others. FJE: He was the only one that served in the service. And he was a linoleum layer, by trade. REH: „ Oh, yes, I remember that. FJE: And worked in connection with one of our large dry goods stores here in town. REH: So that was Maitland. Now, he was—what order? Then there was Harrison and Bertrand. He must have been the baby. FJE: Maitland died before '31. REH: Before James* was born? FJE: James was born in '31, in February, and Father died in June that year. REH: Yes, 'cause I remember they were close. I mean, how much can you remember when you're six years old? But I remember something about that. FJE: Maitland died in the hospital with a ruptured appendix. REH: So that was Maitland. FJE: Not much was known about those things way back then. Now Harrison, the last, died fairly recently. I haven't the date... REH: That's okay. FJE: About his background, he attended Hampton Institute in Hampton, Virginia, and was an agriculturist by profession. He taught agriculture at a school in North Carolina, and then later, after he married, he taught at Bordentown... REH: Yes, Bordentown Manual Training School. FJE: In New Jersey. REH: You know how I remember, one of the interviewees in the Black Women Oral History Project is a woman in New York City now, Frances Grant, and in reading her interview—she didn't say where she had been—she mentioned this school for black children that was in New Jersey, and we wrote to get information. I found out it was Bordentown, so then I wrote to her, and she did know James Edmonds﻿3 REH: (cont.) Uncle Harry and the whole family. FJE: That's interesting. My youngest brother died about three years ago. I forgot to say that Harry—we called him Harry—he moved to Washington, D.C., and there worked for the government. And my youngest brother was Bertrand, he also attended Hampton Institute. In Pittsfield he was known as "Sticky." REH: Oh, yes, yes. "Uncle Sticky." [laughter] FJE: And he was good at sports. He spent all his life in the South, and again, later moved to Washington, D.C. REH: What did he do there? I don't remember. FJE: He was connected with the federal government. REH: I don't remember what. Well, it doesn't make any difference. FJE: With an institution, a prison... REH: 'Cause it's your life we mainly want to deal with. FJE: It seems odd that out of six children, three girls and three boys, the girls are still living and all the boys are dead. REH: Yes. Another thing I know is—when you were telling it, you didn't mention it—that you became a nurse and each of the boys in a sense, had a profession, something that they did. But, now Aunt Bessie and Ariel didn't. They worked, did domestic work... FJE: No. REH: ...mostly? FJE: No, Bessie was a bookkeeper in one of our old grocery stores called Macken's, and Ariel worked at the...in Mandigo's, another grocery store, in the pastry counter, and waited on customers. REH: Oh, I see. So then it was later on that they did the domestic work. FJE: ...when they did domestic work. REH: I was just wondering whether we should review the...just get the names in the birth order, if you remember them. So Aunt Bessie was first... FJE: ... then myself, Maitland, Harrison, Ariel, and Bertrand. REH: Then Bert. I never knew who was really the baby of the family. Now I was wondering about your mother and father and where they were born and things like that. What their names are, too. FJE: My mother was born here in Pittsfield, and it had to be in this house where we're now living. REH: Yes, that makes sense.﻿4 FJE: And there was a large family of them, but only two lived to any age— my mother, who was ninety-one when she died, and my Uncle George... REH: Oh, I remember him. FJE: George Harrison, who...he was a professional barber, and his customers were all white. He later moved to Newark, New Jersey, and I got a whole lot of help from him while I was in training at Lincoln in New York City. REH: Financial help, moral help, emotional? FJE: Someone to visit, as much as anything. He gave me a little financial help to travel back and forth. But all the other children really died at... REH: ...early, young. No, you didn't give her name. FJE: My mother's name was Lydia—Lydia Harrison. I don't recall her having any middle name, REH: I had always figured if I ever had a daughter, I was going to name her Lydia. FJE: What was it about Lydia that you liked? REH: I don't know. Well, I like...I loved Grandma, too—one thing. [laughter] I don't know, she always meant a lot to me. I just always figured if I ever had a daughter, she was going to be named Lydia. FJE: Well, this is beside the point. This is the daughter of a friend of Milton___ well, recently had a baby and named it Lucretia. Milton said, "What did they name it that for?" [laughter] REH: Sort of an old-fashioned name. I'm not sure how happy the child will be with it, but... What kind of education did Grandma have? FJE: Went through the schools. Before she graduated, she graduated from Pittsfield, here, but they had moved to Portland, and... REH: Portland, Maine. FJE: Portland, Maine, and got some schooling there, and then when the family moved back, she went to Pittsfield, as I said, graduated from the high school in Pittsfield. REH: Oh, I see. So she may have gotten elementary education here, and then they went up to Maine, and then they came back? FJE: I couldn't tell you anything about the schooling as far as my uncle was concerned, but I suppose it was probably on the same basis, as far as hers. 'Cause in those days, it was just your elementary and high school, you might as well say. REH: You mean, everything up to that was counted elementary, sort of? They didn't go elementary, secondary, or primary, secondary—whatever they do? FJE: No. I don't think even when I went to school...because we went through to the ninth grade, and then from the ninth grade you had your high school, three﻿5 FJE: (cont.) years of high school. It wasn't till you children really got to school that there was kindergarten, elementary, junior high, and senior high. REH: About your father... FJE: My father, I could say... Would you want to know more about my grandfather at this time? REH: I'm going to discuss them, too, so, you can just put it in any order you want to put it in. FJE: Well, my mother's father was a minister. He was born in the South, moved to Philadelphia at a young age. It was soon after his moving that the whole family was set free of slave parentage, and that they themselves were slaves. REH: His parents were slaves, so... FJE: His parents were slaves, and he was a slave when he was born, but soon after... REH: I think I remember reading in the booklet that he wrote, he was nine years old, or something like that, when they were freed? FJE: Yes. I can't think offhand when he was born. REH: No, that's interesting, because that was... FJE: Eighteen eight or 1809—I think he was... REH: Yes, but it was long before the Civil War and all that. Do you happen to know how his family or his parents happened to get freed? FJE: No, I don't know anything more about it than that. He learned a shoemaking trade, and that has helped him, I guess, in life, while he was...even when he was preaching, so as to support his family. Now whether you'd want more about him at this time... He was really the first minister of the church that we belong to. That was formed by seven black people that was a break-off from the white church—it was a Congregational church. What inspired them to break off was, at Communion time, they weren't allowed to have Communion. REH: They couldn't have it at all or... It wasn't a matter of waiting till the whites were through and... FJE: No, 'cause they were... REH: Just couldn't have it? FJE: Didn't have it, didn't have it. REH: I didn't know that. FJE: And that's how they come to break off, these four men and three black women, and they formed what was called the Second Congregational Church, and that is the oldest black church in Pittsfield, and in fact, it's the third oldest black [Congregational] church in the United States.﻿6 REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: Oh, that's interesting. Do you happen to know where... The others were probably in the South or something. 'Cause there was Bishop Allen and the Methodist... He was a Methodist... But you're talking about Congregational churches? Oh. So it probably was more than... Here in the North, most likely. But even now, there are only five black Congregational churches in Massachusetts. This is an interesting fact, in a hundred years, we only had three ministers. But in the next ten years, we had... [laughter] ...you had at least three more. Three more ministers. [laughs] Well, I guess in those days, ministers stayed a long time anyhow, and... Well, probably the feeling between the congregation and the minister was different in those days, too. Not only that, but the people are different now than they were in those days. Now you didn't mention his name. His name was Samuel Harrison. Do you know what his wife's name was? Ellen, her name was Ellen. It was his first wife; after she died, he married again—her name was Bridget, and she lived in Springfield most of her time, so we didn't have too much to do with... Oh, you mean, even while he was here in Pittsfield? Yes, preaching. So we didn't have too much dealings with her, as far as that goes. And incidentally, he was chaplain of the 54th black Massachusetts volunteers at the time of the Civil War. And I think Shaw was the___ Oh, yes, Colonel Robert Gould Shaw. He was, well, the colonel, or whatever, in charge of that regiment. In those days, they didn't believe in paying black soldiers and it was practically impossible for him to get any pay as a chaplain; that was one reason that forced him out of the...when he got out of the service... But he was already a minister here in Pittsfield... And after service he came back here, This is an interesting fact—I think it's the Old North Church, isn't it, in Boston, where they have... Oh, yes, I remember you were telling me about that. I think it's Old North Church. FJE: ...where there's the sword of this Shaw. This was the picture when I was﻿7 FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: (cont.) visiting there one time, and we were looking over things, and we told a curator about it, and so my name is written on the back of a... ...picture of the regiment? Or Shaw. Of Shaw. And my relationship to...how it came to be. The [Second Congregational] church is still in existence, and it has had three homes. Now, let's see, the one on First Street, which is where I grew up. And that was an old Methodist church—it was moved there and more or less put together. Then back in 1940 we bought a house—remodeled it into a church—way across town, where most of the colored folks lived—as they were called in those days—the minister felt that they would go to church better there than they would 'cross town. But that didn't make any difference. [laughter] If you're going to go, you're going to go. Or you're not going to go. And then in 19...I'm trying to think of the date. When was the church— was it '64? Let me see, next year is... It's probably in some of these papers you showed me, somewhere. Next year will be 1980. Yes, this is just beginning of 1980. Well, this year we will have paid up the mortgage, and that was a ten-year mortgage. So we started building the church in '69. I think our first meeting in the church was on Christmas in '69. That was it, yes. But the interesting fact over that, to help us with the mortgage, the white Congregational church and our church formed a committee, which we called the Support Committee, and every year, in February, we have what we'd call a Brotherhood Banquet, and that has helped out. We used to have barbeques in the summer, and of recent years it was through this fellowship, this Support Committee, this fellowship dinner that we have helped to pay the mortgage; and it got to the point where not too much money was... We'd gotten far enough along, and it was really more of a fellowship meeting than it was a money-maker. So then the First Church decided to give us at least two hundred dollars every month, and our church pledged three hundred dollars every month, and that's the way these last two or three years our mortgage has been paid. Well, it's interesting that the church started with the break-off from the First Congregational Church, and then later on all this friendship and fellowship. And we feel we should continue on with some kind of fellowship dinners, whether to be just the two churches, or whether we can get all the churches involved in it. But this coming year it'll be just the two churches. That'll be nice. Well, I need to go back because we mentioned your mother as Lydia, and we never really got to talk about your father. I'm going to have a hard time keeping these things in my head.﻿8 FJE: My father* was born in Dalton—that was a little town not too far away from here—and he had Indian blood and white blood in him...white blood was part Canadian. I never knew his father, but we knew his mother very well, and he had several sisters that we... And on Sunday, our father always took us over to his house to visit with his mother. Well, what we were more interested in was the funny papers, seeing we were...belonged to a minister's family, funny papers were never allowed in our house. We always went over there on Sundays for the Sunday papers. [laughter] Let me see, he worked in a restaurant as a cook, and in later years, he was a porter in a dry good...in one of our larger dry goods stores. And—what do you call it?—it wasn't exactly, chef...of a white men's club, the upper class, they would have meetings regularly, and he would... And later on he did catering as well in his... REH: That's the thing I had remembered. He has his own catering business. FJE: He did a whole lot of catering. He was involved in church work, and he's the one that brought us to church. My mother seldom if ever went to church, and he was the one that brought us right from church, always. REH: Church? Over to his... FJE: ...as children. So we grew up in the Sunday school, you might say, and in those days we had... Our young people's was called Christian Endeavor, rather than Youth Fellowship, and with that we got involved with, through that we were involved with white... But outside of that we didn't do much mingling, because there were very few... The only time you would meet with white would be in school, because your other life was practically all — REH: Was at home? FJE: ...was at home and playing with the children in your neighborhood, which of course were white, and very few black families in this neighborhood. REH: As 1 was growing up, I remember our family and, you know, our cousins, and basically that was it, wasn't it, on this side of town? FJE: There were a few other oltl families. Another old family lived down on Lake Street, across from—the red house, where the Principes—that was a colored family there. And on the corner here was a Gardner family. REH: Well, I didn't know them, did I? FJE: You must have known some of them. The mother's name was Lucy Gardner—they later moved out to Berkshire. REH: I remember a little bit. FJE: You probably vaguely recall... And then there was a Treadwell and Shields family that lived... You knew Harry Blake, did you? REH: Yes. FJE: Well, they lived in this neighborhood. * James Jacobs﻿9 REH: I was going to ask you something else. You said that your father took you to church, and your mother stayed home. Now, the mother who stayed home was the daughter of the man who was the minister at the time? How come Grandma didn't go to church? [laughs] FJE: Whether she was too busy having children or what... [laughter] She never did any shopping or marketing. My father did it, bought all the baby diapers, all those kind of things; she never appeared on the street when she was pregnant. She saw herself once, and that was enough for her, so she never went in the street while she was pregnant. REH: Oh, my goodness. With the number of children that she had, it sounded like she was pregnant a good part of her...life, and she never got out! Oh, that's interesting. Oh. So does...anything else you want to tell me about either your parents or grandparents that you think of? FJE: We are the last on my mother's side, and... No, 'cause Warren is on that side, isn't he? REH: He's a collateral line. FJE: No, he was on my father's side. REH: Jacobs, he's Jacobs. Warren Jacobs. So you are... FJE: He's on the Jacobs side. REH: So, see, there was Uncle George. Now did Uncle George...he never married, so... FJE: He married, but he had no children. Ariel has four children and four grandchildren, hasn't she? REH: I'll just put in for the record that Ariel is your sister, and her name is Ariel Dillard. FJE: Ariel's got more, because Frances has got three children. REH: Frances has three children, yes, so that's three grandchildren there... FJE: And Gordie's got the four. REH: Yes, so seven grandchildren. FJE: And I have only two grandchildren. REH: Yes, out of... FJE: Four children. REH: ...four marriages, of your children, you only managed to get two grandchildren. [laughter] We're not doing very well, are we? FJE: And those two grandchildren are all by one daughter. REH: Yes. That's why I say, we're not doing very well. We're not staying home﻿10 REH: (cont.) and doing our homework. [laughter] Let's see. Unless there's something else you want to say about your parents and grandparents, why don't we just go on to your childhood. If we think of something later on, we can just come back and talk about it. Now, when you were growing up, how did you get along with your brothers and sisters? FJE: All right, as far as I can remember. The whole time we went to school, all schools were within walking distance. One was right down a stone's throw from the house—you remember where that was, don't you? Right down here... REH: I don't remember whether it was a red schoolhouse or what? Somehow red... FJE: ___little old brown schoolhouse? REH: ...comes to mind, but I remember that... Do you remember the name of it? Not that it makes any difference... FJE: No, I don't recall what we called it. And later on I went to school, high school, with some... I don't know how to explain it. REH: Oh, it was the one where we went to junior high. FJE: The green...the little green...across from where the city hall is now and that...where the police station is now, in there, that's where we went to school afterwards. REH: Oh, I see. I never knew there was a school... FJE: There was a school there, and if I recall right, it seems to me my graduation was held in what is now here in the Common. REH: That's the school I was thinking of, where I went to junior high, I thought that you had gone to high school or it was a high school, but that's where graduation was. FJE: That's where graduation was. REH: So what was it called when I went there, Central Junior High? I don't remember. FJE: It was Central Junior High in your day and time. REH: So it was a high school when you... FJE: Yes, and then it was Central Junior High, and then it was BCC... REH: Berkshire Community College. So what's it now? FJE: Nothing. They're getting ready to turn it into a senior citizens home. REH: Well, when you were growing up, did you... FJE: After school, there was nothing special for you to do, except to come home and play in your own neighborhood, play in your own back yard. REH: Yes, I was going to ask you about that kind of thing.﻿11 FJE: And with your children in your neighborhood. There weren't the after school activities that there were when my children were...when you were children. REH: So when you were playing in the neighborhood, did you play with the other black children or the white or was it mixed? FJE: There weren't really any black, it was mostly white children. REH: You said there were very... I didn't know whether...your family was basically it, even though there were other black families around. FJE: I don't remember too much about school, as far as that goes. Had no problems, as I recall. Got along in school all right, and did well. REH: What kind of subjects did you like in school? FJE: Of course we didn't have that, we had grammar, reading, writing, and arithmetic REH: The three R's? [laughter] FJE: Which I think they need more, pay more attention nowadays to the three R's than they do. REH: It wouldn't hurt. FJE: No, it wouldn't hurt. We had, I think we had exceptional teachers in school— in fact, I had geometry and algebra, and I remember I would have to teach geometry to you children 'cause... REH: I was always terrible in math! FJE: ...because you never got it good from your teacher, and I was able to teach you your algebra and geometry, so that's why I say we apparently had good teachers, as I could remember those kind of things. I graduated high up in my class in high school. REH: Yes. Arreta* just showed me the newspaper that has your speech which you were... What role were you? Several people gave speeches, but I don't know, I mean, you were valedictorian... FJE: Valedictorian of the... REH: ...of the class of 1908, from Pittsfield High School. So it was about the Westward Movement or something or other. FJE: Pathfinders of the West. I didn't know that the paper was still in existence. REH: Still around, I know. I was surprised when Reta brought it down. FJE: One of these days I'm going to read it and see what I said way back then. REH: I was wondering how you or your family thought of themselves as far as socially what social level. How did you think about that? ^sometimes called Reta﻿12 FJE: Well, as I say, weren't too many colored families around here. My father belonged to an Odd Fellows club, and we were allowed to go to the Odd Fellows ball, which happened once a year. Otherwise you didn't go to any... REH: You didn't go to any dances. FJE: No, you didn't go to dances. It was only a thing called a ball that you... And on Sundays, growing up, as we were in our teens, we used to go on hikes on Sunday. It was a mixed group, but we weren't a paired group, and we'd go on these hikes, but we'd always come back for evening service, and another hobby we liked to do was to climb Mount Greylock. We'd go out, take the last trolley out at night and climb the mountain with all your wraps to keep you warm, 'cause you went up to see the sunrise. And you'd bunk in the shade, or anyplace where you could find a spot to keep warm and wrap up. REH: Didn't have any cabins or anything? FJE: No, there weren't any cabins for you to... And we'd come down in the morning, but we would always show up at church. I'm sure children wouldn't do that these days. REH: No, they wouldn't do that these days, no. FJE: They wouldn't even climb Greylock at nighttime. REH: But these were just friends, like from Lenox and from Dalton and... FJE: Pittsfield and... REH: Now, outside of your father taking you to visit on Sunday after church, did you do any other traveling or visiting when you were young that you recall? FJE: No. REH: Another thing I was wondering about, was there anyone that you thought of who was...think of now, perhaps... [break] FJE: As we were children we used to have Sunday school picnics, and we would take the trolley to what was known as Pontoosuc Lake, and take the boat over to the other side of the lake and have our picnic in the grove there. And picnics were more or less of a community affair—it wasn't just a church affair. That carried on for a goodly number of years, till one of our later ministers didn't like it because people came from all over to the picnic, and never came to church. So since then there hasn't been much of a church picnic. REH: Yes, 'cause I can remember going on these picnics up to Pontoosuc Lake when we were growing up, too. I was going to ask you... Well, I was thinking of childhood, but it could be any time, I guess—but thinking of childhood, any particular person that was a great influence on your life? FJE: No, I can't say there was. REH: Well, let me get back to your going to school. So we got to high school... FJE: Got me through high school.﻿13 REH: Got you through high school, more or less. What did you do after high school? FJE: Well, then I went to work in a doctor's office. REH: What kind of work were you doing? FJE: I did his bookkeeping, and cleaned the office, and answered calls, made his appointments, and so forth and so on. REH: Was that sort of a funny kind of combination? Doing bookkeeping, but also cleaning the office? If you were the only woman in the office, you did everything, was that it? FJE: Well, I guess that's probably what all of them did, in those days. And at nights I went to business college, business school, and took up shorthand and typewriting. REH: I was going to ask you how you got to know about bookkeeping, 'cause you did this right out of high school? FJE: As I recall, I went from high school to the doctor's office. In those days shorthand was what they called... REH: It was Pitman. FJE: Pitman. And that was the hardest kind of shorthand that was. REH: It was harder than Gregg? Not like this speedwriting that they have today with, where you use the letters that you already know about. You worked for— what was it?—Doctor Dodd, as I remember. FJE: Doctor Dodd. REH: How long did you work for him? FJE: Well, I left there in 1917, and he was born of missionary parents, and it was the time of the war, 1917, and he went into service; he went into service, and it was that time I decided I would go into training. I sort of applied to the white hospital here in town. They didn't say no, they just said it had never been done before. REH: No, never had any colored before. FJE: So I was steered to Lincoln Hospital and Home for Nurses. REH: This is Ruth Hill, continuing the interview with my mother. I forgot to mention the date yesterday when I started. Today is January 4, 1980. Now are there any corrections or additions that you want to make to yesterday's... FJE: I think the correction is with my mother's birthdate, and age, and death. REH: Yes, I can't remember whether we actually gave a birth date, but she was ninety-three when she died, rather than ninety-one, and she died in 1954. Then we can go back and figure out when she was born.﻿14 FJE: I think it'll be interesting to know what kind of courses were given in high school at that time. There was what we called the classical courses, the Latin-German course, the Latin-scientific course, and the English course. I took the Latin-scientific course. REH: That's interesting. Now when they think of the college course they still don't have it divided out quite like that. I can't imagine somebody taking both Latin and German, or whatever, in high school these days. You think that's what was offered or... FJE: Mine was Latin and French. REH: In the Latin-scientific course. FJE: But I don't think they stress Latin in school nowadays, do they, like they used to? REH: ~ T don't know. FJE: I think they do not. But you had to have Latin then to get away to college. REH: To do anything, yes. Another thing I was wondering about, after we finished yesterday, whether there were any friends or classmates from your high school days or earlier that you wanted to mention for any reason? FJE: I've run into several, and hear about several, and some of them are still living. When they had the "This is Your Life" program, quite a few of them showed up at the affair. REH: Yes. We'll get to that later on when we talk about honors. I guess that's where we'll put that one. When I was looking over the "This is Your Life" program, I noticed that they called you "Jakie," and I was wondering when that started? FJE: "Jakie" started in training. That was my nickname in... REH: ___when you were in nurses' training. So before that you had just been called Florence or whatever. Oh, I think we're at the point where we want to talk about your training as a nurse, and I was wondering what made you decide to become a nurse? FJE: I really don't know whether it was working in a doctor's office and dealing with patients... REH: You mentioned that you had applied to the local hospital, so at that time, mostly you would just apply to a hospital for training. I know it's probably much more formal now, with...you have to have a college degree, and all kinds of things. But you would go from high school into nurses' training, and you would apply to a hospital. Now, what made you decide to go to New York after not getting in here in Pittsfield? FJE: There were only so few black nursing schools, and that was your problem, and I don't recall how I got the name of Lincoln, but that was the nearest, and probably that's... REH: How long a course?﻿15 REH: FJE: FJE: It was a three-year course. Training was altogether different in those days and times. We started in what was the old folks' ward—that was a ward of, I think, about forty beds or so, and there were all kinds of old people with their many ailments. And of course, you took care of them and dressed their sores. You also had to scrub the floor and scrub the johns, and all those things. We had to be at chapel at six o'clock in the morning, and that was compulsory. REH: Every day? FJE: Every day. And we had chapel of a Sunday evening, that you were expected to be at; and you put in a twelve-hour shift, and you had a half-day off during the week, and four hours on Sunday. You often had the chance to pick your Sunday hours, especially if you wanted to go to church; it wasn't always possible to get the hours that you especially wanted. Now, how much time would you spend, say, in the classroom, as opposed to actually being in the ward, and on working? As far as your classes, no matter what time they took place, you had to be there, even if you worked all night, you had to be at class, even if it was at seven o'clock in the morning. Nowadays it's so different, your class and work shift are more or less separate—we don't have classes on really the days that you're working on the floor. They try... REH: It was more difficult, that's for sure. FJE: More difficult, is right. I spent a lot of time in the office, and the fact that I knew shorthand and typing—I spent a lot of time in there. Before I finished, I was put in charge of the GYN [gynecology] floor, because there was no one to man that, and I had charge of the operating room and everything, and I had to get that on my own, without any actual... REH: Without study or... FJE: ...actual supervision, working under someone to get it. REH: They must have thought you were worthy of it! They felt it was in good hands. FJE: Of course, I was older than most that go into training, because, you see, I was twenty-seven when I went in. REH: I was going to say, thinking back, you worked in Doctor Dodd's office for quite a while. FJE: And ethics was a strict thing that they taught you. You couldn't go through a door or into an elevator ahead of anyone that was even an hour older than you were. They could snatch you back. REH: Really? FJE: Yes. REH: Oh, goodness. You mean, this was in training or... FJE: Yes, that was the rules and regulations.﻿16 REH: Everybody went around checking everybody's birth date? [laugh] FJE: Well, that's about it, you know. You knew your own class, anybody got there before you did... As I say, even if it was just an hour ahead, they could snatch you back and let them go in first. REH: Now, did they have certain periods of the year that there would be an entering class or how did... FJE: The class was in September. Let's see, this was getting near wartime; they were taking February classes, and September classes, and we all graduated at... It later shifted on so we all graduated the same year, as far as that goes. Then later on,it changed to just the one entrance date. REH: So now what year did you enter? FJE: I went in in 1917. REH: Yes, so that was the year the U.S. entered... FJE: And most of the girls were from the...more girls were from the South than there were from the North. They went into training in my day and time. REH: Do you know why? FJE: No. Whether the opportunities for work were better for the black in the North than they were in the South... REH: That's what I was wondering—at least that was the reason that came to mind. FJE: That's the only thing that I can think of. REH: So when you finished training, then you stayed in New York and worked, or what happened? FJE: No, when I finished training, the year that I finished, two scholarships were given for a year at Teachers College [Columbia University] and I was offered one, and you had to find your own board and lodging, or place to live—that was a problem. But I borrowed on my insurance, and was able to take up with it, and I'm quite sure that if I'd been at a white hospital here in Pittsfield, I never would have been selected, given that opportunity. REH: So what did you study at Teachers College? FJE: At Teachers College, I took up what was called hospital social service, and did field work as well, going into the homes and visiting people—it was more or less like interviewing them. And also, they promised you that when you finished this course, you would be offered a job, so my job turned out to be on the Henry Street—Lillian Wald was the beginning of Visiting Nursing— Henry Street Settlement, where I got my... REH: Yes. Very famous place to... FJE: Famous place, and I have a certificate in hospital social service, as well as one in public health nursing, from down there. My field, after I finished, my work was all really in Harlem, 'cause Lincoln Hospital was in the Bronx.﻿17 FJE: (cont.) This might be interesting—that all the nurses were black, but the doctors, and practically all the patients were white, because we were in a Jewish neighborhood. We got very few colored patients. And the board of directors, of course, was white. But in Harlem, my experience in Harlem, was working with black patients in the field, under Henry Street's nursing. And my field work for hospital service was between the hospital and the black community. REH: So, as Columbia is really close to the black community now, where a lot of black... FJE: That's right in the___I was going to say, next door to Harlem, and my district ran from 112th Street up to 145th Street, and from about Fifth Avenue over to Eighth Avenue and beyond. REH: So this was like visiting nurses. FJE: I was a visiting nurse. I traveled from that... REH: Lot of walking? FJE: Well, you had to... REH: ...or did you get around... FJE: You had the trolleys in those days and times; you did a lot of walking, of course. And this was an interesting thing, we had prenatal classes, which I taught; and in prenatal classes in New York in 1921, we nurses did more than the visiting nurses in Pittsfield did when I joined in 1945. There we did urinalysis and blood pressures, and, in fact, we had home delivery. We went out on home delivery and even we did home delivery. And here, I found out when I joined the VNA (Visiting Nurses' Association), the nurse wasn't even to do urinalysis or blood pressures in the home. The doctor did that. REH: Yes, the doctor had to do it. FJE: And also, when I joined the VNA here, I was the only one of the nurses that had any college background. You see, I came out in 1920, and I didn't join the VNA here till '45, so it shows what a difference it was in the training that they gave you there and here. Of course, with our home deliveries, we made visits in the home so as to tell them how to set up for the delivery. They were supposed to call the doctor, he was supposed to get there first, but oftentimes you found you were the one that did the actual... REH: You were there, yes. FJE: ...job. And in those days, you visited after the mother had the baby, you went into the home about daily for, I think, as I recall, about twelve days or so, helping with the baby. Nowadays, the mothers don't stay in the hospital that long. Also, in those days, your insurance...Metropolitan had an insurance policy that covered patients sick at home, and they collected through them with your deliveries and all kinds of illnesses. More people were sick at home, really, than went to the hospital. Now it's because of the new type of insurance, more people go to the hospital.﻿18 REH: ...hospital, yes. The more centralized care. FJE: More centralized care. And your insurance companies—and I think the John Hancock too—but when they went to more of this Blue Cross and that type of insurance, the insurance companies cut out their paying for care in the homes. REH: So it was Lincoln Hospital, Teachers College, Henry Street Settlement... What else about your New York life? FJE: I got married while I was working in the Henry Street Settlement; I got married in '22. I graduated in 1920, and my future husband had been working in Pittsfield. When he became interested, he moved to New York and managed to f ind a j ob. REH: Oh. So, I've got to sort this out. This was next on my list, but he had already met you in Pittsfield? FJE: Oh, yes, that's where I met him. In fact, he'd been working in Pittsfield for some time, was sort of interested in me, but I don't know whether I was that___ REH: ...interested in him? FJE: ...in him. [laughter] He followed me to New York and lived there and... REH: Okay. Well, let's start with his name and where he was born and when, and things that you know about his early life. FJE: Well, I might tell you this, too, with your home nursing, you were never molested, going into these homes, at all. And I always felt that our bag and uniform was our passport. You hear of so much molesting these days in New York City and in Harlem and in that area, but there was never anything of that type done to nurses. REH: That's nice. So you felt safe going anywhere. FJE: Oh, you felt safe, you never gave it a thought. REH: Did you sometimes have to go at night, or did the visiting nurse always go in the day? FJE: No, it was a day... Always in the day. REH: But even so, in winter it gets dark early and... FJE: And while I was in training, and even after I finished, I was an organist of the Grace Congregational Church down there in Harlem, whenever it was possible for me to get to church. REH: I guess we never got into that, about your studying music and things like that, or how you learned to be... FJE: That's right, I never gave... REH: No. I had thought of it for later on, and thought, well, we could put in hobbies, or something. But let's talk about it now.﻿19 FJE: Well, in those days when you were growing up, it was the custom for every girl—you might as well say—to know how to play some kind of instrument. We had an organ in the house, but our music teacher was a piano teacher, so we...it was an old-style pump organ. REH: Yes. Like we had when we were growing up? FJE: Yes. And so I really took piano lessons, as far as that goes, and you — REH: And you transferred it to the organ? FJE: ...transferred it to the organ. And sort of got into the organ on my own, you might say. REH: So did you start piano lessons when you were young? FJE: Yes, we started them very young. We went to her house, of course, to take your lesson, and your parents saw that you did your practicing at home, [laughs] That was compulsory, you might as well say. REH: We can get back to Papa then. FJE: I don't recall just when we bought that piano down there, but that's probably been the one that we... REH: Which one are you talking about? That one that's in the house now? FJE: Yes, must be. REH: Oh, I knew it was an old one. I mean, I remember from ever since I was visiting Grandma, so... FJE: So I don't recall just how long we had it. REH: Something just occurred to me—I was thinking of the number of the rooms in the house, how all eight of you fit into, fitted into the house. FJE: All eight of us? REH: Well, were there six children? FJE: No, four children. REH: Three sisters... FJE: No, no, no. That's right. REH: There's six—there's six of you, yes, and then Grandma and Grandpa. And all of a sudden it came to me that, even though there is one, two, three—three rooms upstairs, that are fairly large, and... FJE: We all slept upstairs. I think there was a double bed and a sort of a small bed in each room, so that we all... REH: So it probably worked out, the three boys in one and the three girls in another,﻿20 REH: (cont.) and Grandma and Grandpa... FJE: Where were we now? REH: We're at Papa. FJE: Well, your father's name was William Bailey Edmonds. He was born in Clover, Virginia, June 2nd, 1888. I don't know much about his family. I do recall he had a brother that lived in New York, and a sister in Brockton, and I think there was a sister in Long Island. As I say, what brought him North—but he came to Brockton, and I imagine he must have worked in the shoe factory there, because that's where he first was married and had a son. There was a separation there, and he came to Pittsfield because there was a friend here that had moved from Brockton and seemed to have liked it here. The son stayed in Brockton till he finished high school. He worked as a porter in several stores, and in a bank, ran the elevator and so forth, in a bank. This was after we married. He was active in church, and that's probably how I really got to know him. I can't recall, at this present time, what kind of work he did when he moved to New York, but part of our married life, he worked nights and I worked days. We got married in '22, and we probably didn't stay only about a year and a half after marriage before we moved back here to Pittsfield. The reason we moved back, he felt that New York was no place to raise a family. We'd been more or less scouting around in that area, in the suburbs, about places, but he felt he would rather come back to Pittsfield, and that's why we moved back to... I'm glad he did! I really like Pittsfield, myself. Can I interrupt? What about Papa as a composer and as a singer? Well, I might say this, he didn't have much formal education, but he really was what you could call a self-educated man, because he believed in reading and listening to people, and he was musically inclined. In fact, he had composed one or two...some music, and I know he had one or two published, and we have a... Oh, I know—-the piano, the roll... The roll, piano... He had quite a few of those—in fact, I have some copies of those things, some of those piano rolls still around. Well, when you moved out of the house that we were born in, moved down here, then Arreta gave...all of us got one of the rolls of music. Yes. So before we moved back to town, we had managed to find a house that we wanted to buy, and he had also found a job—he knew where to get a job. This was in a men's clothing store, this was George Newman, and we've been friends of that family practically all our life. You were connected with them, with their son... Relationships are interesting, yes. We lived with my mother for a while, while the family was vacating the house and was getting it in shape to move in. That was a seven-room house, and in the beginning we lived just on the one floor. I didn't go to work when I came back to town. I felt that they weren't ready for a black nurse, so I REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE:﻿21 FJE: (cont.) made no effort at finding... In fact, I stayed home until my youngest child was in high school. I took in sewing and that made extra pennies for us. The oldest child, Ruth, was born in 1925, and the next one was born in November, '26, and then one girl was born in March, '28, and a boy was born in February, '31. REH: Well, let's have a few words about each, if you want. You don't necessarily have to say anything about me, unless you want to. FJE: Their schooling was the normal school... REH: We just went around the corner to go to grammar school. FJE: In fact, all the schools that they went to, you went to, were in walking distance. REH: About three blocks, at the most. Four... FJE: After school, I don't think there was any after-school activities that you children went to. I believed in having 'em playing at home rather than going in someone else's, because I recall we never had any grass in our front yard until after the children got... REH: We were all tearing it up, playing. [laughs] FJE: That all stayed bare the whole time you children were growing up, until after you'd gotten grown. I preferred the children coming, neighbor's children coming over and playing than my children going over to the neighbors' and playing. Now at that time we went through a depression— was it in 1929?—where they gave food stamps... REH: No, the ones you showed me were from the war, from later on, right? FJE: Was it later? REH: Yes, 1940s, during the war. FJE: Well, all right, then. That's got to be a mistake, then, because I was... While they were growing up, there was what was called the WPA (Works Progress Administration) around here, and they had programs on the Common that you children took in, and that's how you became sort of interested in music, too, didn't you? REH: Well, I remember I started to take piano lessons. FJE: Yes, and Reta took 'em, too, because rather than having one black all by herself, it was a case of two together. I don't recall where you took 'em at... REH: It was over on Columbus Avenue someplace, some kind of big old, empty factory building, and I, as I recall, I didn't take piano lessons long because I was afraid to go into the building. I didn't like it. [laughs] I don't know about Reta. FJE: No, but I know, she went with you, and you went farther in music to that extent, whereas... farther than she did, but you never...﻿22 REH: Yes, I mean I didn't take any more lessons, but I just... FJE: ...because you didn't want the, like the idea of practicing. And in those days, I didn't force you to. And James, the youngest boy, he liked music and he would practice before he would go out and do his playing with his friends, and the youngsters would sit on the step listening to him practice. And so he has gone far in his music. REH: Okay, well, let's go back and I can just put in about myself; then you can talk about Arreta, Lorna, and James. So I'll just say that, after graduating from Pittsfield High School, I worked in the public library for a year. FJE: Well, while you were in WPA, you got into the... REH: I remember I went and worked in a—pajama factory, was it? Some kind of place where you...sewing machine, where you stitched, and I just wasn't any good at those fast machines, do you remember that? FJE: No, I don't remember. REH: Well, it was very brief, I can assure you. FJE: 'Cause I thought it was some WPA, you got in the library. REH: Well, 1 don't remember whether it was through that or not, but I know I went to the library and worked there after school, and then I worked in the summers, right? You thought I was too young to go to college, and so I worked for a year, I worked in the public library before I went to college. So then I went to University of Massachusetts, then called Massachusetts State College, and graduated in 1946? And then worked for a year... Oh, as a student, I worked in the library there, at the college. FJE: But you graduated with a B.S. in bacteriology. REH: Bacteriology, zoology, yes. All science. There were so many things I seemed to be good at, and I didn't know whether to go... I like languages, and thought of going into languages, but I didn't want to be a teacher, so I finally decided to go into sciences, and do research or something or other. But then I ended up going to library school and becoming a librarian. FJE: You continued in that field ever since. REH: Yes, pretty much. So then I married Hugh—long time ago now. People are always asking us, "How long have you been married?" and he won't tell. FJE: Nineteen fifty. REH: It's always easy for me to remember 'cause my birthday's 1925 and my marriage date's 1950, and it was January 25, 1950, so... Now you can talk about Arreta. FJE: Arreta was my next child. She was born November 12, 1926. She went through school, and she ranked second in her class in high school when she graduated. After school she worked in a—what would you call this﻿23 FJE: (cont.) place?—in a gift shop. REH: Oh, yes, I remember. I can't remember the lady's name but...I know. FJE: She later on went to University of Massachusetts, and she had planned to be a teacher. Summers she worked on the playground for the city in a colored section of town, but her children were... She was planning to be a teacher, and I think her major subject was history. But there was one year when she wasn't able to go back to school in September, she became ill and was sent to the hospital, and lost a whole semester. By the time she went back, she'd made up her mind she didn't want to study history, and she went more into the sciences. And later, I don't know what made her take up physical therapy, but it was...of course, with her studying science, it gave her that opportunity. REH: Background, yes. FJE: Background. And this is interesting. She was the first ever to receive a scholarship from the National Foundation of Infantile Paralysis. REH: You mean, the first black? FJE: No, the first one in this area, period, to get a scholarship from that. And she went to Simmons College in Boston for her therapy work. REH: That's right. I went to Simmons for library school—I guess I forgot to... [break] FJE: She went to Simmons College for her physical therapy training, and that was a fairly new field at that time. She was the only black in her course. And when it came time for her to work, there was an opening in Chicago, and one in Aurora, Illinois, and there were two girls that decided to go out that way, but she picked the smaller place—she thought she'd rather go to a smaller town, so her real work was her... REH: Her career began out in Aurora. FJE: Aurora, Illinois. She went there in '52, and moved back to town in '59. And since moving back to Pittsfield, she's been in the physical therapy... really, head of the physical therapy department at North Adams Regional Hospital. She married Milton Smith in '69. I think that's all you need to know about... Oh, she's been active in church, in her local church, and then the church on the state level—United Church of Christ, on the state level, and I might say, on the national level, since she's been to the national synod. REH: ...a little bit about Lorna. Oh, I should say that Reta's spelled A-R-R-E-T-A, an unusual name. FJE: Lorna went through the normal grade schools that these others went to— in fact, they all went to the same schools, as far as that goes. And she graduated, and before she graduated, she was working at the Pittsfield News Company afternoons, after school. And she continued in that work. It was sort of an office job and she continued there till she moved to New Haven. I think there was really no advancement here, and Ruth was working in New Haven at the time, and that's what...﻿24 REH: Yes, I was working at the Yale Library and I knew there were possibilities for her there. FJE: So that's why she went, moved there. And she worked in Sterling Library at Yale, in the office. REH: Acquisitions Department. FJE: And it was there she was married. Well, she met her husband there, Hiram Whitfield. She also took up some comptometer study in New Haven, and she worked, continued at the library until after her first child was born. LEW:* Nineteen fifty-nine. FJE: And there with her child she got interested in school and was in their lunch program and in their library program at school. She has two sons, Keith, age twenty-three, and Blayne, fifteen. And she and Blayne are now living here in Pittsfield. REH: I was just going to make a comment that's interesting, that the house we're sitting in now, for this interview, was the house that our, what, greatgrandfather built for himself, and then Hugh and I lived in it for a time when we were in Pittsfield, and then when we left Pittsfield, Reta and Milton came to the house, and now you're in here. Then the house in back where you grew up, Aunt Bessie still lives, and now Lorna and Blay.ne are over there with her, so we've kept these, well, three houses [including the house where I grew up] pretty close for a long time. Okay. James. FJE: James, the youngest, went through school, and as I said, he was musically inclined, and piano was his major instrument, and he was very faithful in practice. He started lessons with a Harry Baker who was the son of our minister, but when Harry left town, he referred him to a Bullock... REH: Bullock—Irving Bullock? FJE: Irving Bullock, yes. I couldn't think of his first name. And he made strides really under Bullock; he gave several concerts, and, in fact, before he left Pittsfield, he gave a concert at the Pittsfield High. No admission was charged. We had a Catherine Van Buren who—a local girl—who was a soprano soloist, and she was on the program as well. But at that concert, the high school was filled, and they took over twelve hundred dollars for him. That was to help further his education, because he was getting ready to go away to college. REH: So it was just donations that people gave? FJE: It was donations. REH: I didn't know on what basis, but I knew it was to raise money to...for him. FJE: Now, when it came time for him to go to college, he debated whether to go to Oberlin or to Syracuse University, and he took auditions at both places, but he finally decided to go to Oberlin. REH: Yes, to the conservatory. *Lorna Edmonds Whitfield﻿25 FJE: Yes, to the conservatory for music there, and he did very well there, and graduated with honors, and planned to go on to his master's—he was going to his master's at the University of Michigan when the draft interrupted his career, so he spent a couple of years at Fort Monroe. On his going back, he went back to University of Michigan, and got his master's. He also taught a year of music theory at Oberlin, and got his Doctor of Musical Arts from Michigan in '62, and since then he's been working at the Eastern Washington University in Cheney, Washington. REH: I always...never could remember that name. FJE: In the music field. REH: So he teaches piano and theory, and he's also done a lot of concert work out on the West Coast. FJE: Done a whole lot of programming, playing. REH: Both solo and supporting, accompanying, rather, singers and... FJE: He has a duo-piano team, he and a Mrs. Jean... REH: Jean Stevens. FJE: Jean Stevens. It was, Jean Wardian was the one that got him out there... I think it's interesting to know that when he went out there for his audition, before he left, they had accepted him...he also had a job to teach, be the organist at a Methodist church in Spokane—that was through Jean Wardian. REH: What do you mean, before he left? FJE: After he went out there for his audition. REH: Oh, before he left Washington to go back to Michigan he already... FJE: This was all set. REH: Anything about our home life? FJE: ...be interesting to say that James is, at present, president of the Washington State Music Teachers Association. He just went in this past summer. REH: He's done a lot of study in Germany, right? FJE: He's traveled...yes. He's studied in Germany, he had a sabbatical leave where he studied in Germany, and practically every summer he's been going over to Germany and has studied as well as traveled. And through him, there's a German group that has traveled extensively in the western part of the country, a singing group, and he generally accompanies them. He's well known out on the West Coast. REH: Okay, when I was asking about the home life, I was thinking of our getting around the piano on Sunday afternoons after church and you playing and all of us singing—anything that you want to mention?﻿26 FJE: I should have mentioned this about your father, with his singing. He not only played, but he sang. He sang in several choral groups. REH: There was one in Chatham, New York, he used to go to. FJE: And just recently I met one of the vocalists, one of the singers from Chatham, in that group, and we had quite a nice chat. And he sang in a Dalton Congregational Church choir for quite some time. REH: One of the things that I always remember, from when I was quite young, was when there was a concert in which a lot of church choirs sang the Messiah, and you know the "Hallelujah Chorus?" [laughter] There was one extra "hallelujah," at one point, and it was Papa. But I felt pretty good, 'cause I could say, "Gee, I heard my father sing." [laughter] FJE: I recall that. He was connected with the Second Church choir for quite a good many years. REH: Now, did he go sing in the Dalton choir for a long time before he came to sing in the Second Congregational Church choir? I couldn't remember what it was. LEW: ...chorus, too. FJE: Yes, he was in the, chorus, too, which was a male chorus, and they traveled extensively, and as I say, he sang in mixed choruses, too. REH: You were mentioning taking in sewing to earn a little extra money...I always remember, on Easter Sunday, when we would get up sometimes, we would find we had a new dress, new Easter dress. You remember that, Lorna? FJE: Well, talking about sewing, I might mention this, too. Your father had to hold down two jobs—this was after you children went to college—and the sewing more or less kept you in spending money. And I remember, I used to tell you never to let yourself go broke, you children, but always to call home and get money, 'cause we could get along without money better than you could in a strange place. But I was always afraid of the telephone bill, because I never knew what it was going to say. [laughter] Because it was easier to call... I thought it was better to let 'em call and tell their problems, 'cause by the time they wrote and you answered, the problem, the occasion was over. REH: Or it had mushroomed into something more than it should be. FJE: Now where are we? REH: I was thinking that, at the time you were in New York and were getting or just finishing your training, I think, and getting married, Marcus Garvey was very active in New York. Were you involved in anything like that? FJE: No, I wasn't. Your father was sort of interested in it, but he never discussed going back to Africa with Garvey. I know he bought his newspaper and more or less kept up with that, but more than that... REH: 'Cause Arreta, just yesterday... I thought that probably was Marcus Garvey's newspaper that Arreta showed us yesterday, and I was interested to see that﻿27 REH: (cont.) there was a section in French—a page, as I recall. What about, I guess I never had asked you about the First World War and any particular effect that it had on your life. FJE: This is interesting, that was when your first flu epidemic came out, and I was in training then. Whole families were brought in with the flu, and we didn't have beds, families were...you'd pile two or three in a bed. I never got the flu or even a...working with these flu patients. And families died like nobody's... REH: Wholesale. FJE: ...wholesale, with that flu, yes. REH: What kind of protection did you have? FJE: Nothing. There wasn't anything... there were no protections then. That was a new disease, really, at that... REH: So, World War I, your brother Maitland went into the service. He was the only one that went, in the family. But apart from that, there's no particular effect, you feel, it had on your life? Any people, teachers, mentors that you think were particularly influential in your life in any way? FJE: No. This is interesting. While I was at Lincoln, the superintendent was a black woman. She was never officially that, she was always called "acting." But I think since I've left there, a black woman has been the real thing, and Lincoln phased out into just Lincoln Hospital, and later phased out to be a city hospital. It was a private... REH: So does it still exist? FJE: It still exists. REH: Under the name Lincoln? FJE: The name Lincoln. It's one of the city hospitals of New York. REH: Now who'd you say started Henry Street Settlement? FJE: Lillian Wald. REH: Yes, that's it. Now, was she around? Did you know her? FJE: No. REH: Started it long before? FJE: Not too long. That was really the beginning of visiting nurses, under her. REH: That's what I thought, and the beginning of sort of home social service kind of thing. FJE: As far as my classmates at Lincoln were concerned, there's quite a few that we have kept up with—we'd send cards at Christmas—and the group﻿28 FJE: (cont.) that I'm especially close to, and receive cards from, that's more or less dwindled down, and there's... This Christmas, I only received a card from one, and after I got her Christmas card, I got a letter from her saying that one of the others that I had sent a card to had just passed away, with cancer, you know. But there's about six that I used to send cards to regularly, and she's the only one that I heard from this Christmas. REH: I remember, when we were growing up and we would always look at the-Christmas cards, there would always be a few that said, "Dear Jakie," so I knew that was from your nurses' training school. Well, I was thinking of talking about the church in your life, knowing that your great-grandfather had founded... FJE: Well, as you know, we were brought up in the church and Sunday school, and, as I say, the Christian Endeavor. And, if I recall, we sang in a choir, such as they had, and it wasn't till I came back here after married life that I got more involved in the church, with bringing my children to church, and teaching Sunday school, and so forth and so on. I got to be the organist— I had been, I was the organist intermittently—I might as well say, from the time I came back until I retired in '75. Officially retired, but I played until '77. Now I'm... REH: I want to make a correction. I said your great-grandfather, but it's your grandfather, my great-grandfather, Reverend Samuel Harrison, [break] Well, we'll begin again. Any corrections, additions, or whatever? FJE: The official name of the training school was Lincoln Hospital and Home Training School for Nurses. And in 1925 it was changed to Lincoln School for Nurses. REH: Then there was something else you were telling me about, how it began. FJE: Well, it began as an old folks' home, really. The Hospital and Home began for the old and injured colored people, and the need for that sort of dwindled, and that's why it was changed just to the School for Nurses. REH: While we were having our little break, we were talking more about the church and what you did in the church, so maybe... FJE: Well, I've really held practically every office you could hold in the church— Sunday school teacher, organist, and clerk, and treasurer and financial secretary; and, as I say, I continued being organist until retiring in '75, but officially quitting in '77. REH: Well, the church was a family thing, in a way, for a long time, 'cause it seemed to me Aunt Bessie and Ariel also held different offices. FJE: Yes...all different offices. We're all reaching that age where we don't need to be officers, and it doesn't need to be a family business...'cause for a while they used to say that Edmondses held all the offices—it would be Jacobses now. REH: The Jacobs family. Well, in a way, it's gotten back to that. There was a period of time when it did move away. Did you have any particular feeling one way or the other about growing up in the church, so to speak?﻿29 FJE: No... REH: Because you had to go to church or Sunday school or whatever, or... FJE: Well, the church really was the only social life blacks had years ago. That's what all their social life was centered around, the church. And I think even now, the church is the one stable thing among black people, 'cause there are other organizations that don't last the way the church lasted. REH: Yes, I guess...true. Many black people do center their life around the church, so they're there on Sundays and they're doing things during the week. FJE: ...during the week in their different organizations of the church. REH: When you were talking the social life, functioning around the church, I remember Irva and Henry Walker, I saw some photographs by a man named James Van Der Zee, or something—was a photographer down... Was he down in Lenox? FJE: Yes, he was... REH: I remember seeing the book that was published and so there were some people from... FJE: ...the church... REH: ...and this area, that I remember seeing in that book. Anything you wanted to say about either the place of religion or importance of religion in a person's life? FJE: Well, I think they need that type of a background, something to fall back on, 'cause I think it's been found that even if they were brought up in the church and wander from their church, people eventually come back to the church. And no matter how far they wander, and if they've been members, when they come back, even if they haven't been helping the church, lo, these many years, they still feel they're a member, and when they die, they're still a member of that church, even if they haven't been near the church for years. REH: I suppose something that's so ingrained in you from childhood, you just can't escape, in a way. When we were talking about Papa, you forgot to—or you didn't—mention his death, when and... FJE: Well, he died in July, 1955. REH: So you had thirty-three years of marriage, right? FJE: '22 to '55. And they were happy years. We didn't do much traveling 'cause... REH: Couldn't afford to. FJE: ...couldn't afford to, with the children really... Although they had practically all got on their own before he passed away. REH: You mentioned traveling, I remember we did once go down to Bordentown and visit Uncle Harry. You took us kids some other places... We went to the﻿30 REH: (cont.) New York World's Fair, in 1939? FJE: Oh, yes, I remember going to the World's Fair. REH: What else? That's the only thing I remember. That probably was it. FJE: That's it. REH: Except you've done a lot more traveling now. FJE: I've done more traveling since my children have gotten married and got away from home than I did during my whole years of bringing 'em up. And probably that's because everybody lived...no one lived... REH: No one lived nearby. FJE: No one lived in Pittsfield. They'd all moved away from Pittsfield. They gave me the opportunity to travel. REH: 'Cause you've even gotten to Germany. FJE: Well, I thought we'd talk about that later when my...do some of my... REH: Okay. I want another thing, then. How did being...becoming a widow change your life in some way that you can talk about? FJE: No, because I was already working, doing visiting nurses work at the time my husband died. REH: I need to review something. So, you were in the visiting nurse... When did the Red Cross come along? FJE: I think it might be interesting... REH: I need to review your whole career. FJE: Yes, to tell you what happened. As I said, the children, you might as well say, were all grown, before I went back to nursing. And what took me into nursing was the First World War... REH: In this case... You were ready to talk about 1940s? FJE: I guess 'tis the Second World War. The Red Cross was giving classes in home nursing, and also I read in the paper where they were giving, that the hospital was giving refresher courses for nurses. REH: This House of Mercy? FJE: The House of Mercy. I called up to inquire about it, and they said they'd let me know later, and I never heard from 'em. So then Saint Luke's Hospital, which is just a stone's throw from the house, gave courses for nursing, I said, "I'll go there. I won't call 'em up, I'll just go there and if they don't want me..." REH: They'll tell you to your face.﻿31 FJE: Yes. So I took my refresher course in nursing at the Saint Luke's Hospital, and it was from just nursing, we went into nurses aide...I mean... We took courses in bandaging and all that—what do they call it? REH: First aid. Fje: And i was debating whether to do that, 'cause i didn't know whether other nurses would be interested in me doing things for them. But as I say, it worked out all right. While I was there, a Mrs. Criscitello, who was active in the Red Cross, asked me about teaching some Red Cross home nursing classes. It seemed like a few blacks had joined the home nursing classes, but they never finished the course. So I went in, originally, just to teach blacks. I sort of slowed down when I found out that I had to recruit my own blacks, whereas the others didn't have to do any recruiting. Classes were always there for them. Of course, I had to take a course—sort of understudied with another nurse—we've always been friends since then. So I sort of slowed down, and then they gave this class—lasted for, I think it was a fifteen-week class, and later... Or was it fifteen lessons? Anyhow, it was long. And later on they came to a shortened course, and we had instructors from the home office, and I went into that, under supervision. From then on, practically all my—in fact, all my students, you might as well say—were white. And I had some of the upper crust in my Red Cross home nursing classes and first aid. REH: Now I just want to be sure I understand. Home nursing was if someone in your family got sick, so you'd be able to take care of them? FJE: During the war. REH: 'Cause there weren't that... Fewer doctors available, that was the idea? FJE: Yes. The classes were taught in the visiting nurse office in town, and in the course of one of these classes, the supervisor of the visiting nurses asked, Had I ever thought of going back into nursing? So she gave me an application, and I brought it home and debated on it. And one day she says to me, "The board has already accepted you. Will you see that your application gets in." So that's how I got back into nursing. REH: It's not often you get accepted for a job before you've applied. [laughs] FJE: So, as I have said before, I was the only nurse at that time who'd had any background, any college background. This was something new—a black nurse in the Visiting Nurse. We had what we called walking districts at that time, and my district turned out to be more of the black district, although I had a whole lot of... It was a mixed district, on the west side of town, where most of the blacks have lived all their life. In fact, I had more white patients than I did blacks. 'Course, I was often transferred to different areas. If I didn't have enough acute care, and someone else had.more acute care than I did—and I always remember, whenever I'd rap at the door and say, "I'm Mrs. Edmonds, the visiting nurse," you could see this queer expression going over their face whether they should let me in or not. And it got so, I..,one of the first questions they would ask, "Are you any relation to James Edmonds?" I always thought that became my passport! That was my passport in a good many of these homes.﻿32 FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: (cont.) One occasion that has always brought back to memory, there were... I was relieving for this nurse, and it was near the Christmas season, and she gave me this woman to take care of, an elderly person to take care of, and I was also to tell 'em the nurse wouldn't be in on such-and-such a day. I rapped on the door, and they opened the door, and I introduced myself, and they hemmed and hawed, I told them I'd come... Well, Mother was sick and this was her last Christmas, and they... ...weren't sure they wanted... Yes, didn't want... ...someone black? ...black to take care of her. Well, did I know so-and-so-and-so? I says, yes. Well, she's Mother's...one of Mother's best friends, and this was another black woman. It was all right for her to visit, but no, we want Mother's last... And incidentally, they were trimming the Christmas tree that day, but they wouldn't let me in to give their mother...'cause they wanted her last Christmas on earth to be happy. So I went out and I called the nursing service office and told them the story. Later in the day, this family calls up and said, "No nurse has been here." Well, the Visiting Nurse didn't send a nurse to that family till the end of the day. Now, another connection with this thing, when I was on the Visiting Nurse, we worked Sunday...on Sunday any special work that had to be done. So this Sunday I had to go to this certain house. "Well, I'm so glad you've come. We've been hoping you would come here sometime." They're related to this other family that wouldn't let me in. Apparently, this other family told them about me. So I traveled practically all over Pittsfield...families in all areas. And you finally got to be very well known and accepted all over the place. While I was a visiting nurse, we gave prenatal classes, and I taught the prenatal classes. This was first expectant mothers. Then we went into classes for just expectant fathers, and before I left, it was a combination of mothers and fathers. And you'd also go into the home and help them set up, see if they were set up for when they come home. I think, while I was here on the Visiting Nurse, I got involved with at least two home deliveries. We had a bag that was called a home delivery bag. Families were supposed to have their own doctor, and the doctor was supposed to show up before the nurse could do anything, but we got into two or three actual home deliveries. They would get a good doctor, one of the best obstetricians, but all he would do would be deliver the baby, and he'd never, no more go back to see the patient. Well, at that time was there still a lot of home delivery or what? No, those sort of dwindled down, because it was one of those things they were hoping would phase out, and people would go into the hospitals. But was it that a few people wanted home delivery, or they just didn't get themselves to the hospital on time? They didn't just get to the hospital on time, and apparently hadn't gone to see a doctor. Nowadays you're encouraged to start going seeing a doctor right﻿33 FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH FJE REH FJE REH (cont.) away. But these, most of these patients, some of them even didn't have a doctor. And so of course, the best obstetrician in town would generally get sent; all he would have to do was just see that you got delivered, and we would have to carry on from there. So I worked in the Visiting Nurse from '45 to '56. Just '45 to '56—yes, about eleven years. Eleven years. Oh, I thought of something else that I wanted to ask you. For visiting nurses to, if somebody at home had to put in a call to get a nurse, or did the doctor... We could go and make the first visit, and see what it was all about. But from then on, the order had to come from the doctor. Oh, see. And we had to follow... And we did dressings in the home, whatever was necessary, and the nurse decided how often she should go to them—sometimes there were daily visits, sometimes it might be twice, two or three times weekly; or it might be once a week, depending on the condition. And then, at the first, they also had this insurance business was paying for the call, and later on it... That, as I say, dwindled out completely. So does the Visiting Nurse still exist in Pittsfield? It still exists. Now, of course, the nurses have to, they're expected to have some college background. 'Course, when I went down to the...first visiting nurse, they all sort of looked at me a little leery, 'cause I was black, but they got where they... And the one that looked down on me the most, became one of the best friends, you might say. This is an interesting fact; we had a supervisor and an assistant supervisor, and of course she took me into the homes at first. Well, anyhow, they apparently must have told around that they were going to have a black nurse— 'course, we were "colored" in those times—but there was this family that she told me that they had said they never wanted a colored nurse to come. Now this is ironic about it. When my father was in Christian Endeavor, he used to meet, often invite some of the members to his house, and throw a big feed. Well, the family that didn't want me to come into their house was one of the most faithful members that had come into his house to eat the food! And incidentally, I never was sent to her home. Did they know that you were related? No, I don't think they did, but they just didn't want any black nurse. That's interesting. Now, whether they knew I was related or not, I never did know. Yes. Well, it's sort of odd, in a way, that people wouldn't want a black nurse, which is one of the service professions, but they would want a black woman in their home looking after their children sometimes, or doing things like that.﻿34 FJE: And you see, in pre-Civil War times, it was often a black woman that nursed the baby. REH: You just can't tell about people, I guess. FJE: No, you can't figure people out. But in my course, in my VNA business, I traveled practically all over the city, and I was well known practically all over town. And even now, I meet people that come to me, "You took care of my first baby." "I attended your mothers' class." "How much it's helped me, and it helped me with all the other children," and so forth and so on. REH: Yes. 'Cause I know that after we had gone away to school, and we'd come back, we'd be walking down the street with you and somebody would say, "Oh, hello, Mrs. Edmonds. I'm..." so-and-so. "You remember, I was in your fathers' class," or, "You helped me with the baby," or it was always somebody who had some recollection of... And it seemed to me that the men particularly had appreciated what you had done... FJE: What often happens now, I'll meet a mother or father with this grown boy. "This is the boy who..." which of course makes... REH: With a boy twenty years old, and you're supposed to recognize him, yes. [laughter] FJE: So there are still some of these mothers that I still run into, and they'll speak to me, I says, "I can remember your face," and I could always tell where they lived. I couldn't call them by name, but I could tell where they lived. Another habit that they used to say I had taking care of patients, and I realized it myself, if I got into sort of difficult—while I was doing a dressing or something like that, I started humming to myself. And another habit I had was the habit of saying, "Mm hmm." And there was another home that I used to...I had taken care of her babies and we would follow the babies—sort of a supervision—and the children to grow up to a certain age, and there was one home that the little youngsters always used to mock me, "Mm hmm." The mother realized it, and she was... REH: Yes, that she was getting...they'd learned it from you. I guess I say, "Mm hmm," a lot. I guess we all do. FJE: Yes, we all do. Milton, Arreta's husband, doesn't really give to it, because there're so many different expressions... REH: I know, I know. FJE: ...he never knows what we mean when we say, "Mm hmm..." 'cause there are so many different expressions and accents we give to it... REH: I know it, I know. We carry on a whole conversation of mm hmms. [laughter] So, Red Cross, VNA... FJE: Well, I'll go back to the Red Cross, 'cause I worked the Bloodmobile, but that wasn't till after I left the... REH: Well, then we can just review your whole career, anything, so we can cover the... We've finished New York, so we've got the VNA, the Red Cross, then we'll get to Pittsfield General. Yes, so let's just continue on with the career part as you want to.﻿35 FJE: As I said, I left the VNA in '56. REH: Now, was this a retirement? FJE: Well, I had a retirement party from them, 'Course, I was already at the age of sixty-five, although they weren't using that as a retirement age at the time. But how I come to go to the Pittsfield General*,the superintendent of nurses had contacted me about being secretary of the Massachusetts State Nurses Association, District One, and invited me up to her apartment, and we discussed it. She asked me, had I ever thought of leaving nursing and coming into the hospital. So... REH: ...as an administrator of some kind, that it? FJE: ...administrative work. And, 'course, as far as being the district nurse, I felt I should discuss that with my VNA superintendent, 'cause it would mean going away to meetings and so forth and so on. She was perfectly agreeable to that. So I filled a term for secretary of District One for two and a half terms, which amounted to five years. So that meant taking in your district meetings as well as the state association meetings. Now, about my leaving the VNA, I began to thinking of my age—here I was sixty-five, I had a walking district, how much longer would I be able to walk in all kinds of weather? Was the bag heavy that you had to carry? Not 'specially heavy, but it was... ...extra thing. ...extra, and feeling I had...well, it was a walking district, and had to depend on the trolley or the taxi, and as I say, I tried to plan my day with my district so that I___ This would be more consecutive—so I wouldn't be one side of town... REH: ___town, and then have to go to another. FJE: ...the other end of the district. I did have a large district, as far as that goes. So I decided, this was a time for me to get in under cover. And that's how I came to Pittsfield General. And there I went in as part-time instructor, and health coordinator just for the nursing school, the nursing service and... At that time, just the students and nursing... REH: Staff? FJE: ...nurses had physicals—not the whole hospital personnel. So as I say, I taught home nursing. REH: So how many years did you teach home nursing to the students? PJE: Until the school phased out, as far as that goes. It was in '56 that I went in, and I think it was in '61 that the whole shooting match had to have physicals, every department, every employee, and all new employees were to have a pre-employment physical. So I was put in charge of that. And in the original...my office was just in with the nurses' service office. As I say, seeing I dealt just with nurses, and traveled back and forth across the street *Pittsfield General Hospital﻿36 FJE: (cont.) for classes for the students... Student nurses had to have a pre-entrance examination, and in fact, they had an examination every year, and another one before they, in their last year before they finished. REH: What'd you call that title? Coordinator of... FJE: Health coordinator. And then the student nurses had one doctor that did all their physicals in the hospital—we became very close friends—and in that way, any sick calls were taken...whenever they were sick, they were through him. But when I became coordinator of the whole hospital, my office was moved down into the clinic area. So I held forth there. And even before then, if anyone was sick, they called on the student nurse doctor to doctor 'em. So I got to know a good many of the... In fact, I got to know practically all the employees. Even if they didn't have their physical—they could even have it with, under the doctor there, or else have their own doctor. But I had to make the arrangements and see that their lab work got done and all that. REH: I see. And keep the records, sort of... FJE: Keep their records. So I got to know practically all the... REH: Well, in a way, was this a program that you set up or... What had been happening before you went there? FJE: Well, they never had, these other personnel never had any physical at all. But they felt it was time that everybody should have a physical. And I had to set that up myself. It wasn't till a good many years, quite a number of years...I stayed there till '68, for that matter, and it wasn't, say, till, probably about '65, one doctor had carried all the student nurse service, and it wasn't till '65, he was getting along in years, and they felt it would be better to phase it out, so different doctors offered to do the physicals. So then again it was a problem because this doctor had his time, this doctor had his time, and you couldn't have physicals while the nurses were in class. REH: So coordinating the student nurses' schedule and the doctors' schedule... yes. So, now at that time, was there still a nursing school at Pittsfield General... FJE: Yes. The nursing school didn't phase out till '68, and that's when I retired. Reason I retired, because the age sixty-five was set out as your retirement age, and I found they were beginning to put the shovel under people if they reached sixty-five. REH: Yes. And so, how old were you at that time? '68? FJE: I was sixty-five when I went into... REH: When you went in. I know. FJE: ...when I went in there. REH: So by then, it's... How old are you? I need to do some mathematics. FJE: 'Cause if I left there in '68, I think I was... I was born in '90, that﻿37 FJE: (cont.) made me about seventy-eight. REH: Wow! [laughs] You're doing pretty well! FJE: So about age seventy-eight I thought I'd better get out before they put the skids under me. I did find that the men, especially, felt this being pushed out, more so than the women did. I suppose the men didn't...had nothing they could go to, whereas women always have your house that you can go to, and keep yourself busy. I felt this was a good way, when the school of nursing phased out, for me to get out. So, from then on, they had a doctor who had charge of the whole shooting match over there, whole nursing... So, but no, up until then it was the different interns that would do the employees, and... We had this intern program, the interns would do that, and that was a problem, too, because they weren't happy about doing it. You had to figure on their time, and they would only do just so many in the time that they were there, whereas Doctor Vohr, he would never limit the number he would do. After the different doctors took over the examining of the student nurses, each one had his own way of doing business, so you had to learn each doctor's doing business. REH: So you had a retirement from the Red Cross, you had a retirement from the VNA—how many times did you... FJE: No, a retirement from VNA, and I had a retirement from the hospital, and the hospital retirement party was right there at the hospital and open to all the employees, and it was a very... REH: Well, I know something that you did after you retired at age seventy-eight from the hospital—you went and worked in Milton's store. [laughs] Well, we're back for another session. What did you do after you retired from Pittsfield General Hospital? FJE: Well, I really stayed home. First, I did go out to the state of Washington to visit, and I really stayed home that winter 'cause it was a bad winter under foot, as well as over head, for going out. I think that's why I adjusted to not going to work every day and seeing people. And not too long after that, however, I worked for the Red Cross Bloodmobile service when it came to town. It would be here, probably, a day and a half—it would open up in the middle of the morning, and do that day, and then have a morning session, afternoon session the next day, and different ones would... nurses would put in an hour or so, interviewing the... REH: ...the prospective donors, is that... FJE: The donors. We would interview them and take the blood pressures and temperatures, and do a blood test, a hemoglobin. Sometimes you were quite busy doing it, and then... But, as I say, you put in your time there, and they would pick me up and bring me home, seeing I had no transportation. Sometimes the Bloodmobile was at the Masonic Temple, and sometime, then I've been over to G.E. (General Electric Company)—they did it over there. I gradually had to withdraw from that, because I got to working in my son-in-law's store. He had a small neighborhood grocery store, and he did have﻿38 FJE: (cont.) someone to work for him, but she took a vacation and said she wouldn't be back, so that's how I came to fill in. He was doing construction work, so he needed someone to more or less just tend the store, and I more or less waited on customers and no actual ordering or having much to do with the financial end of it. It was just waiting on customers. You might say I was filling in time. He didn't want me to go there, 'cause he didn't like the neighborhood, but he couldn't find anyone else to do it, so I took it. I stayed there... Let me see. I probably worked there... probably for a year and a half or so, when the store burnt down, so it was closed up completely. Now, he opened up in another location, in '72. When he opened the store on Bradford Street, I went in at the beginning and did the waiting on customers and the bookkeeping angle of it. And later on I did the ordering, as well, and stuck with that until I was forced to give up, when I had my surgery in... REH: Was that two years ago? FJE: Nineteen seventy-eight. But I still... REH: And you were there six years or so? FJE: Off and on, for the six years. REH: So that means you were eighty-four years old, or something like that by the time you left there. FJE: And I suppose I would still be there... REH: ...if it weren't for the surgery, probably. FJE: And he's closed up. He finally rented the place, someone wanted to rent it from him, and she just automatically closed up, and he hadn't found anyone yet that he thought he would like to have be in there for customers, so he's closed up completely. Now, what would you like to... That's my working angle. REH: Well, I was going to ask you about your feelings about the women's movement, and relate it to something you said earlier when I asked you how becoming a widow had affected your life, and you said, "Not much," because you had already been working. And so I just wanted to ask what your feelings were about the women's movement, women's push for equality, and so forth. FJE: Well, you see, that wasn't brought up while I was working, really, that's of fairly recent years. See, I really had no problem finding jobs, as far as that goes, so Ireally wasn't...couldn't have much bucking up against it, and... REH: You were liberated, already liberated, in a sense. FJE: In a sense, because, as you see, I had gotten where I was working, and after my husband died, I continued working, so I really had...was supporting myself and doing all my own business, and all of that stuff, and I had to do my own figuring and so forth and so on. That way, you have to find out for yourself which way to turn, and with the kind of work I was in, and the profession, they weren't at that time, even too concerned about pushing and pushing and pushing—and the professions weren't. You see, nurses,﻿39 FJE: (cont.) nowadays, go on strikes and go into unions and all that type of thing. REH: Oh really? FJE: Oh, yes. But they didn't even think of doing that. You were more concerned about the sick, and what you were doing, instead of your pocketbook. The patient came before you did. And now they're beginning to go on strikes and go into unions, that type of thing, so it'll make a...probably will be a different kind of an angle all around. REH: Well, when Papa was alive, were you handling the family finances? FJE: Well, he had the two jobs; he gave me the money completely for one job, and what he kept was to cover the taxes and the fuel for the winter, and you children's tuition. And I took care of the bills. REH: So, in a sense, you weren't like some women whose husbands don't tell them anything and don't give them anything, and so you were... FJE: Well, when we first got married, he said he would turn all his money over to me and I could spend it as I wanted to, but don't ever come back saying that there were some bills that needed paying. REH: So you had to learn to manage. FJE: So I had to learn to manage. REH: Okay. That's good. Now we've talked a little bit about how being black affected you when you wanted to go to nursing school, but I just had a general question, how you think being black or female... FJE: Well, don't you think it was rather ironic, right here, the hospital wouldn't take me when I wanted to go in training, has asked me to come back to be a... REH: ...forty years later to head up a health program for them, yes. Well, it just shows how far... Well, not just... FJE: It wasn't long before... It wasn't much before then that the hospital began to take blacks into training. REH: Oh, really? The local hospital? FJE: At the local hospital. And when I first got involved with it, to go into training, it was called the House of Mercy. When I went in to work, it was the Pittsfield General, and just as I quit, it went to the Berkshire Medical 'cause it absorbed the Saint Luke's, merger of the Saint Luke's... REH: And Hillcrest, what happened to... FJE: No, Hillcrest is still on its own. It's still on its own. REH: Oh, really? That's interesting. FJE: There's still agitation to close Hillcrest, but I feel, and a whole lot... Even those I've met, that I worked with at the Berkshire Medical, or Pitts-﻿40 FJE: (cont.) field General, feel that patients...people should have a choice of which hospital they want to go to. See, if Hillcrest is phased out, they would have no choice at all. There was just the one hospital, you have to go to, whether you will or whether you won't. And most people feel that you should have a choice, as far as that___ REH: Now, Saint Luke's still exists as a hospital, but it's all run by all the same... FJE: Mm hmm, it's all under the one head. REH: Yes, Berkshire Medical. FJE: And you see, that's the... An addition was built up where the Pittsfield General was, the way the Saint Luke's... Saint Luke's here is closed out completely. REH: Oh, I didn't know that. FJE: Oh, yes. That's closed down completely, and that now, is going to be phased out into apartments for the elderly. REH: That's what I was thinking, that would be good for that, yes. FJE: No, there's no Saint Luke's, at all. REH: When did they close? FJE: I should say, they've been out there probably, not any more than two years, at the most. And you see, all nursing schools phased out because... REH: The hospital nursing schools, 'cause you had to go to college and get the... FJE: Yes. And now, around here, a nursing course is given at the BCC, Berkshire Community College. And -when they come out of there, they have a degree as such. REH: Associate in science, or something or other. FJE: But, see, even if they g© into a hospital, they haven't got the... REH: They have to get a four-year degree, don't they? FJE: No. They can start working in the hospital, and they can have an authoritative.—but they haven't got the actual feel of nursing, because they haven't had the practical part of it. REH: Oh, I see. FJE: They don't get the practical part that the three-year course gave a nurse. Whereas, when I was working, you worked on the floor and did your classes all at the one time, now it went so far that you had classes, and they didn't interfere with your working. We got paid at the rate of $6 a month, which was to take care of your breakage. And we had no entrance fee, but you see, they felt, with nurses paying a fee to go into training, they shouldn't be expected to work. So they only put a little time on the floor,﻿41 FJE: (cont.) whereas— Although, they did get more practical work than your associate BCC girls did. REH: Well, it doesn't seem to me that your being a woman has hindered your life in any way, but I just wondered if you had anything to say about that, how being a woman has either affected your life, or affected the choices that you made. Any comment? FJE: Whether it's my being involved in the profession that's got me involved in these other things that I have been involved in, I couldn't say, but that's probably how my name got known, 'cause it wasn't till I quit working completely that I got much involved in outside activities 'cause, you see, you were pretty well tied up at work all day, and then you had to come home and do your housework. And outside of church, I didn't do much outside activity till after I finished. And I got involved with ECDC, that's Early Childhood Development Center, and it was a day care center, sort of been brought - into existence by blacks, and I was one of the original signers of the... REH: Corporation, or something? FJE Yes, I'm one of the signers of the corporation, as far as that goes. REH: You were on the board? FJE: The board. And I served as secretary for them for a while, and, as I say, I stayed on the board. Fairly recently, I've gotten off the board, probably these past two or three years. At least I haven't been... REH: So they got off the ground in 1960s, late 1960s? FJE: Nineteen sixty-nine, they got on the ground. 'Cause last year, in '78, they had their tenth anniversary. And Arreta and Milton were all on the board. He was one of the original ones that discussed bringing it up into existence. And, as I say, all those, practically all those who signed in the corporation, there was probably one, or two whites, but they were all blacks who have signed into the...were signed into the corporation. We tried to keep it as much as possible, the majority on the board are black, but now it's more mixed. It's more whites on the board, I think, than there are black. REH: Now, the children that came to it... FJE: And we found out, we really got more white children than we did black, and that's... The instructors are a breakdown of both black and white. REH: Now do the children have to pay much to come, or how does that work? FJE: Most of them are from working mothers, and some could get in on, through, that their mothers were on welfare, the city would pay so much toward it. And then there's some of these grant affairs that pay so much for... And, through the grants, they got more than the city would pay, so we had to... And then, you had a sliding scale, the private students, that weren't paid on welfare, paid out of their own pocket. We tried to make it a sliding scale for them, depending on how much they could afford. It's reached the point where they feel that both welfare and these sliding parents should pay what the state allotment is for a day care center. Because, you see, that would have to make up the difference of your expenses. That has to﻿42 FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: REH: FJE: (cont.) be met, whether anybody pays or not. So how many children, about, and how many... Well, they can service about ninety children. It's worked good from the very beginning. It was over in the colored neighborhood, but children came from all over, and not just from that area and, as I say, we found out we were having more whites than we are blacks. I didn't know whether it was still going or not. It's still in existence. Now, then I got involved with the Salvation Army. I can t figure who it was that called me up, Would I like to serve on the board of directors of them? And, as I say, I've probably been on pretty close to the eight or ten years, if it's that. You serve a two-year term, and you just continue if you wish to... Oh, I see. ...wish to serve. So that was about the same time as this ECDC? Yes. I really got involved in all of these things after I finished. It was pretty much the same time, and I've enjoyed the work with the Salvation Army... What did you do on their board? I was the only black on the board, and I still am the only black on the board. So, well, the board more or less planned their work, and had to oversee the financial...see how they spent, the different activities that they did. And of course, their Christmas program is more extensive than anything else. They would give presents, go visit all the nursing homes. They carried presents and visited each patient. And I rather enjoyed that part of it. Lately that's been phased out. So, you mean, the board went to the hospitals? Members would go to these nursing homes, and give each patient a gift. So it was quite something to go into these nursing homes and see the patients, the different types and what happens... So their board, then obviously, it's not all Salvation Army people. Oh, no. The board isn't Salvation Army people. None of 'em are Salvation Army people. Oh, really? No, no, no. It's just your head man, the major and his wife are really the only Salvation, really Salvation people. It's just people from... ...the community. ...from the community that are interested in that kind of work. They're the...﻿43 FJE: (cont.)'the head of the board, yes. And I think that's what it is in most other places. REH: I'm learning lots! [laughs] FJE: No, no there isn't any Salvation Army person as such on the board of directors. And they're from all walks of life. This Mrs. Lepisto I mentioned about the hooked rugs, she's a board member. She worked at the Christian Center in the office, and different things like that. There's no one of us that's an actual Salvation Army member. As I say, you continue and continue, and after you feel you don't want to be an active member, you generally get put on the reserved...or you, you're still a member, but not...a nonactive member. REH: Like an honorary member or something? FJE: ...honorary member. There are no dues, although you do make contributions to the fund occasionally. That's up to you, as far as that goes. The board never, has never done any action of raising money, but this year we went into the actual raising of money by giving a pancake breakfast, and I think it was so successful, they shall try it again. Because the Salvation Army never gets as much money as it needs. It gets money through the United Community Chest, but the Community Chest wants you to separate the, what would you call—the religious side from the other. They want to know how much you spent on that, and how much you spent on that. Now can you differentiate, 'cause some of it's...all of it's part of a person. And they feel you should know how much is for their kind of work and how much is... REH: Well, considering what they're involved in, I mean, they are a church, in a sense, so how can you separate it? FJE: And in some places, the Salvation Army, usually it's withdrawn from the Community Chest because of that, and they've done better raising money... REH: ...their own money. FJE: ...their own money than they have with what they get through the Chest. Of course, it wouldn't speak too well of you to leave the Chest, in a way... REH: Yes, but it's understandable. FJE: Yes. Now, the other thing that I got involved with was the Friends of the Atheneum. I don't recall who suggested my name to that. And we did have two blacks on that. And now at...presently, I'm the only black on that board. REH: Yes, 'cause when I just saw Mr. Newman, he mentioned Mrs. Nevers... FJE: And so I'm the only one that's black there. We have our monthly meetings and plan your activities there, your book stall and... There again, your book stall is a way of raising money, and to get scholarships for anyone going into library training. REH: So now, when I was just up there, Jean Bosquet showed me a program of arts and movies and things. Now are the Friends, is your board involved in... FJE: Yes, Friends. Our board is involved in it. They vote the whole money, overall thing, money that does pay for all these things, yes. I don't get﻿44 FJE: (cont.) there very often 'cause it's a Wednesday evening, but they are well attended, I think, on the whole, because they are free to people, and it gives them a chance to see good movies and other kinds of programs they... REH: Yes. It looked like an interesting program, from what Jean showed me. FJE: It is an interesting program. REH: Now that was the kind of program that James played on a few years back. FJE: That was really the beginning of their programs, because, you see, more or less... REH: I remember he actually played in the old Berkshire Athenaeum building, didn't he? FJE: No, he never did. REH: I know I saw Moby Dick there and saw some other things. But he inaugurated the new building, almost. FJE: Yes, the new piano. REH: Oh, it was a new piano. FJE: They had had a few sessions before then but this was really the inauguration of the new piano. Now the only other thing that I was connected with was the Berkshire Association, which is a church, United Church of Christ group. And the Berkshire Association is local, and then there's the state level as well as the national level. REH: So what do they do, the Berkshire Association? FJE: I've been on the board of directors for that, executive committee of that. Now I'm not so active, but I'm on...a member of their leadership committee which amounts to what you call a nominating committee; there again, you serve so many terms, and they ask you, Do you want to continue to serve? It's a way, more or less, of getting all the churches together, 'cause you all have some common problems, and you can refer them to the state level and___ REH: So now, are the people that are in this Berkshire Association, is it ministers and laymen together and... FJE: Ministers and lay people all together. Elections come every two... You serve, there's a layman moderator, and then the next two years it'd be a minister. So they rotate that way. On all their committees, there's a minister. They have a goodly number of women, as well as men, on these different groups, as far as that goes. REH: Well, that's good. So if a church had some kind of particular problem, it might come to the Berkshire Association for some guidance? FJE: Yes. I think that's about all the... Now the only thing that I'm active in now, really, are the Friends of the Athenaeum and the Salvation Army. The Berkshire Association, seeing it's the nominating committee, that's just a yearly thing, so...be so active in it. But these other two meet monthly,﻿45 FJE: (cont.) and I try to take in the meetings. REH: It seems to me, a long time ago, you mentioned being—a what?—secretary of the Massachusetts Nurses Association or something? Now, were there other memberships, professional memberships that you had, or things that you were involved in? FJE: No, that was really the only thing. We had a public nurse group of ours, of this area, North and South Berkshire, that I was a member of, and we met periodically, and we had dues for that. I'm still classed as a member, but I don't attend; they keep you after you resign, even if you're... But they don't expect you to pay dues, as far as that goes. 'Course, there're still a few of the ones that I knew when I was in, working for the VNA, but most of them are new. REH: Yes, perhaps younger members. FJE: Younger members, younger members, or also old ones that are pretty well retired from the VNA and don't attend these meetings that regularly. REH: And what about membership in things like the NAACP or Urban League or... FJE: No, I never was a member of either of those, and never belonged to these groups like the Masons or anything like that; Eastern Stars, they are. No, no. Well, you see, when I was growing up, and when the children were growing up, I didn't have time nor money to take in these things. So I really had no interest in them, as far as that goes. REH: You haven't been a clubwoman, so to speak. FJE: No. Not a clubwoman. REH: Then, as I recall, most of our social life, also, was at home. You know, we weren't a family that did a lot of that kind of thing. FJE: Well, I felt that you couldn't run nights and study. REH: Yes, true. Well, I guess many parents wouldn't have disciplined their children that well. FJE: No, and you see, there weren't that many activities that were strictly black, either, for you to go to. And the only mixed thing would be the Girls' Club. REH: Girls' Club. That's right, we went to that. FJE: Went to that, I think, didn't you? REH: Mm hmm. Yes. FJE: All of you, didn't you, to a certain extent? But how active you were, I don't recall. REH: I don't remember, either, but I know we used to go after school. FJE: But you didn't go to any of their summer camps, or anything like that.﻿46 REH: I was just wondering about the black population of Pittsfield. Let's see. It was quite small when you were growing up, and has... FJE: Well, they began to come, of course, during wartime, when there was an influx of them from the South to the North for labor. REH: To go to work at the GE, or what? FJE: The GE, whatever they could find. A good many of them got into factories, but that's when most of them came North, most of your blacks. And the sad part, whereas they were really church people in the South, they more or less got away from the church when they came North, more or less; I think that's still the way with a good many of these that come North. They don't get involved with the church. There is a goodly number of people that you see on the streets—it's reached the point where I feel like I'm the stranger, although I've lived here all my life, and these other people are the... REH: In the last thirty years, essentially, thirty to forty years, have come in... Could you give any percentage of.,. FJE: Well, all the old families, really, have died out around here. They're all, you might as well say, newcomers, 'cause there are very few of the old, old families left around here. There were certain names that you always thought of, and they're pretty well along in years, and those that did have children, their children are grown and... REH: ...moved away, a lot. FJE: And if their children are here... So now, as far as the blacks working in professions, we have quite a few that work at the GE, men, but they're from outside and have come here for... A good many have come here for training, and they keep 'em, say, about a year or so, and then they move them on elsewhere. We have, though, several who've been here over the period, and we have a few blacks in the school system, and... REH: Any local people, or did they come from outside, too? FJE: The only one that you could call local would be Eleanor Persip, And we had your Marian Hart from Williamstown... REH: Oh, I«remember her, yes. FJE: ...but outside, all of 'em, you might as well say, are newcomers that have come from the South. They are the only ones. In fact, all the children are people who...of these old families have left here. 'Cause when they finished college, there would be really nothing here for them, and they've all gone elsewhere and made their names elsewhere. REH: That's what we had to do. FJE: 'Cause Harry Baker, Sunday, got to talking, that when he finished—how'd it come up?—it came up, mention was made in the service, "Too bad that when our children go away to college, they don't come back here and give something to the community." But there's been nothing for them to come back for. Harry said he had wanted to come back here, but there were no blacks here for him to teach, so he had to go South, really to do his music business.﻿47 REH: Yes. 'Cause I was lucky that I got into the Berkshire Athenaeum, I was able to... And Arreta in North Adams, but... 'Cause there really aren't a lot of openings, a lot of places to... FJE: Yes. Because when Arreta came back this way, she had written, answered different ads in the physical therapy magazine, and she'd always let them know she was black, so they didn't answer. But I happened to know this person who was the physical therapist connected with the crippled children's clinic, and I spoke to the doctor about it, and he said, "North Adams Hospital is interested." So Arreta wrote to them, and just had her interview, and they took her. REH: That's why they don't come back, 'cause... FJE: Well, there hasn't ever been anything for them to come back to, and that's the sad part. REH: 'Cause many would like to. FJE: Because you do want 'em to have something that they can fall back on, not little... In fact, you have to have more than a high school education nowadays to get anywhere, and it's too bad that there aren't these openings for them here. Now whether this new generation going away to college would find something when they come back, seeing the things are opening up more... REH: Yes, well, everybody's attitude has changed a lot, so it's possible, yes. FJE: So it may be possible for them to. REH: Are there any professional people like dentists or doctors around? FJE: Dr. Nevers is a dentist. There may be one or two R.N.'s, but there are quite a few practical nurses, licensed practical nurses...and nurses' aides are working in the hospitals. Of course, there are blacks at G.E., This one girl that's quite high up in the office, and she's high up in her union, as far as that goes. But, as I say, we do have quite a few in the schools. There's teachers and others as teachers' aides, and working in the dietary... of kitchens, that type of thing. REH: Well, Pittsfield, you sort of think of it to a one-industry town, and that's G.E., and if you're not there, there really aren't a lot of opportunities, no. FJE: There isn't anything for 'em, no. The Eaton Paper Company, which has changed hands, that has...is called Sheaffer. REH: Oh, it's not in the Eaton family any more? FJE: No, I think they're pretty well died out. But folks still think of it as the Eaton Paper Company. Well, that has quite a few blacks who are in it, mostly women in the different departments, as far as that. I've never heard of any men work in there, no. No, as far as places for living, it's got to where the blacks can...they're living pretty much all over town, and they're able to buy just about where you want, as far as that goes. As far as churches go, there are some black Catholics, there are quite a few blacks that go to the white Baptist church, and some go to the white Methodist church, although﻿48 FJE: (cont.) there is a black Methodist church, and the black Congregational. I don't think any blacks go to the white Congregational, but I know... REH: If they're going to go to the Congregational, they're going to come over to Second? FJE: But we do know that they go to the white Baptist and the white Methodist. REH: When I was growing up, it always seemed to me that people at the First Congregational Church were the people that were the bankers and ran the city, and they weren't too amenable to...to a lot of the people in Pitts-field. That was my feeling. FJE: But you see, even they have changed, because the old families they're died out, and this new generation that's come in, they're an altogether different breed of people; whereas the old folks gave all their money to the church, these folks don't give their money to the church like the old people did. And your white churches are having just as much problems to live as the black churches. REH: Let's see. Anything else you think of about the business life, memberships, professional life, before we go on? FJE: I've got that pretty well covered, I guess. You were wondering about honors I have received? REH: Well, I thought we could... FJE: Or shall we do traveling first? REH: Well, whichever you want to do. FJE: Maybe leave the honors for the last. I'll travel. REH: Okay. FJE: Now, as I said in the beginning, my children all went in different parts of the country—or they were when they first finished. James has been out in the state of Washington ever since he finished in '62; Ruth has been in New Haven, Connecticut, and in Cambridge, Mass.; Arreta's been out in Aurora, Illinois, now she's back in Pittsfield; and Lorna was in New Haven. So I have done more traveling since they were grown and off my hands than I ever did when they... REH: That's not a nice way to put it, "off your hands." [laughter] FJE: ...so it means I have visited down in New Haven quite a few times, been to Boston, I have been out in Aurora, and around a little bit in Chicago, and Oberlin, and Michigan, and the state of Washington, and I have even been overseas—I spent about three weeks in Germany. James was on sabbatical leave, and we did quite a bit of traveling in Germany. He had sort of mapped out where we were going by having made this tour himself at different times, so we knew where we were going. Here in the United States, with going out in Washington, we used to travel by train, and they have more or less dwindled out; then, since then, I've﻿49 FJE: (cont.) been flying out there. While we were out in the West, we've traveled pretty much over the state of Washington, and we went from... He was this end, that's not too far from Spokane, we went up through Idaho into Canada and traveled across Canada to Vancouver, by automobile, sightseeing there. We've been down the coast to Oregon, to the Shakespeare festival there. REH: So that's, say, in the last twenty years or... FJE: '62, '63, we've done... REH: ...done most of your traveling. FJE: So, as I said, it's been flying... I'm not particularly keen about flying, but, I say, that's the only way to get there these days. It's been the time element as well as train. And this was when we were over in Germany, we ran into this person, she'd been trying to get her mother to come over there, so she said, "Why don't you write a note to my mother and tell her that you came..." Well, I says, "I wasn't able to walk on the water, so there was no other way I could get there. There was only one person that could walk on the water. ..11 REH: ...that we've heard of! [laughter] FJE: And then I said, "Flying overseas was much more even than it was flying across the country," 'cause I suppose the water is more level, whereas the...across the country you had the mountains. So, as I said, although I never did exactly like—I still don't like it, but that's the way I do travel, when I go. REH: Well, Hugh and I have been traveling so much since about May, I guess, of 1979, up through November, and the last part of our trip we took by train, and we said, we just figure we've had it with flying for a while. We want to be on the ground. FJE: Well, yes, you see, when Arreta was a delegate to the General Synod of the Congregational church, one of their meetings was in the city of Washington— was in Washington, D.C.—I attended that, and we traveled by train, and it really is a pleasure to... REH: I like train. FJE: You can see something of... I really like train. REH: Yes, I do a lot. FJE: And I'm hoping it will get back in more than it is. REH: Well, the thing that sort of surprises me was, there was so much talk about the gasoline shortage, and at the same time they were talking about cutting down on Amtrak, and it just never made sense to me. If they didn't want you to go by car, or if you couldn't afford gas, then you need to have some alternative. FJE: No, and I don't like...never take any real long trips on the bus. I have gone to Washington, D.C., once, but...﻿50 REH: We're talking about the travel and train and so forth, you've never taken a long bus trip. FJE: I never thought I would be interested in taking a long bus trip, 'cause you can't stretch and walk the aisles. Although I never did walk the aisles in these trains, as far as I... 'Cause even with the overnight trips in trains, I've slept in berths, or just slept in your coach seat and been very comfortable. I think the interesting part, when we first went overseas, we went from New York to Germany, via Iceland, and dropped down there and spent a few hours before we went further on, and did a little sightseeing there. So that was an interesting experience. When we were in Germany, we've taken in a glass factory, and a candle factory, and woodcarving factory. And we even visited Berchtesgaden, which was where Hitler had his hideout, but it later was taken over by the United States government, and that's... So that I say, we did a little of sightseeing and music. James..,we got into practically all the churches, because James was interested in churches. REH: Churches, and the organs, probably. FJE: One interesting thing we found out when we were over there, we took in the opera, and the whole row in front of us was filled with men. There were really more men and, you might as well say, whereas men wouldn't be going to something like that here. But the whole row in front of us, just men. And it was cheaper, really to go to an opera there than it would be to, almost, to a movie here. Much cheaper than it would be to go to an opera here. REH: Now, you've been to Germany more than once? FJE: No, just the once. REH: Did Arreta go with you? FJE: Yes, she went. And we were there for the three weeks. People were there so much more open and congenial, and they would speak to you whether they knew you or not. And Arreta bought a sweater at this store, and she had to change it, so we went back by ourselves—Sena went with us the first time— but we went back by ourselves to change it—that's the sweater that you had on... REH: ...that I just had on! FJE: And we didn't know where to go to, and one of the customers helped us out and explained to the clerk what we wanted, and so forth and so on, and after we got what we wanted there, she took us to the different places in the store and d id... REH: Translate, or whatever? FJE: Yes. Well, you know, they wouldn't have done that here in this... REH: No, I wouldn't expect anybody to do it, particularly. FJE: I doubt that we would do it to a foreigner coming here, as far as that goes.﻿51 FJE: (cont.) But they were that congenial over there. And you got so, even if you couldn't speak German, you were able to communicate with them. It was a good experience getting over there. REH: Now, did you get to East Germany? FJE: No. REH: James has been, but you haven't. FJE: Now I guess I might as well tell you about some of my honors, is that what you call? REH: Yes, honors. I was also interested in hobbies, if any. FJE: Well, my hobby is crocheting, or else these word search games. REH: What are they? You mean...not crossword puzzles? FJE: Well, I'm not too good at crossword puzzles—I can do 'em a little. There'll be all these letters in the book, and you hunt for this, certain words that are in them. You can look any way, direction for them. I rather enjoy those things. Well, what I'll generally do is see how many words I can pick out that I know and see whether they're in the list, and any ones that I don't find, then at the last I go over the list and see what I have left out. [looks through a book of puzzles] There weren't many in that one. Is that yours? All kinds of things that take the time. But the word search thing, there's a... I was doing one this afternoon up there in the room. You'll see what it is, it's a maternity magazine, Modern Maternity. AES:* Here it is. FJE: You hunt for words and... REH: I know about the crocheting. FJE: I don't watch T.V.. There's certain programs on T.V. that I watch. There's what is called "Ironsides" and there's a couple of game things, but outside of that... There are certain evening programs, but these, what they call soap operas, I just have never followed them. Of course, I never was home to do them. REH: Never was home to get involved. FJE: And I like to listen to radio, music programs. REH: I think we need to make a correction. I thought you said, "Modern Maternity, and I was sort of wondering why you were interested in maternity, but it's Modern Maturity. [laughs] FJE: That and crocheting. REH: Do you ever sit down and play the piano any more? FJE: Not that much, unless I really have to, unless I'm going to play at church, *Arreta Edmonds Smith﻿52 FJE: (cont.) do I sit down at the piano any more. REH: What about reading? FJE: Reading? Yes, I do quite a bit of reading. Sometimes it's solid material, every so often you'll want some light material to read. I don't get up to the library that much, but Arreta as you know, is always... REH: She's always...all these book clubs and things. FJE: Book clubs, and there's always books coming in the house, there's always something in them that's worth my reading, as far as that goes. So X still get up, you might as well say, at the same time as when... I wake up, still wake up at half past five in the morning, get up half past six, even if I don't have to go to... I've done that all my life. REH: No, you never do use an alarm clock, as I recall. FJE: No, I still don't use an alarm clock. I seem to just automatically wake up at just five-thirty. REH: That was the thing I never was able to understand! FJE: I have never lived by the alarm clock. REH: Okay, here comes Reta, do you want to continue or stop? FJE: No, we might as well stop. REH: I was going over in my mind the things that we had talked about yesterday and the day before, and I still had a couple of other questions. One of which was about your parents' attitude about educating a daughter as opposed to educating sons. Did they have any feeling one way or the other? FJE: I don't suppose so. But of course, it was the practice in those days, anyhow, for boys to get education. I suppose 'cause they were going to be supporting the families, and girls were generally just homemakers in those days and times. But of course, I was well along in years, so I could make my own decision without upsetting anybody's viewpoint, as far as that goes, and I had the wherewith to carry myself along... REH: 'Cause you'd been working anyway. FJE: ...'cause I didn't have to depend on them for support. So of course, that would be something to do with it, too. REH: Yes, I'm sure. We never discussed what kind of a town Pittsfield was. I suppose it was a town then, or was it already a city? FJE: It was a city, back then, and in fact, there's only the two cities in Berkshire County, and this is the larger of the two. REH: So it's probably always been the county seat. FJE: ...county seat, with the courthouse and all...types. The jail is in this city, and all those types of things. This is an interesting commentary on﻿(cont.) the jail, and it's been on one of our—how shall we say?—family streets, lo, these many years. Now they've built a schoolhouse on part of the property, but the jail was supposed to be moved to some other place. Now, the people have lived in the neighborhood of the jail for years, and so far as I know, have never complained about the jail being in their back yard. But now, no matter where they suggested putting the jail, folks object to it 'cause it's too near their house. No, we used to walk by it, and I remember seeing sometimes...most of the time, the gate was just open. But occasionally it would be closed, and then there'd be a sign that said something like, "Sorry, kids. Playtime is over." So, you know, children played on the jail property and everything. We just accepted it as part of what was going on in the neighborhood, without thinking about it. Now whether they feel that it's a different type of person that's in jail nowadays, or what, but no matter where they've gone, it's too near business, or it's too near the families, and so forth. So it's probably going to stay where it is? While the tape was turned off we had a little gossip about Pittsfield politics. [laughs] Oh, when I was looking over the...we'11 be getting to this in a moment—the "This is Your Life"—I was reading that, and there was a comment about your using the clothes of the time to hide your pregnancies, and made me think of what you said about Grandma [laughs], 'cause she wouldn't go out at all. But it said that people didn't know anything about what was happening with you till they would read in the newspaper that there'd been a birth. And that was my neighbors, too, that saw me passing down the street every day! No, I never stayed in because of that. I did just as much running as... I thought it was rather funny. Well, we'll get started with awards and honors. First, I thought I would ask whether there were any related to nursing in your early years, and then we'll get into the ones that I know about, the Mother of the Year, and "This is Your Life." I suppose you would call the scholarship to Teachers College a sort of award. It was the beginning of such things with Lincoln Hospital, and I gathered they kept it over the years since then, as far as that goes. That was something you had to apply for or did it just... No, you didn't have to apply for it. Whether it was on the basis of our standing, I don't recall. But I was offered it, and the other girl who took it was...happened to be a New York City girl, born and lived in New York City all her life. But, no...but I think it was one of those things that I couldn't pass up, and even though it was up to me to find ways and means to support myself during that time... It was just a good opportunity. 'Cause you never know what's going to come out of such things, but I don't see how anyone could really pass up an opportunity like that. Of course, nowadays, if someone had a scholarship, there'd be ways and means, outside of personal, to find ways of support. But in those days, it was up to you to do your own supporting, and it probably wasn't as costly, either. And yet it may have been...﻿54 REH: But in proportion, it might have been as costly. FJE: ...proportionally, it might have been costly, too. REH: But when you just think of straight dollars, it wasn't as much. FJE: Now, I can't say that I've received anything... Of course, I have a Red Cross pin, was given to me when I started working for the Bloodmobile—no, it was when I started working, teaching home nursing classes, instead of that other. REH: So what's a Red Cross pin? I mean, what does it mean? That you've given so many hours? FJE: No, it was just a... [interruption] And then I have a couple of recognitions from the hospital—every five years, practically every hospital gives you some type of recognition. Hospital Day is in May, and hospitals nowadays recognize their five-year employees, and every five years you're recognized, and you get some special recognition for the thing. So I have two from the hospital where I... REH: Yes, Pittsfield General. FJE: ...worked. And incidentally, I might say, I never did any floor duty after I graduated. REH: Oh, really? No, that's right, it was the visiting nurse kind of thing, and... FJE: Visiting nurse, and then when I went up the hospital it was more or less administrative, so I've never done any floor duty. REH: Except, just while you were doing training you would go... Yes. FJE: Although I had tried to keep up with what has been going on. REH: Yes, you still read any nursing magazines? FJE: No, I haven't, of late years. If I get a hold of one, I read it, but I stopped subscribing after I quit working. REH: Final retirement. FJE: So, as I say, I finally gave up nursing completely, in '68. Now the only other thing that may be of interest was in '62, I was named one of the Mothers of the Year in Pittsfield. I really don't recall how it originated, but the honor came from the Women's Club of Pittsfield, which is more or less of a white group—in fact, I've never known of any blacks belonging to it—but it consisted mostly of business and professional women, and it was a social club and they give... Now I know they give classes and such types of things. It's open to the public, as I gather now, to join, and I don't know what the membership is. And in fact, I never attended any of their meetings, although the Visiting Nurse, whenever it would have meetings, would often have them over there. So I got sort of acquainted with some of the members there. But it seemed like this certain year, they had what was called the Mother of the Year, and I have never exactly found out how my name got turned in, and﻿55 FJE: (cont.) two of us were picked. They didn't know your names—you were given numbers, and they claimed these two came up each time they went over it, and that's why they gave two awards. The other woman... Incidentally, she lived in this general neighborhood, just up here on Lake Street. REH: Oh, yes? FJE: And she had taken care of, I think it was about...had been the foster mother for about twenty-six children. And now, whether mine was because of...mine, I think, was probably 'cause of my work in the nursing profession, and being known so well in the community. REH: It may have been a combination of your work plus what the children did. FJE: 'Cause I think you came onto it, and Reta was there at that time, I think. REH: I don't remember. About '62, Reta would have been... Yes, 'cause I would have still been in Pittsfield. FJE: You showed up at the affair, and it does seem to me that one of you other... REH: Well, see, I was just graduating from high school in 1941, so we all were still around. Hadn't gotten away to go away to college or anything. FJE: Nope. Now, since then, of course, as everybody said, No one's had as many retirement parties as I have. [Laughter] 'Cause I had one when I retired from the VNA, or rather, left that to go to the Pittsfield General, and that was in '45—no, that was in '56. And then I had the one when I left the PGH, which was in '68, and then I suppose the next, would you call in '75, when I was...when they had "This is Your Life" day. REH: Now how did that come about, do you know? We know it happened, but... FJE: I wasn't supposed to know about it, but they had to tackle me, because no one knew anything about my background. But I was amazed and surprised to see the number of people there were there, and it covered people I had worked with, families I had taken care of, and the nursing profession, and board of directors of this, that, and the other thing that I belonged to. There was this church...church was represented, and there was even some that were pupils in...that I graduated... REH: Classmates? FJE: ...graduated from high school with there that were still living and showed up at it. And all of my children were there, even James came on from Washington, and he took part in the program, and Ruth and Hugh took part in the program. REH: I was surprised that the number of people... It was really a reunion for me, too! FJE: There was a goodly number of black, and you might as well say, blacks don't exactly respond to something like that, so I was amazed at the ones that showed out to...﻿56 REH: Yes, but they did in this case. FJE: They did at that, and it was really run by some of the people that were in church, although it wasn't a church backed thing. REH: No. They got the idea, you think, some couple of people from the church. FJE: To be perfectly honest, I think the background came from Milton, and he suggested it to someone else and they thought it would be a good thing for them to do. And when you get right down to it, it's nicer to honor a person while they're living than wait till they're dead, as far as that goes. No, and it was a very impressive thing, and the mayor of the city was there. REH: Can't remember whether Mr. Newman... Or did he write a letter? FJE: Oh, he wrote a letter, because there was... REH: I saw the book with some of the letters in. FJE: Because they contacted people all over... REH: All over the country. FJE: ...the country, 1 might as well say, because a letter came from the Chaplain Major who was down at Fort Monroe while James was there, and a minister at the church he went to out in Spokane, in fact, and the head of the music department over there. Of course, I had already been out there... REH: Visited, yes. FJE: ...visited and met these people, and as I say... REH: I thought they were very nice letters. Very touching. FJE: And even people here in town wrote letters. So all in all, it was a very impressive meeting. And outside of this booklet that they gave me, and these many letters, there was a sum of money that was given to me. REH: So that's... It's not the end of your life yet. What are you doing these days? FJE: I'm still resting after a strenuous week. [laughter] I am due to go have lunch with Betty Jones. It was to have been last week Wednesday. And since '77, I don't know if I said that I'd quit, quit being the organist of the church, but the only organizations I now belong to at this present date are the Friends of the Athenaeum, and the Salvation [Army] advisory board, and the Berkshire Association. And I try to attend their meetings as necessary. REH: Oh, last night when we were talking, later on you were mentioning being out on the street ringing the bell for the Salvation Army at Christmas time? FJE: Yes, I spent two hours of the day, and it was cold... REH: Well, in Boston, I had only seen the people who were Salvation Army members with their bonnets and their regular outfits on. I had never seen other people.﻿57 FJE: No, ever since I have been in it, it's the board of directors that has always manned it, and within recent years, they've tried to get the service clubs to be involved and take over a day. This was at the main booth on North Street. At your outlying district, there would be someone in the Salvation Army with their tambourine or something to collect the money in. REH: Well, it's probably a nice idea to do it that way, to have the whole community to participate, and they know it's going to a good cause. FJE: REH: ...and they know it's others besides Salvation Army people that are interested in the work of it. And it was a broad section, you might as well say, of the community that was involved. What do you think was your most important achievement in life, if you have one? [laughs] FJE: Well, I would say it was bringing up a family and being able to...for them to show what they have done. I think that's more important, really, than just work. REH: I think we all turned out pretty decent. [laughs] FJE: 'Cause you got to give 'em some kind of a background, and inspiration for them to want to do anything. REH: And the parents' expectation of them—it was just expected that we would somehow all go on and make our way in life. FJE: Right. And I think it's becoming more and more necessary that children have more than a high school education, 'cause even graduate degrees, nowadays, don't bring jobs. But I think that's the sad part of the black children around here—the parents don't seem to be interested enough, not too many of 'em, to want to make them do something of themselves. But there's always some families whose children—in fact, especially in the church, there's certain families that practically all their children have had a chance to get away, and that seems to be in the mind of the parents who sort of backed them. REH: Well, I was looking at the Berkshire Eagle this morning, and it was on the editorial page, and I had the feeling that the white parents in Pittsfield don't really have expectations for their children to go away to college. So... but I still think it's, well, perhaps in this town, more important for the blacks to get away and get some education. FJE: It is, it is. And I suppose everybody looks at the money angle first, probably—that's probably it, and I will say that, in your day and time, when we were putting you through, you never knew where the money was coming from, you never had the money stashed away in the bank, but when the time came, the money seemed to... REH: Came through somehow. FJE: ...to come through. Now it's possible for children to get scholarships more so than it was in your time. And I think these families that have sent their children away, a good many have gotten some type of scholarship, more so than it's coming off of a mother's pockets, parents' pockets. REH: Well, I feel like I have asked all the questions that I had. Can you think﻿58 REH: (cont.) of any comments or anything... FJE: I've rather enjoyed doing it, and probably it's been easier for me to do it than if it had been a perfect stranger... REH: Well, I've enjoyed it. FJE: ...'cause you can probably jog my memory at things that a perfect stranger wouldn't know anything about. REH: Yeah. And then, Lorna sat in and listened to some of it, made some comments and helped us along. FJE: And Milton seemed rather... REH: Yes, I think everybody enjoyed it. Well, thank you very much.﻿FLORENCE EDMONDS..