 Marcia M. Greenlee: Constance A. Thomas: This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Constance A. Thomas. A for Allen, Thomas. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Thomas's home at 1635 Twenty-fifth Avenue, Seattle, Washington, 98122. The date is August 11, 1977. The interviewer is Marcia Greenlee. Mrs. Thomas, could you briefly describe what your career has been? Do you consider yourself primarily a professional businesswoman, or housewife and mother? Well, I consider myself principally a professional woman, as I've had little experience as a housewife, but a great deal as a mother. I attended the university at a time, during the depression, when many blacks didn't attend. I imagine the most we ever had at one time in the university among eight thousand students was perhaps seventeen blacks. We were three black sisters attending the University of Washington at the same time. My family was very educationally motivated and felt that all members of the family should attend college. In those days we had very poor counseling in high school and at the University of Washington. I probably would have ended up in a much different field if I had had a different type of counseling—for example, I liked law, I liked working with people in foreign nations, but there was just no encouragement in those days for women to become lawyers. Therefore, I went into the speech field, and I took therapy as sort of a sideline; I majored in speech and minored in drama because I was interested in the theater and had been all my life. My other minor was sociology. I was the first black to major in speech at the university as well as one of the first in the nation. I know this, because at one time the government searched the United States trying to find a black individual in speech to work in Washington, D.C. I was approached by the head of the speech department at the University of Washington as I was the most advanced black student they could find in the United States in speech.﻿2 MMG: About what time was this, do you remember? CAT: Yes, this was around 1937. I started the university in 1935. But I didn't have any idea of wanting to go to Washington, D.C., at that time and so I didn't pursue that. I acted in the theaters at the University of Washington, and the Federal Theater. MMG: Could you just name those theaters? CAT: Yes, there was the University Playhouse, there was the Studio Theater and the Penthouse Theater. Each one gave a different variety of plays. The Studio Theater produced the most difficult at the university, e.g., Sherwood Anderson... MMG: Anderson. CAT: The Penthouse was more the sophisticated light comedy, As You Like It type of theater. The University Playhouse was really outstanding. The Federal Theater came into being, and when I was a freshman in '35, I went into the Federal Theater. MMG: This was part of the WPA [Works Progress Administration]... CAT: Yes. The WPA, and we were paid...I was there on the NYA [National Youth Administration] section, because I was a teenager. The work with the Federal Theater was a thrilling and exciting experience as we had an opportunity to play everything from Shakespeare to stevedore. Original plays were produced. There were opportunities to direct, to act, to sing, to dance, to do all types of things. I also majored in dance, as I was always interested in dancing. I had danced as a little girl on the stage, I was with the Pantages circuit, dancing as a very small child. Also, I had training in modern ballet and formal ballet. I'd had polio when I was six and so my grandmother enrolled me in dance classes to strengthen my legs, and dance became quite important in my life, also. At the university, when it came time to belong to the honoraries and sororities, I was denied the experience. The reason I know I was proposed for them was because of professors informing me. When this movement started with black being beautiful and all, and this antagonism toward whites, I had to tell many people that there were good and bad in all races. If it hadn't been for some whites who had been really interested in me and who told me of where I stood as a human being at the university, it would have been a very depressing thing. Being the only one in your field— and my sister being the only one in nursing, and my other sister the only one in accounting—was very difficult. The one in nursing had to change her major and pretend she was taking sociology. A sociology professor said, "Pretend you're taking sociology, so that you will receive decent grades in nursing," because they tried to fail her. From then on, her grades improved. Now she's a professor and was instructing at the University of Washington for four years, and is now an instructor at Seattle﻿3 CAT: (cont.) Pacific University. She had to go East to get her training in nursing because the university would not fulfill their obligation to her. The sister in accounting had the same experience. She used to have to take her papers and tests and compare them with other students, and then go and fight for correct grades. So it was with me. I had Professor Pellegrini and Professor O'Brien, two fine men who came to me and said, "Yourname has been brought up for the speech honorarium, drama honorarium, dance honorarium," which is Orchesis, "The young people want you, but the counselors have voted you down, and we want you to know that you're that good." The head of the drama department at that time, in acting, went on to Warner Brothers. She told me that the greatest disappointment in her teaching career was that I was colored, because she thought that I could have been outstanding. At that time, what could a black student, who had been trained in Shakespeare and other classics, do in movies or on the stage but play maids and similar roles? At least I had some strength from these professors. Of course, the great strength came from my mother saying, "Don't hate. You know, hate only corrodes you, not the other person." I decided finally to go into teaching, which would be in my fifth year. Because, what could one do with the speech that one had but teach? I decided to go into education in order to look around and see what I would eventually do. At the University of Washington, I enrolled in education. It was a very difficult department, there was no encouragement, no help, and the students too were very stand-offish except for several Jewish girls I knew, who also had trouble getting into Seattle to teach. And when it came time for me to do my cadet practice teaching, the university would not allow it. But I fortunately had a young professor, a woman who was a fantastic teacher, and she had already had us as a class go out to teach. Therefore, I had taught at Garfield, Franklin, Roosevelt, Lincoln, and Ballard High Schools. As black history was one of my interests, I had taught black history and English in English classes in the schools. The school board told me first that a principal would not accept me. I went and got a principal, a Garfield principal, who said, "You graduated from here? Of course you can come to teach." They said teachers wouldn't want me; well, teachers had already accepted me. They said children wouldn't come to me, and parents would object. Well, the children had liked me and the parents had liked me. The education department heads were just furious that a teacher had the nerve to put me into a school. MMG: Now this was about 1939 or 1940? CAT: Yes, this was 1940. I graduatedin 1939; my fifth year was 1940. There were two brothers, Shorett brothers, who were state senators, who helped me. My parents were in politics, and we based our stand on a state law in Washington that all students are entitled to an equal education. Part of my education was practice teaching. The senators had graduated from Broadway, and they asked the principal of Broadway to ask for me to come to his school to teach, which he did. The superintendent of schools, Dr. McClure at that time, was in Washington, D.C., to some educational meeting, and he flew back here to find out what the excitement was all about. The﻿4 CAT: (cont.) day I walked in to get my assignment, which was for Broadway High School, all the other students had been teaching for several weeks. The head of the teaching unit of the educational department at the University of Washington just threw my assignment at me across the desk, he was so angry. It took a lot of courage for me, as the Urban League and the NAACP were quite small and not very aggressive in those days. But I was willing to fight. MMG: Mrs. Thomas, could you give me the name of the individual involved in the education department? CAT: I can't think of his name right now, but I will... Dr. Francis Powers. He in later years became dean of the College of Education at the University of Washington. When I did my teaching, there was a fine woman teacher who was my supervisor, and I was able to do all types of instruction in English, speech, therapy, and drama. Members of the education department came and observed me; I think I was observed probably more than anyone else. Professors asked this professor who was supervisor of teachers, How did he like what I was doing? Professor Pellegrini was one of those who was asked. And he said, "She's doing fine, but she's just an experiment." So at the end of that year, of course, I got my degree to teach, and applied to Seattle public schools but was turned down. I kept applying; eventually they offered me a third-grade teaching job. Well, I'm not a third-grade teacher. I was a high school teacher and therapist. I'm not trained in elementary school, and I don't know if it was because they wanted me to fail, or what, but I refused it. I knew I was a therapist and a pathologist, and that was what I applied for. For eleven years I continued to apply to teach, and that is why Mrs. De Witty was the first teacher, and not me, in the Seattle schools, because she was an elementary teacher. And so...that is why I eventually went to New York, in 1943, and worked there with the American Negro Theater, had my own U.S.O. unit, and worked at laboratories and taught night school in Harlem to adults. I did a great deal in dramatics, and had a marvelous time meeting many of our famous black poets and writers. I mean, New York at that time was just a hotbed of young and mature people in all of the arts. It was a thrilling place to be, at that time. I returned to Seattle in '45 just for a visit, because I had gotten my first chance to act in a big role on Broadway. I was to return in September—this was in June. And I had not been feeling too well; I'd been working quite hard. What I had was rheumatic fever. When I came down with rheumatic fever, the doctors said I could never live in the East again, because I'd be a heart cripple. It would be too cold for me. I decided to stay here, in Seattle, which they even thought that would be too cold and damp for me to live in. I went back to the university for more graduate work, and kept applying to teach here. After eleven years of trying to get work, I applied to the same woman, Miss Elvina Miller, who was the head of the speech department, pathology, for Seattle public schools, and God knows the mysterious ways... she had had a stroke, and during that time had become religious. Therefore when I applied, she decided it was time for her to be broader, and to give﻿5 CAT: (cont.) me an opportunity. So I was put on what was called a semester substitute basis, taking the place of a teacher, Kathleen Pendergast, who was going to get her master's degree. She is now head of the department. And they gave me seven schools I was to travel to. This happened after I had married and divorced, and had a serious automobile accident. My child at this time was several years old. I was still in a steel body cast. While waiting to teach, I had done many jobs, that is, worked as a census taker, been a supervisor at the juvenile court, a postal employee, ran the Democratic headquarters in our area, where people could come for material, and information, that type of thing. There are so many kinds of jobs, in these years. Anyway, they gave me seven schools. As I had no car, I had to travel, in those days, on buses from school to school. When Mrs. Miller was taking me on my first visit of the schools, she stopped under the University Bridge and said, "I'm sorry to tell you this, but we have given you five of the seven devils." And she explained that there were seven women principals who were called seven devils, because they were. And five of them, they had given to me. Now, how they decided this, I didn't know, but anyway, I ended up having to go to schools clear at the top of Queen Anne Hill in the north end, and to Columbia City in the south end, and in the central area... I very seldom had a chance for lunch, I was catching buses all the time between schools. But at the end of the year—my assignment was "semester substitute" and they had kept me for three semesters—at the end of the year, six principals were pleased and asked specifically that I return to their schools. The seventh was a man who was very prejudiced, and he did not; but six of the others did, which I thought was a good...even all the devils! They were the kind that would open one's mail that came from parents. I had one who was next door to my room in a nurse's office. She would come in and take over the class, and with that type of behavior, she'd frighten my poor children half to death. So I became a speech therapist for the Seattle public schools, and remained so employed until I became physically disabled. I was with them eighteen and a half years. I worked as an itinerant therapist, and then as my physical condition involving my legs deteriorated, I became a certified teacher of the deaf. In the sixties I went back to the university and trained for this. When I eventually went to a wheelchair, I transferred to Lowell School to work with the cerebral palsied, and was head of the speech department there. Interestingly enough, the Speech and Drama Honorary asked me to join—the Speech and Drama Honorary of America. I refused, because I said when I was a student, they wouldn't take me; I didn't want to then. But many of the young people in the department—I was the oldest one at that time, doing graduate work in the sixties— used to always gather around and they would beg me to help them. I found, too, as a teacher, and I was often at odds with the professors because they'd say, "You think like a teacher," and that's what I was supposed to be. And I found that they were sending their students down to observe me. A student would say she wanted to know how to teach. "Go down and watch Mrs. Thomas." The professors didn't know how to teach, they were in research! When the students said, "Please, we want you," I did join. And finally, after all those years, I was a member of Zeta Phi Eta; they keep in touch with me still; they want me to be active.﻿6 CAT: (cont.) I became interested in black history because of my grandparents. I wish I had listened more as a young child. I had a grandmother who loved history, all history, and she would tell me black history, and English history, as she was particularly interested in this as well as the history of Seattle, and the Northwest. Some of this stayed with me, and when I got to the university, I was seventeen, and began to study about blacks, in other nations—black musicians in Russia, or black artists in Europe, this type of thing. I became specifically interested in Northwest history, and started to collect stories and pictures. I was an itinerant therapist in the central area schools. I also had schools all over, which gave me quite a variety, as I didn't want to be in one area. I felt it was difficult to be in one area, especially, I felt, all-black schools. Because I worked so hard, and I just couldn't turn anyone down, and you were supposed to carry seventy-nine, and I was carrying around one hundred twenty-five students, and thirty-five ^ were stutterers, which was quite a large load of stuttering. I wanted the variety of different races, and different backgrounds, and society. In the black schools, I found I worked doubly hard. I would stop a child if I saw them in the halls, and they had been put out of their rooms, and I'd stop and talk to this child, "Why are you here? Don't you know you should have pride in yourself, that we would not have a state of Washington if it wasn't for black people having come here and settling? The United States was able to claim this land from England, because black sailors couldn't settle in the Willamette Valley in Oregon, and settled here." The teachers asked me when I'd come talk to their classes. This was in the elementary grades, and so I did, to Washington State history classes, and to school assemblies. MMG: Now was this just in predominantly black schools, or all over the city? CAT: This began in the schools which had become predominantly black schools. But the children, of course, were mixed races. The little Oriental children, the white children, they'd come up to me, "Oh, I took my mother out to show her," or "I took my father out and showed them where it was that you told me that this first settlement was, and where the Our House Hotel was, where the first animal pound was," and so on. They were so excited, and became quite proud of themselves. I felt and still feel that this was something, an intimate, close relationship the children need to know about each other. I still don't think history is taught in the way it should be, where the children have this enthusiasm and excitement, wanting to go out and find out for themselves. To have this great pride in themselves, as blacks, and other races, having pride in each other. Which I found Oriental children had, and the white children had, and the black children all had—when they knew about each other. So this was just a sideline I did for assemblies, and in the classes. MMG: Now you are retired... CAT: No, I didn't really, I'm not considered retired... MMG: Your disability... What projects are you at work on, planning to work on, in future?﻿7 CAT: What I'm hoping to do, and what I was doing up until two years ago—then I became so ill—was recording the history of older black people in the community. And of course in the last two years, so many of them have died; I feel if I could have driven, I would have been able to get to them. I find that many of the old people do not like to talk to strangers, and so some of the people who are doing work with history aren't able to get to them. And I enjoy them, and they, I think, feel I'm part of them, and so they will be very frank, and they're quite relaxed, and will tell me their stories. And so I've been making tapes of them. I would like to have them transcribed, and eventually I would like to write stories for children, elementary stories, a group of stories and book about Simmons and Bush in Washington State, and the first one that settled here in Seattle, George Grose, and the various other families. MMG: Now, I'd like to discuss with you some of the early influences on your career interests and just your personal development. We should start with your whole family... CAT: One thing before we talk about something else, I would like to go out and lecture to groups, like church groups and library groups, and I've done this with many of the white churches, but seldom to the black churches or never to the black newcomers, and I think that they should know about black history also. I'm sorry to interrupt you, but I thought it was important, that I'd like to do that. MMG: That's all right. Yes, I want to talk some about your family background. Could you begin with a discussion of your father, and your paternal grandfather, whatever you know about them? CAT: My father was from Jamaica. MMG: What was his full name? CAT: Edward Alexander Pitter. MMG: When was he born? CAT: Let's see... He was born in Ellen Street ^Jamaica] in the beautiful green hills. I'll have to get his age. He died in his eighties, at eighty-four, last December. We could subtract that... MMG: That's 1892. CAT: Okay. And he left Jamaica at the age of fourteen, after they'd had a very severe earthquake. And went to Panama, and in Panama, he heard of the Alaska-Yukon expedition, and so he came to Seattle; he worked on a boat, and came up as an adventurer to Seattle. He liked it very much, and people were quite friendly to him, and he decided to stay. MMG: Do you know anything about his parents? CAT: Yes, we went to Jamaica two years ago; the whole family did. And it was quite an interesting experience. We went back, and we found why he loved﻿8 CAT: (cont.) the green hills of Washington, because he lived in the Blue Mountains in Jamaica. And we found what is called the Pitter Estate. His grandfather was Scottish, and Pitter is a Scottish name. Scottish-Jewish name. Thomas Pitter owned a huge plantation, and they call it now the Pitter Estate. And on that estate is the little post office they have there, the little store, general store, the graveyard; and we visited the church where he used to pump the organ. The first time the Messiah was ever sung, in the islands, it was sung in this church. We found relatives, cousins, and they're all over—of course, in England and in Montreal, and in Quebec, and Dad's father was a Pitter married to a Pitter, and we found that quite interesting, because we hadn't known that before. The Pitter name. We found the large graveyard where the Pitters are buried, and the estate stretches for quite a long way. MMG: Do you have your grandparents' names? CAT: Thomas Pitter and Margaret Pitter. I have them in the family tree that we made up there; we made botto the Allen tree, because we had a reunion of the Aliens about four years ago, in Philadelphia. MMG: Well, maybe I can just copy some of these off. How was your father employed after he decided to settle here in the Northwest? CAT: Well, Dad had been trained as a printer; in those days they took examinations to go to Oxford, where he would have eventually gone, but because of the earthquake and ensuing problems and all, he came here. He had started out in printing and accounting, which he is interested in. But when he first came here, he worked as a waiter, at the Butler Hotel, some of the other large hotels that were here at that time. Some of the older men, like Mr. Gayton, took him under their wings and became his friends. Dr. Cooper was another. Evidently he was a very likeable person, as a young man, because they all sort of supervised his growing up and maturing, and getting an education, and he did work with an accounting firm until the depression, when the firm failed. He took time off to write his book, Who1s Who in the State of Washington. MMG: Do you remember the name of that firm? CAT: No, I'm sorry, I do not. My sister may have it among some of her things. MMG: Who's Who in the State of Washington was published in 1927. CAT: And it was to be printed every other year, until every black family in the state—and there were over 5,000-sorae odd black families; they were 3,900-some odd families in Seattle—and every family was to be covered, but because of the depression, he was unable to continue with that. He traveled throughout the state working on his book. He was appointed through President Roosevelt and Dr. Thompkins, the recorder of deeds, as organizer of Democratic clubs in the state of Washington. In 1940 he began organizing Democratic clubs throughout the state. Black Democratic clubs. And because he was in politics and had excellent references, he was appointed deputy sheriff, and eventually he became a county clerk, and then court clerk for several judges—Judge James was his last one.﻿9 MMG: Now, what about your mother, what was her name? CAT: Marjorie Marian Allen. And that's why I'm Allen; the first child of our branch of the family always have Allen as a middle name. Some of my cousins' first names are Allen... MMG: When was your mother born, and where? CAT: My mother was born in Mount Holly, New Jersey, in 1900. MMG: Could you tell me something about her background, and her parents? CAT: Yes, Mother's parents died—her last parent died—when she was nine. All her brothers were trained. My mother was the youngest—no, she was the second of three young girls in her family. And at nine, she felt she did not want others to take care of her; she was a very independent person, she was fiery, and she felt that she did not want to become almost a slave in some home. The Vanderbilts' first cousins wanted a girl...in those days, often they would have a companion and servant who would grow up with one of their children. And my mother went to work for them, and that's where my name comes from, Constance. I'm named after one of the Vanderbilts' cousins. And she stayed with them until she came out here. MMG: Was this in New Jersey then? CAT: This was in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. And I must say this. I said "grandparents" before, whereas Isiah Allen really is my mother's uncle, and he's called "grandfather" by us because that's the only grandparent we knew. Hers was dead, and so to her they became her parents. And their daughter Adela had died. They had come across the United States through San Francisco, and came here in 1889, before the fire. Isiah and Mary Allen. My mother came to live with them in her teens, and went to Broadway High School here. I don't know where she got all that fighting spirit from, but she was a fighter; I guess the Aliens have been fighters. They have, because I understand about some of her uncles and her cousins; one who was a judge, and others who had been lawyers or ministers had all been fighters. There were those in politics, who had been murdered because of their fighting for the rights of blacks in their own day. So Mother came to Seattle, and we had a beautiful letter after she died, about when she was very young. She must have been about fifteen, and a woman in the letter told how she gathered up the children in the neighborhood from parents who worked, and started a nursery school. These children learned how to sing, paint, and draw, and to do things one would do in a nursery school. She wrote plays for them, and eventually in later years she wrote plays that were put on downtown at the Moore Theater and some of the high schools, with a cast with as many as 150 young people. MMG: Have those plays been collected any place that you know of? CAT: No, they have not. The Awakening is one of her most famous. People often say, "I remember when I played this part in a play!" My mother was champion for all. The principal of our grade school could look out from her third floor, which is the Edmund Meany Junior High now, but was﻿10 CAT: (cont.) Longfellow Grade School—from the top floor, I'd say three floors up—from her little cubicle at the top, she could look down and see my mother marching to school, and she knew that some child there of color had been called a name or been slapped, or had been insulted, and my mother was on her way there to defend this child. Not her own children, although she had to defend us, but any child who had problems. The same thing at Garfield High School. Any literature that was taught that was derogatory to blacks, she was up there, and that literature was taken out of the schools. MMG: These were materials used in the classroom. CAT: Materials used in the classrooms, like the poem, "Study of the Negro Race"— "fat black bucks in the wine barrel room "you know that one. She had her eye on the schools all the time. She was fighting for young people. For example, a boy was accused of rape. Mother had intended to be a lawyer, and one of the write-ups that we have of her with her picture in a book, is that she intended to be a lawyer—of course, she met Mr. Pitter and Mr. Pitter married her instead, and she was supposed to go ahead and be a lawyer, but I came along. This young fellow, for example, was accused of rape, and Mother went out into the area, and because of her color, and Mother had bright red hair and green eyes, and after typhoid, her hair was light brown. And so, Caucasians would not always know people who were black. She could go out as she could find out many things. She found out from the neighbors what type of people these parents of the girl were. She defended this young man and other young people as well to keep them out of prisons, because we didn't have any juvenile homes in those days. And because of her they went to reformatories instead. I have been told that if I could have heard her in court, that she could defend as well as any lawyer. MMG: Do you remember about the time period for this rape case? CAT: Let's see, this would have been in the mid-thirties, during high school. MMG: And this was carried in all the papers? CAT: In all the papers, yes. MMG: And what was the outcome of the case? CAT: The young boy was sent to reformatory school. There were others, too— not rape but, for example, a young fellow was picked up and he was six-foot five, or seven, something like that, for being a burglar, and Mother went down and proved how ridiculous the police were, after they described how the burglary was done, that a six-foot seven young man couldn't possibly have been the burglar. She was always doing this sort of thing. When a young man, a Caucasian, was murdered and raped here in the city jail, the mayor asked Mother to please be on the committee to help to plan the juvenile court. She accepted and she helped to plan the court that we have now. MMG: About what time was that, do you know?﻿11 CAT: This would be in the mid-forties. MMG: Now, your mother and father, then, met and married here in Seattle, is that right? CAT: Yes, they did. MMG: Do you remember the year? CAT: They married in 1916. MMG: Now, when were you born? CAT: In 1917. MMG: And you were the eldest child in your family? CAT: Yes. MMG What's the day and month of your birthday? CAT: July 13, 1917. MMG: Could you tell me something about your siblings? Maybe we should discuss them in their birth order. CAT: All right. There was Maxine Inez, and then there was Marjorie Edwina. And I guess we were active from the time we were born, practically. We-had a Congressional Record as part of our reading as children, and history. Dad was interested in Marcus Garvey, so we knew black history. Our home was a center always of activity. I can never remember sitting down to dinner with just us five. There was Professor McGruder, who was a famous... who had played for the Salt Lake City choir, who inspired us as far as music... Dad had a beautiful voice, and sang with the Episcopal choir, and so, there was a great deal of music, and singing in the home. There was Mr. DeBow whom he wrote the book with, and he kept us politically interested in news; there was my godfather, Mr. Tutor, Malcolm Tutor, from the West Indies, who became one of the wealthiest black men in this area, and with partners built the first theater on Madison Street. MMG: What was its name, do you remember? CAT: The Anzier Theater. There was Anderson, Frazier, and Tutor as partners. He loved literature, and I can remember sitting as a little girl, my feet couldn't even touch the floor, and he would read aloud Shakespeare, Alexander Dumas, and other books and poetry, so I was reading very early. At four I started kindergarten. Our home was just full of activities. One of my godparents was a Portuguese, and so was very interesting... from Portugal, and there were other people from other parts of the world, including Africa. And during the year, almost every month there was a party for the young people. Our home had seventeen rooms that opened into each other and made dancing and partying great fun. We could have as many as﻿12 CAT: (cont.) ninety young people there. It was quite a gathering place where the young people could come, and we'd have parties for every celebration of birthdays, Halloween, dress-up parties, that sort of thing. Also, the first youth band in that area began in our living room—things were always starting there. And some of those went on to become quite outstanding musicians, with bands, and some, to have their own band. Our parents had us passing out literature, even as little children, in politics. I can remember being very small, passing out literature. For Roosevelt, Magnuson and others. And at that time, we didn't call our community celebration "Seafair," we'd call it "Potlatch," and my sister Marge even at ten entered a unit for the black community to have something in the Potlatch. We collected money, and we went to the churches, to businesses, and we had a float the first year. The next year we raised enough money to have a marching unit and band. Marge wanted a marching unit, so Mother ^ got out and taught the children how to march. We ended up with 100 young peopie dressed in white. I was so upset, because Mother took my long socks and cut them off for the little children who couldn't afford them, and sewed them together so they'd have bobbie socks, we called them. We sent to Portland for a sixty-piece band, and we had ten girls, who made their own organdy dresses, on the float. We stretched for two blocks. And that in the thirties was quite an accomplishment, for a small community. Our young men who went to China on the steamships wore white suits they had made in China, and walked as parade marshals, with the children. MMG: Now maybe we should say here that Potlatch and Seafair are citywide celebrations during the summer in Seattle... CAT: In those days, of course, I think it was much more colorful, because the Indians came down from the reservations, and we had carnivals all over in every section of the city, and it was quite exciting, and it was peaceful, and it was, I suppose we'd call it "country," and yet it was big. city, too. And for the blacks, for us to have won first prize in the drum majors, from Portland, second for the ones that were head of the marching unit, and second in bands, we thought we did quite well. We took care of the out-of-towners for the whole time they were here—oh, I never cooked so many hamburgers in my life! About fifteen then. So, sometimes I wondered how someone that young—my sister, ten—could get us in it every year, and so we started destroying the literature when it would come in the house, because Marge was forever getting in things! MMG: Well, I wanted to know a little bit more about your sisters, Maxine and Marjorie. Could you tell me something about each of them? CAT: Well, even though we were interested in artistic things—Maxine in music, Marjorie in sculpture, and I was interested in drama—Mother said one thing, "Always have your education first." So, of course, that was the one thing they saw to it we did. During high school and college, Mother was housekeeper for the Wilsonian Hotel in the university district. Upper-middle class and wealthy people lived there, as well as some of the wealthy students. Maxine wanted to become a nurse and she went to the University of Washington,﻿13 CAT: (cont.) as I mentioned earlier, to take nursing. But they wouldn't give her decent grades until she said she [would be] a sociology major, so she graduated in sociology from the University of Washington. Before that, of course, they were always active. We were active in the A.M.E. church for many years, on Fourteenth Street, and they were head of their youth organizations, such as Allen Endeavor League. Marge went to the Baptist church, Mount Zion, became head of the youth organization there, the Baptist Young People's Union. MMG: Did the A.M.E. church have another name, it was just A.M.E.? CAT: A.M.E. MMG: But it didn't have another name? Fourteenth Street. CAT: Mm hmm. We belonged to the Sunday school, and we were in many activities there, including church. At A.M.E. there was a fine minister. He took a large group of young black children from here to Memphis, Tennessee. That's the first time a large group of young people left the Northwest, because we were really isolated up here, and we very seldom got away. Maxine was one of those that went on to Memphis. At the university, she did quite well, after she decided not to become a nurse. As long as they didn't think she wanted to be a nurse, they would let her work as a secretary at Harborview Hospital, in the office. At least she was close to nursing. There were objections, people coming through the lobby objected to her being there. She left Seattle and went to Lincoln School for Nursing* in New York, in the Bronx, and graduated from there as a nurse. She returned here, and became a nurse at Providence Hospital, and she became charge nurse there. Eventually she married and moved to California, and became a public health nurse, and then the head of public health nursing for the city of Los Angeles. She received her master's at UCLA and went [on] to be a professor at Mount Saint Mary's College in Los Angeles. After the death of her husband, she returned to Seattle. A few years ago, she became professor at the University of Washington. She was a counselor for minority students, and was interested in continuing education. She does a great deal of writing and publishing; she's in one of the government committees which meets in Bethesda, Maryland, where they decide on grants for college in nursing; she's on the state board for nurses, governor's state board; she's an officer in the National Black Nurses; she helped form the first nurses group here—Mary Mahoney Nurses group in Seattle. She is now a professor at Seattle Pacific University, and she is at the present moment in Costa Rica, with a group of nurses from the United States. She teaches in Spanish—public health care. Next year she'll be head of the program in Costa Rica. MMG: What was her married name? CAT: She was Maxine Davis, and now it's Haynes. So she's very active in so many organizations, I can't name them... MMG: Now, is there more you'd like to say about your sister Marjorie? * Lincoln Hospital and Home Training School for Nurses﻿14 CAT: Yes, Marjorie took accounting. After the university, she attended Howard University. She worked at the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., and she attended City College in New York. She was employed as an accountant in New York. Returning to Seattle, she was employed by the Seattle Engineering Department. Then she opened her own business here in Seattle on Madison Street and eventually, when she married, she had a business in her home. She was in politics and was a state representative. She went to several national conventions; she fought for the seating of Martin Luther King, and their delegation. She was one of those that fought and helped them win. She said one of the most beautiful nights of her life was when Mrs. Coretta King was sitting on her bed, and Dr. Martin Luther King was on the other side, and they were discussing strategy. MMG: This was at the Democratic convention? CAT: Convention... And this was, I believe, the one in 1964 in Atlantic City. And they...she was also in the one in Chicago. Almost the entire delegation stopped speaking to her. And then people like Humphrey and Jackson were cornering her in corners, trying to get her to change her way of thinking, and she would walk through the lobby and delegates would speak to her; and after they won and all, oh, she was just the greatest thing in the world, you know, after national television interviewed her and all that sort of thing. She's very active in politics here in Seattle, in the women's organizations, and here in the central area, and she was in the state legislature, from the Thirty-seventh District... MMG: Does she have a married name? CAT: Yes, King, Marjorie King. And Marjorie Pitter King is the middle name that she used. MMG: Now, you've described the household that you grew up in, and the kind of stimulation that was available to you and to your sisters, and you've mentioned some other persons who figured in that stimulation besides your parents. Are there any other names that you would like to call, either related or unrelated, that you feel had an impact on your early development? CAT: I think the parents of the young people we grew up with, like the Alexanders, our parents were very close. And the children felt close, it's almost like the brother-sister feeling of the old-timers. And so we obeyed them as well as our own parents, and they had a very great influence on the way we conducted ourselves. They would also be able to speak to us, and have our parents follow through on their correction. We have an old-timers' picnic, as you know now, that began a few years ago. One of the things one of my nephews remarked on was, "I've never seen so many people that kiss each other, and hug each other, and love each other like you people do." But it was this closeness that we had, and so I feel that the very smallness of the community, although we were not located in just one area, as we were scattered all throughout the city... The Spearmans, I would say, were another fine influence. We were scattered through various﻿15 CAT: (cont.) parts of the city, but we felt very close, and we would come together quite often with these parties, and at church. MMG: In the period of time we're describing now is before the Second World War? CAT: Oh yes, definitely before the Second World War. MMG: What were the Alexanders' first names? CAT: Ernest Alexander. MMG: And his wife? CAT: Irene. MMG: Ernest and Irene. CAT: And Ernest was a fine man who joined the navy at an early age—fourteen, I believe, and did very well in the navy and became an immigration inspector when he retired. MMG: Who were the Spearmans? CAT: The E.E. Spearman family lived in Ballard. He was one of the first blacks to belong to the building and trade union. He was a lather. His wife's name was Vivian. She was a very talented lady, active in the community. MMG: Now you've told already quite a bit about your educational experience at the University of Washington. Let's go back before that. Where did you attend elementary school, junior high, high school, and how would you characterize your early education? CAT: There were no junior highs; I went to Longfellow Grade School, which went to the eighth grade. We had good teachers, and poor teachers. We've seen Miss Nason was my greatest inspiration—she was the librarian— because she gave yora such a love of literature and poetry. My kindergarten teacher, Miss Seterer, never married; she was Judge Neterer's daughter. And interestingly enough, when I was going on my first teaching assignment, I walked into Madrona School, and she was principal there. When I walked in, she said, "Constance Pitter, you're just as chubby and cute and little as ycrn were when you walked into my kindergarten grade!" Miss Neterer was a good principal, especially for a new teacher. The school was integrated. At one time when I was very young, there were some black teachers who came from other parts of the country, or maybe had left there and became teachers, and wanted to teach. And they fought to teach. And the suggestion was made that they have a black school, and have all the teachers teach in the black situation, and the parents fought that. MMG: Black parents?﻿16 CAT: Black parents fought that. They felt that once that was started, we would have a segregated school. And it was best to keep them integrated as they were. MMG: What was the feeling of the black teachers, do you know? CAT: No, I don't. I imagine they resented it, I suppose. I don't know. But I do know that the parents fought it, and it was never implemented. But that was a suggestion; whether they would have followed through on it or not, I don't know. But if they had, the Longfellow School would have been the school where they would have been, because at that time it had the most black students in it. Although that wasn't that many... It would have been a predominantly black school, but it would have been a place where all black teachers would have been, and maybe they would have bused the children there eventually or something, I just don't know. Mrs. Gifford, who was the principal, was a tough principal, but she was also a principal who listened to parents, and if the parent was right, and felt they were right, she would certainly correct on teachers who were not good. I know when I was slapped because I couldn't spell a word, my mother saw she disciplined that teacher; she really followed through on discipline of a teacher. We had good training, and we participated in all activities, and I enjoyed Longfellow very much. From there, Garfield High School was the high school I went to, and at that time, I'd say, at the most there were a hundred students, black students—ninety to a hundred out of a student body of two thousand. And we were very active; you couldn't beat Garfield in anything—we won in baseball, football, track, and basketball, we were just champions in everything, we were the top school in the city. And there were many Jews; that's why we had so many Jewish friends, because that was the central school of the Jewish neighborhood. MMG: Now this was 1930s that you were in high school? CAT: In the 1930s, yes. We participated in many activities. There was prejudice, though. There were teachers who were prejudiced. There was no encouragement to go to college. We had our "Funfest" acts, which was the big entertainment at Garfield. And there would be some mixed acts; the Japanese would have their separate act, and the blacks would have separate acts also. But as I said, there was some mixing. They were marvelous shows; I wish the young people at Garfield could see what the young people in those days did. The music was superior, the dancing was superior, fine full orchestra. I'm a great believer in integrated schools, where all people participate. I think we got a better education because there were so many of us of all races. This is more typical of the world we must live in, rather than segregation. MMG: Why do you think that integrated education is superior? CAT: Because they're inclined to receive inferior teaching as the school becomes segregated. I have seen Garfield, what's happened to it, where they don't have the best of teachers anymore, or the best supplies and methods. I have, for example, a young girl working for me. She's been with me for﻿17 CAT: (cont.) three years—she's sixteen now. She mentioned college, and to her, college was something she hadn't even dreamed of, before she came to work for me. She mentioned going to college to her teacher at Garfield, and her teacher said, "You're the first black child who said they were going to college, coming here." And she said, "I'm going to get my master's; I'm going to get a Ph.D." I told the child, "If she doesn't think you're going to college, then she's not teaching you for college. You go back and you tell her that you want to go to school, and to the university, and you want to be trained for the university, and you need the kind of discipline there, now, at Garfield." She told her teacher that she'd like the extra work, so that she could be more qualified, and the teacher says, "I have enough doing what I'm doing now, don't ask me to do anything extra." I felt that at Garfield we had contact with people of all strata of society, we had the wealthy whites, we had the poor whites, we had the wealthy Jews, wc had the poor Jews, we had Spanish Jews, we had Jews from other parts of Europe. We had not too many Filipinos, but a great many Japanese with whom we were very friendly, some Chinese—which is a different story— and we had black children there from the poorest of families to ones who had affluence. And there was this mixture of all...so that we knew opera, and ballet. We had light opera that Garfield never has now] for example, we put on things like... My son went to Ingrahm High School, and they did Carousel; you'd never find Carousel at Garfield. That's the type of thing I'm trying to say, that there was a broad spectrum so that your life became rich, from touching all types of things, people, and all kinds of experiences. MMG: Now would you say, then, that this sort of education that you have described is necessarily, then, superior to, for example, education that a school like Howard University, where faculty and students are all predominantly black... CAT: Oh no, no, I wouldn't say that. Because you have a variety at Howard University. My sister Marge went to Howard University; when she was a sophomore in business, she left here and went to Howard University, and she was taught by professors from all over the country. And you have students from all over the country, and you're in the center of activity where you can contact a great many people. I would say in a place like Seattle or other towns where maybe the great majority of blacks would come from almost predominantly the same class, that there is not the opportunity to inspire and to teach or to see something different, or to have a different type of experience. I talked to one of the young students who came to Ingrahm. My son integrated Ingrahm's, where he was the first three-year black student. One of the students that came there, the second student there, walked into my son's room and saw a roomful of books, and said, "I didn't know black people had books like this." He took himself out of Garfield, because he couldn't learn there. It was just too hard for him at Garfield. Maybe it was his own personality, but he had found, when his mother married and they moved out to Renton, where he mixed and had intermingled,﻿18 CAT: (ccmt.) he decided he wasn't "gonna" let white people, or any other children, get ahead of him. And he fought for his classes. He fought to be on the basketball team, and he made excellent grades. When they moved back to Garfield and he was in the same atmosphere again, where there wasn't the competition, which he felt he needed, he said he got a map, and he looked to find which was the farther, most northern school— which was Ingrahm, and he transferred there and became a good active student. This is from a student himself, so that's why I have some of these views. And from talking to some of the young people that come to me that have talked to me about their experiences, they're not having as broad an experience in education. For example, unfortunately, one of the substitutes, black substitutes that came to Garfield one day, and one of the children raised his hand and asked a question, and the substitute said, "That wasn't on my schedule - here for me to tell you about." He also said, "I've got mine (education), now you get yours." And I was quite upset, and I was sorry I was ill, and also wished I'd have been a parent, because I'd have been up there to school and done something about him. Because that's not the attitude for our young blacks to experience. And the student who told me about this said that the young black students just sat back and just looked at him in disgust. MMG: You feel that that's a feature of race, or simply a poor teacher? CAT: Well, teacher. No, I'm not saying it's race, I'm just saying it's a poor teacher. But I don't think he would have said that if he'd been at another school. I don't think that teacher would have said that if he hadn't had an all-black class. Even though he was a poor teacher! MMG: What were your parents' attitudes towards the education of daughters? CAT: Oh, definitely education for all. MMG: There was no sort of impression given you that because you were women, you ought to aspire to different things than had you been male? CAT: No, no. Although I do know that some of my father's friends who were in the depression, said to him, "Why don't you put those three big girls out to work, and make some money at it?" And their children weren't in school. And they said, "Why don't you put them out to work, instead of going to school?" So I know that that was an attitude among many of the black men at that period. That they didn't see why women needed education, because they were going to marry, and not follow through on a career. MMG: But it wasn't your father's attitude, nor your mother's? CAT: No, no. MMG: What has been the role of religion in your life? CAT: Well, it's been very important, and I suppose because Mother was an﻿19 CAT: (cont.) Allen—for an Allen it was important—although Mother became Catholic, and she...we were mixed up when it comes to religion. She was Catholic when she was with the Vanderbilt family. My parents were married in a Catholic church; their first child was to be christened in the Episcopal church because Daddy was Episcopalian. I was christened in the Episcopalian church. But in the middle of the week, Mother scooped me up to the Catholic church! And I was baptized again. Isiah Allen wore these long frock coats, you know, ministers wore on Sundays at church. One Sunday when they were baptizing children, he picked me up in his arms and down the aisle he went with me in his arms, and—no, Maxine was in his arms, and I was holding on to his coattails, and down we went and we were baptized. So I was baptized three times! So I really have something of everything—Catholic, Episcopalian, Methodist. So church was very important to me. We always were in Sunday school, and on all their programs, in Christian Endeavor, Sunday school, and church, we helped. Mother told the Catholic church up there on Eighteenth Street, that her people needed her, at that time, more than the Catholic church did. The Zion Church, which the A.M.E. Zion was trying to get started at that time. So Mother went and helped the Zion Church to build, and we went with her, and helped the Sunday school. The bishop stayed at our home. We helped to found the Zion Church which eventually was built at Twenty-third and Olive. MMG: What was the name of the Catholic church? CAT: It was Immaculate Conception. MMG: Now, because of your father's political connections, and political activity that you have been involved in yourself, do you feel that there have been any national or world events that have been sort of pivotal in your own development in shaping opinions, or planning courses of action? CAT: Of course, well, we were with the Democrats—Dad was one of the first Democrats here, so I imagine because of that, we were very staunchly Democratic, and fought for the causes for which Democrats believed in. It broke my heart when they stopped the Federal Theater. Some of those other social organizations that the Democratic Party had set up, I feel were very pivotal. Also, the civil rights movement...I remember sitting in Lowell School one day, and a Japanese teacher walked in, and she'd been one of those who had been sent to Hunts, Idaho, during the war, and I said, you know—and I didn't use the word "angry"—I said, "I'm mad." And she said, "What are you mad about, Mrs. Thomas?" I said, "I'm mad, and I've been mad a long time, and didn't know it. And it's taken the young people to make me realize how angry I've been inside." Because we were reared during a time when you didn't show your anger, like the young people do. When you were a lady, when you could be cold and cutting and polite with it, and you put people in their places and all, but you did not come out with that hard-hitting anger that you had. And I suppose I'd been angry a long time, angry since school or college, angry because I couldn't get the jobs, angry because of the housing... One time, blacks lived all over, and then the real estate people had told Mother, "Well, you belong here in Seattle, and we know you, you can live﻿20 CAT: (cont.) anywhere in the city you want to, but there's going to be this blocking in of black people in the certain areas." And Mother said, "No, I'm not going to sell, I'm going to stay right here," and we're still here. And you have no idea how many people tried to get us to move, and also black real estate people, who were given good buys, or sales, because they would blockbust. And there was anger that the black people had been forced into this. I have slides that show, real estate interests said it was going to be a perfect black "L" when they were through, and it certainly is—you can see that. Every ten years I have a slide showing, or down to even the five years, showing just how the blacks were blocked in by the real estate people, to see what it did to Seattle, because we wouldn't have this trouble now that we're having with busing, and talking about integrating schools, or anything. When the white people came, they were put into projects as well as the black people; they were just as ignorant. I went in their homes and I talked to social workers, and they were using their refrigerators to store their clothes in, all that sort of thing; they were barefooted, they were loud, they were crude, they were from the country, all right; but then the white people were ready to move out and were able to move out... You go out into a block, and if your conduct isn't what the other conduct is, pretty soon you change, you pick up the conduct of your neighbor—the blacks weren't allowed to do that. They stayed in the same areas, and so their conduct stayed the same as... Maybe you can yell across the fields in a country town, but you don't yell across six blocks in Seattle, you see, but there wasn't the opportunity to learn a new type of behavior, and I feel that it spoiled a city that had a chance. I felt if race relations could just succeed anywhere, it could be in Seattle, even though there was prejudice here. But there were people who fought; we fought, and we had whites which fought along with us, like Christian Friends for Racial Equality. There was a time when they tried to make us sit in the balcony, and Alice Lewis, whose stepfather was a lawyer at that time, took the case to court, and fought that we sat in any place in the theaters. There was a time when the Ku Klux IClan tried to be here. And that's an interesting story. We lived in the Broadmoor area, at that time, and we lived across from Mayor Landes—this was when my sister was a baby, and I was a small child—and she was our prejudiced mayor. She tried to segregate the blacks by having a census where they would go from house to house, and ask them, "What color are you? What color is your husband, your child, what color are you?" And they were going to give passes to the fair ones, so they could go various places. All the blacks decided, when they'd come to them, they'd say "colored." So the questioner would ask, "What color is your husband?" "Colored." "What color is your wife?" "Colored." "What color are your children?" "Colored." That's what the black community did, and that program went down the drain. The Ku Klux Klan was here for a while, and they tried to burn out... My godmother moved next door; after we eventually moved because Mother couldn't climb stairs, because of her heart, they tried to burn my godmother out. She called Mother on the phone and said, "Oh my God, come quick." They had sealed up the doors to her home, and they were burning a cross on her lawn. And Mr. Peter DeBow was﻿21 CAT: (cont.) quite a fighter, and he went and sat in on a Ku Klux Klan meeting to find out what they were up to, and they didn't put him out. The Ku Klux Klan didn't succeed in Seattle, although they did in other parts of the state, and in Oregon. But we were always able to bring up some kind of law, or always able to fight to overcome obstacles. And I know that when newcomers came, after World War II, and they'd say, "Well, why aren't black people doing..." various jobs, Black people weren't elevator operators, or garbage men—the Italians were all garbage men—or doing typical, what they called "black jobs," in other parts of the country. Well, it's because we were a shipping city, and our young men, when they were in high school, went out on these great ocean liners as bellhops, or as waiters, or cooks, or stewards. They were going to the Orient and to other parts of the world, and they just didn't fill those kind of jobs here. They made a great deal of money on the boats, until the shipping lines began to fail. When other blacks came here, those jobs weren't open for blacks, for resident blacks generally hadn't even bothered taking those kind of jobs before. MMG: What period of time was this? CAT: This was right after World War II, when the newcomers started coming in. MMG: Now, you're saying, then, that employment was available, but not in the so-called traditional areas of black employment? CAT: I don't think that blacks tried too hard for the traditional area; there were waiters. They didn't hire those who tried places like Frederick's, the Bon Marche, and Rhodes, to be waitresses; I understand they weren't hired. As far as elevator operators, I don't know of any who've tried it, but I imagine they may have been turned down also. Because I remember someone telling me about one of the first black operators here, but it's on one of my tapes, and I can't remember which person it was—I think it was a woman, the first black operator. There were some bootblacks, but they were usually older; the young ones didn't do that. There were barbers, but they were mostly older men who had come here earlier. But the younger men, and the young boys—high school age—went out on the ships. MMG: Have you ever lived for any extended period of time in any other area of the country? CAT: Several years in New York, and several years in Los Angeles. MMG: Do you feel that having spent most of your life in the Pacific Northwest, that that geographical region has somehow shaped you and your career? CAT: Definitely, yes. I know that I enjoy meeting people from other places, I wish I had been able to spend...if it hadn't been because of my illness, I would have spent more time there. And I know when I did say I was going to stay here, some of those in the East said, "You're crazy! Way up in that corner? This is where everything's happening, nothing's happening there." But I tried to tell them, too, that there was a fight to be fought here, just as there was a fight to be fought where they were. I﻿22 CAT: (cont.) think it was a beautiful place to grow up, perhaps it kept us from being as militant—I'm sure it kept us from being as militant as other young people from other parts of the country. We had to fight a different fight. Because our prejudice was not as open, I would say; and then there was a mixture of the races, so there wasn't that... except when we were at church, or formals, sometimes then we'd have a large group of blacks together. I know that what it did for me, which was very foolish, but I was young, I was going to Baltimore, and then to Washington, D.C., and that was a time when there was a great deal of prejudice—this was in '43—and I got as far as Baltimore, and they wouldn't let the black cabs come up to pick one up, and I had to carry my bags for a block away from the station before they'd pick me up, and I was just furious. I enjoyed the people I met in Baltimore, but I just didn't want to go on to Washington. And I didn't. And I am so angry with myself now, at this age, that I didn't go to Washington, because I should have gone. My mother had, and my sisters had, and Margie was in Howard, but I didn't. I was just furious, because I'd never been treated like that before. And I went back to New York. MMG: You've spoken of prejudice; do you distinguish between prejudice and racism? CAT: Mmm. Well, that's something I hadn't thought of before. No, I don't think so. Maybe racists know they're racists, and prejudice is something that some people aren't conscious that they have. MMG: I was wondering if you saw those as two distinct sorts of... CAT: I had never considered it that way, and yet I have been with a white friend, for example, and we were traveling, and a black fellow went, drove by us fast in his convertible with a white girl beside him, and she said, "He wouldn't have done it if a white girl hadn't been with him; he was showing off." And I realized she was prejudiced, yet she was my friend, and had done many things for me when I couldn't shop for myself; there was a prejudice in her against black. MMG: But you wouldn't have described her as racist? CAT: And I had not..."racist"? I was thinking of the word being "prejudice" at that time. But it's something I'm going to have to think about. And that would be very interesting. MMG: What year did you marry, and what was your husband's name? CAT: I married in 1948, to Gordon Thomas, and went to live in Los Angeles. MMG: Would you say a little about your husband? CAT: He lived in Portland, Oregon. Our marriage lasted for a very short time. He was in school to become an engineer. He had been in the army; I had met him in Portland, previously, before the war, but just as young people meet, and saw him again in New York, when he was on his way overseas. He trained to become a pilot, he and his brother were to be in the 372nd, I﻿23 CAT: (cont.) guess it was; it was the first group. They trained, and had bought their tans, had their gold bars, and the week before they were to become lieutenants it was decided the air force didn't need any more black officers, and they were shipped out immediately overseas as footsoldiers, and put on the Arno River, to fight in Italy, which made him a very bitter man. I think that had a lot to do with our difficulty, when he came back, and we married. There was this bitterness and then he wasn't prepared for marriage, and so it didn't last. MMG: Did you have children? CAT: Yes, I have one son. MMG: What is his name? CAT: Kenneth Allen Thomas. MMG: How important have friends been in your life? Are there any friends you'd like to mention who've been particularly close? CAT: Yes, I've had friends from all races. I've had friends who were going through the same struggle as I was, rearing a child alone, who were teaching...Elizabeth Caldwell, a dear friend, a Scandinavian girl who married, incidentally, a Mormon, and went to live in Salt Lake City, and she couldn't teach school, because she was a Protestant, and so she felt that she had a great kinship with me, knowing what prejudice was like, because of the way she was treated by the Mormons. I've had my friends who have grown up with me through the years, but of course some moved away, but we kept in touch with each other and we feel like we're as close as sisters. Like Dorothy Alexander, and a dear friend who was a nurse, Doris Fry, who was a colonel, and is now a retired colonel. I did not meet her, though, until the forties, but she became my dear friend; I corresponded with her until today. Those of us who have grown up together keep pretty close contact, and once a year, there's a party, New Year's Eve party. There were newcomers who came in the fifties, the Timmes, Elbert Timmes. They sort of reunited us together, and we meet every New Year's Eve at their home; so many of us that grew up together sort of get together every year. MMG: Mrs. Thomas, you've been a wife, a teacher, a mother; do you view your various careers in any particular order of importance? CAT: I would put my motherhood and career on a par, because I've cared for both equally. I missed my children that I teach, and I was very close to them. And they were very dear to me, and meant a great deal. I just met one the other day who's a reporter at the Times; he said, "See? I can say my th's!" That was very important to me, the teaching. And I was quite ill at the time, so ill the pain is impossible to describe, and my supervisor did not know it, and Iused to wait until the bell rang, and then when everyone was in, I would pull myself up the stairs and go into my room. I made arrangements for the secretary to ring the room and every child had a clock and knew the time; when the secretary would ring, the child would come to me. My supervisor visited and found me, and she said the﻿24 CAT: (cont.) amazing thing was to see and to find how ill I was, because the moment I started teaching the children, all pain seemed to drop away, and I was someone else, because I was lost in my teaching. It meant a great deal. But also, the way my son has been, was very important. He's been a great friend; I feel he's not just a son, but he was a friend, too, and he had to take over many of the responsibilities when he was twelve— cooking, shopping, the laundry, that sort of thing. MMG: How old is your son? I didn't ask you that. CAT: Well, he's twenty-eight. And he became interested in the same thing— opera, ballet, plays, music, and various things that I enjoy. So I felt we were friends. But I felt also that when he graduated from high school, he should get away. I felt that he'd been close long enough. And so he went, with a scholarship, to Willamette University in Salem, for two „ years; then he went to University of Washington, and finished there, and then he went to MIT, in urban planning. He's been living and working in Washington, and Boston, and to Los Angeles, but because I'd been so ill, he decided in November he would come and stay with me for a while until I'm better. [break] MMG: What have your experiences been, trying to accommodate a public and a private life? Have you experienced any particular problems and tensions, and how have you resolved them? CAT: Well, I suppose my situation has really been different, in that I was handicapped and therefore... I wasn't married, so I didn't have the problems of trying to satisfy a husband and a home life; I just had my son, and he, of course, would usually have his activities also. I did have to separate the two... The time came when my school life did impose on my life so that one night when a parent called and I was talking to her, my son, who was little, just put his finger out and cut the phone off! And I realized, no, no more calls at home from parents; they belong in a certain area and I had my own life. I tried to be like a father and a mother, so we went camping, had tents, and I was a den mother and went to all the activities a den mother would go to, having a young boy as a child. I became very disillusioned with church, because of some of the things that happened with the church—the type of ministers, the way money was handled— and therefore my family left the Zion Church. My father started going to the Lutheran church on East Union Street, which was an all-white church at that time, but it was the closest church, so he just started going there. Eventually it became an interracial church, and all of our children became Lutherans and we are Lutherans now. MMG: What is the name of that church? CAT: The Church of the Good Shepard, the Lutheran Church of the Good Shepard. MMG: How did your son respond to your public life? You've already told me the﻿25 MMG: (cont.) incident with the telephone. Did his feelings change, or was there always a little... CAT: Well, he became very close to his Aunt Marjorie... We're all very close, the boys are like brothers; there are four boys. He became very interested in politics. He was head of Young Democrats, and he did a lot of political work, and he went back to the Chicago convention—I think he was about sixteen then. He cameback with the state of Washington standard sign. I think he slept all the way back with it on the train; so he's very active politically. He was active at Ingrahm, I think there was hardly anything he didn't belong to, the Latin club, the operetta, the choir, just everything. I guess he was going to show them he could succeed, because there's an article he's written on what it's like to be the first black student there. The first day he went to school, the parents passed him by standing on the corner waiting for a bus, and let their children off at the next corner. We lived in the north end, at Carkeek Park, I had remarried .it that time, to Avis Dennis, and we lived there. When he went to catch the bus the students passed him by. He eventually made some friends who are still great friends. When he was to Willamette, one of the boys from there was his roommate. He's a lawyer now. But it was tough. He seemed tough for the occasion, but it has marked him too, because he said that it was a very difficult thing for him. Willamette was also difficult, why did he have to go to Willamette! I thought a small college would be beneficial for him, but there were problems when he would go into town. He was told, "Black boy, get back where you belong," that sort of thing. He joined the great boycott for Chavez and boycotted the stores. When Robert Kennedy came through, he and his roommate organized his campaign. The people were prejudiced, and very Republican, in his area, and they didn't even provide a police escort for Robert Kennedy. He and his friend ran off the material to advertise that Robert Kennedy was going to come, and they became the cochairmen for Robert Kennedy in their area and sponsored him there. They knew him so well, and the picture you see of Robert Kennedy looking out on the Pacific Ocean, Ken copied with a picture of himself in a huge blowup, looking out at the ocean. That was a heartbreak to me the day that Robert Kennedy died, to watch what happened, those young people who had believed so in him... MMG: When was your marriage to Mr. Dennis? What year was that? CAT: In 1963. MMG: Do you have any preference among the terms "colored," "Negro," "black," and if you do, could you explain? CAT: Well, I use "black" because my son trained me! He took me through a training period. So...my dad never can reconcile to "black." And I used to say if people would spend more time working for progress instead of arguing over whether they were colored, black, or Negro, we'd get farther, so it doesn't upset me that much. I said "black" because that's what's used now, and that's what the majority of the young people seem to feel is important to them, and I can see why there was the "Negro" period and the﻿26 CAT: (cont.) "colored" period, and the "black" period, so I don't get upset about... MMG: ...one or the other. CAT: One or the other. MMG: Okay. How do you feel that your race has affected the options available to you in your life and the choices that you've made? CAT: Oh, definitely the fact that I might have become an actress. I did want to become a lawyer, very much so at one time; I was told I'd be thrown out for contempt of court! I feel that I eventually became a speech therapist, I suppose, both because of my illness, and because of my race. I was in speech because at that time I didn't know where else to go; I really didn't know where else to go. And we didn't have counseling of where 1 might have goiie. Whereas if I'd been in another part of the country where there were more options, or there were more inspiration for reaching for something different, I might have done something else. Maybe if I had gone on to Washington at that time that they were searching, I'm quite sure that I would have gone on in another field, maybe in government. MMG: How might your career have been different had you not been a woman? CAT: I have never wanted to be a man. And I've never thought what I would have done if I'd been a man. MMG: Do you think that your sex has affected your career, your life in any particular way? CAT: Probably so. But, you know, at the time when I came along, of course, being a man my family would have sent us to college anyway. But I do know there were more girls on the campus than boys, because the parents sent the girls, where the boys were expected to do it on their own or make their own money, and very few of the boys continued schooling. MMG: These are black students you're speaking of... CAT: Yes. Very few of the young men graduated, or made it all the way through. Maybe I would have had a different type of desire, as a man, of what I wanted to do. I think as a man I probably would have pursued law. But it has never bothered me that I was a woman; I enjoy being a woman. I have never even wanted to be a man, ever. MMG: What is the women's movement as you see it? And what do you think of it? CAT: I'm for the women's movement. I have been ill, so I have not been able to be active. Maybe if I'd been out and active more, I might have other ideas, and a great deal of mine has come from reading, and listening. I can see where blacks have a part in the women's movement, whereas some black women have said they don't have a part in the women's movement, that we have our own movement or we have always been free, or we have always been independent, and that sort of thing.﻿27 MMG: Do you believe that? CAT: I think in a way we have been forced to take on roles and perforin tasks because we've had to. I don't say that was freedom; it was because there was no other choice. But I think that we have a great stake in the women's movement, because I think it will free us and free our men, too. MMG: Well, what do you see as the objectives of the women's movement? What is it all about? CAT: Equality of human beings. Equality of men and women to accept each other as human beings, and not with one being superior to the other. I don't believe in stridency, or when they talk about this burning-the-bra thing and all that; to me this was just sort of laughable, because I didn't think that really expressed the women's movement, and I think that was just something that was played up beyond necessity. I think that as women arid sen can accept each other, and as the black woman and the black man can accept each other as human beings, as friends, can talk to each other.. .1 find it so tragic that so many can't. I suppose that it's the same with other races too, but among our own I'm most concerned, because our men and our women find it so difficult to talk to each other and to appreciate each other and to respect each other, even educated ones. I have found educated women who have had to divorce their husbands because they've a lack of respect for what they are trying to attain educationally. Our so-called young blacks... I can sit around and I listen to the young men talk, because being where I am, I can hear, I get the blacks who are affluent and I get the blacks who are uneducated, I get to hear all, a cross section. I feel unfortunately many of our educated black people who move away and get out don't know how others feel, or are thinking, or doing. Just a couple of months ago, I saw a group, came out with a program in which they were trying to teach the young uneducated black woman, unmarried or married, about their health care, sexual knowledge and other problems. The program failed, the people didn't come out for it, but the organizers didn't go about it in the right way. They were on TV programs where they were interviewed, they were on radio programs where they were interviewed, they were in the newspaper. You don't get the people that way; you have to get out, and you have to walk, and you have to knock on doors, and you have to stand on corners, and you have to go into grocery stores. You've got to go where the people are, and our educated people don't do that sort of thing. MMG: Now do you feel that that's a national pattern, or something that you see as a pattern in Seattle? CAT: I see it as a pattern in Seattle. I don't know enough. I can't say about other parts of the country, because I don't live there. But I do read sometimes that this is a pattern in other parts of the country too. And from some of the things that are said and that I read sometimes, I think they're just not with it! You read about some person who's supposed to be speaking for the blacks in the newspaper, or on Channel 9, and I'll think, they don't know what they're talking about, and they're not from here. You﻿28 CAT: (cont.) have to be with the people to know, and hear, and see... A boy my son's been tutoring has four sisters who are prostitutes, two brothers who are pool sharks, a mother who is an alcoholic, and a father who is a gambler, and here's this one flower sticking up there and he's going to make it, and everybody thought he was retarded. Ken has to put his work on tape so that he gets it through his ears, because reading is difficult for him, but he's making it. He's getting out of junior college this year, and he wants to be a lawyer, and I think we'll hear from him someday. These are the kind of people you want to get in and help, but I don't think many people want to even know those kind of people. Pardon me, you had asked a question, I digressed again. MMG: Well, I think we've covered it. We started out by talking about what the women's movement meant, and relationships between black men and black women and from there... CAT: Oh, and I was saying that many young black men talk about black as beautiful and everything, but the sad thing, you go on the campuses and the nursing school and the medical school and those young medical doctors have white girls on their arms... My sister is doing counseling, and there are young black women, beautiful black women, charming women, talented women crying in her office because they can't get educated black men. This, of course, may be indigenous to this section of the country. I think even as a little girl, our state has always been wide open. California had laws, there could not be any interracial marriages, so every summer I saw cars from out of state, in Washington State, where there were black men marrying white women. And of course we grew up in an interracial marriage situation, because many Scandinavian girls were brought in here to work for wealthy families and there were black chauffeurs working for the families, and so they intermarried. Many of my friends were of mixed racial background. So that was a pattern that was, in this section of the country I would say, that would be much different than other sections of the country. And Ken said when he came back to visit—he'd been away for about five years, and he'd brought a friend with him—he said I didn't realize how much intermixing there was, because he'd been in Boston and Washington and New York, and he said he didn't realize until he came back to Seattle again how much there was, and that's sad. I've heard they're going to start an organization of young black women who are going to be very tough on white girls whom they see with black men. At least I've heard of that lately, that there's going to be. Now this isn't just uneducated ones. MMG: Might consider being tough on the black men. CAT: They need to be. But then there are a group of black young men, like my son and others who say, Never! And they wouldn't be seen with one of the... They tease, like, one of my nephews is married to a white girl, and she has been fantastic for him, and they have gone far together, and I just think they really work for each other, because it's worked so beautifully. But my nephews tease the dickens out of him all the time, and they tease her constantly, and she's had to learn to really take a lot of ribbing.﻿29 MMG: What do you consider to have been the most important achievements of your life? As you look back, what gives you the most satisfaction so far? CAT: Oh, I think one of the things was my teaching in the schools where there were mostly minorities, the fact that I loved waking those children up. That was the most exciting thing, because they were children who had never heard of Joe Louis, who didn't know how to... I taught them how to wash up, how to use soap and water. I gave them the questions to go home and ask their parents, that would stimulate their parents to know that they could help them, even though they weren't educated. Every Wednesday was set aside to go and sit in a home, and I mean I went and pursued those parents, and I held wet babies on my lap, and everything else, and let those parents know, "I don't care whether you're educated or not, you have something to give your child. Just see that they study, see that they get the lesson that is given to them, and that you have standards that you can set for them. So you're a farmer, take your child out and show him the difference between a weed and a flower," this sort of thing. The fact was that I would never look at IQ tests; I hated them, because they just weren't worth the paper they were written on. Children were not what their IQ said they were. I fought to keep children from going to the retarded schools; to me that was a great thrill. Teachers would come and say, "My, the children are reading better, and doing better because they come to your class." So that to me was very exciting. I miss them. [break] MMG: This is part two of an interview with Mrs. Constance A. Pitter Thomas. The interview continues in Mrs. Thomas's home. The date is the fifteenth of August, 1977. Mrs. Thomas, when we were last speaking, there were some questions on which you had additional information to give me. Would you like to start with those now? CAT: Yes. The supervisor of Educational Cadettes for the University of Washington at that time was a man by the name of Powers. He eventually became head of the education department. And the person for whom I substituted as a teacher—it was not a summer substitute, it's a semester substitute— and it was for Kathleen Pendergast, who is now the head of the speech department for the Seattle public schools. The grandparents' name on my father's side was Margaret Pitter and Thomas Pitter, and on my mother's side, it was Reeves, it was Ella Reeves. MMG: Would you mention here your connection with Bishop Allen? We talked about that, but the tape wasn't turned on. CAT: Well, we are descendants of Bishop Richard Allen, who founded the African Methodist Episcopal church. I have his book telling of his experiences at that time, beginning with his birth in 1760. We're one of the branches of the Allen family. My mother's uncle, Isiah Allen, is the one who came to Seattle. He helped to found the African Methodist Episcopal church here. My mother came to join him and his wife in Seattle. Her name was﻿30 CAT: (cont.)Marjorie Marian Allen. Ella Inez Reeves was her mother, and Samuel Allen was her father. MMG: These are your maternal grandparents. CAT: Yes, maternal grandparents. And by the way, her brother, Samuel Allen, was the one who lived in New York who was head of the Urban League. I mentioned his daughter, Lois Allen, attended Howard University and taught there, eventually. But those were the grandparents' names. MMG: Good. Was there anything else that we were going to include this time? CAT: Also, I wanted to state that you had mentioned people who had influenced me, and it was interesting, I did not think of Idell Vertner, who was the head of the YWCA when I was a young person, who was very influential in helping, in that she not only was a sorority sister, but she helped me develop as an individual in working with young people, by being a counselor, that type of thing; and Bertha Campbell, who founded Delta, has been an inspiration for many years. Also, when I was a freshman, Winifred Ingraham, who was a Delta, who taught at University of Michigan eventually, and is now at Evergreen State College. But she took a raw girl whom no one had really trained, as far as taking notes and how to study, and she was really a big sister. I wouldn't have made it the first year or two without her! Then also, one of my good friends was a girl, Lynn Rawlinson, who is a Finnish girl whose grandfather was poet laureate of Finland. Her life has been spent in traveling the world, planting rice in Vietnam, and every summer going somewhere. Other times she took off and taught in foreign countries, visited Africa, and climbed Kilimanjaro. Vicariously, I have lived through Lynn, and she's been a very dear friend. I'm godmother to her children and was at her wedding in a Mormon church. She's been a great influence in my life. It's been interesting—people are varied. But I wanted to name them. MMG: Okay. Thank you very much. CAT: Also, one thing I forgot to say is that the unions at first did not accept blacks. For many years, the unions—for example, aircraft unions, and iron workers' union. Newcomers came from the East and the Middle West who were iron workers and welders, and they couldn't find employment. The white unions just would not accept these blacks. They just wouldn't allow them to be in the union. Mother went to Renton, and I went with her, and we became employed by Pacific Car and Foundry. The supervisors wanted us to use separate toilets, they wanted us to eat in a separate section and other indignities, so we had a strike, refused to work, and our strike closed down the plant. The head of the seventh naval district had to come here, because we were making parts for tanks and also parts for battleships. Mother went to the union meeting, and they were taking in new members, and she went forward and became sworn in as a union member; so she broke the unions. And they had to take blacks in after that. President Roosevelt ordered the plant to comply to our wishes and send the employees back to work. MMG: Who was involved in the strike?﻿31 CAT: The workers In the union, I mean, the workers of the plant, plus all the black workmen who had come there. There must have been about twenty-five at that time. They called Mother the "black Joan of Arc," in the newspaper articles when they wrote it up. I thought it was interesting that she would insert herself into something like that, a woman who had never ever worked in a factory. But she thought that this was important, that they be admitted into the unions. MMG: Now, you had memberships and, I'm sure, offices in many organizations. Are there any of these that you would like to discuss, any that you feel were particularly rewarding? CAT: For many years, and very early, I belonged to the Urban League, because Mother was in the Urban League for herself. I started out with the Urban League, and the NAACP—I didn't work too much for the NAACP, as they were not very strong, in early years. After people like Mother and others served on the board, the Urban League became much stronger. There was the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, which played a very vital part in my life, and I have been president of the Seattle chapter several times. There was, of course, NEA, National Education Association, WEA [Washington Education Association], STA [Seattle Teachers Association], those were all the educational organizations. WSHA, the Washington Speech and Hearing Association, there's where I had a chance to really know and work with so many of the people from throughout the state. I thought it was very important, and what a thrill it was for the first time to find another black in the organization from another part of the state, from Bellevue. I think you might be interested in this story, too. The year that was my first year of teaching, I was a semester substitute. The second year, when Kathleen came back, I was put into a junior high to teach. Junior highs were just coming into being, and I went to a junior high in west Seattle. They gave me one course in speech correction, in speech therapy; all the"other courses were English and history, which I was not trained in— I'm not an English teacher, and I'm not a history teacher. A young man who'd been teaching eighth grade came in, and they had made him head of all speech, all drama. I think he'd had a course or two in these subjects, so I really had to help him a great deal. Thomas, was his name. We became very good friends, but I had to help him put on drama and speech productions, and other activities at the school. Which I resented, not being the one who was the head of all these. During that year, ASHA [American Speech and Hearing Association] opened up for all of us to go in under the grandfather clause. I was not informed. And everyone else in the department got in, except me. Then, they asked me, Would I come back and be itinerant, and of course I did. Well, ASHA had changed then, and was expensive to go into, and there was a great deal of involvement; I just couldn't go into ASHA at that time. There's also the speech and drama honorary, Zeta Phi Eta. I feel I have made some friends. They have written me up in their national magazine, some of the things I've accomplished and some of the history, because I was lecturing on history at that time... MMG: Did I get that citation from you, from the speech and drama? CAT: No. That belonged to the speech and drama honorary, yes.﻿32 MMG: But do you remember the date of this article that you were just speaking of? CAT: No, I don't. I have it somewhere, but it's something that I can get. MMG: All right. Are there any awards or honors that you've received that you'd like to mention? CAT: Can't think of any right now. MMG: All right. Do you have any hobbies, and if so, what are they? CAT: Well, my greatest hobby, of course, is black history, and that's what I spend much of my time on, when I am well enough, trying to collect tapes, and articles. I was very interested in a black museum, and our family was going to donate our home, since it was a large home, seventeen rooms, in the central area, we would donate it to the community to use. It's Dutch colonial. My mother bought it from the owner, so that it is original, but I understand that another group is starting to work toward this, so we just thought, well, we'd just let them... MMG: Mm hmm. Where's the home located? CAT: At Twenty-fourth and Pine. I received a letter just the other day saying another group was going to start a museum. I just thought that, well, if there's others interested and want to work, good! I think, the more the merrier, the more they can work... This is one of the mottoes of our family, my mother always taught us, you give to your community, you don't take from your community, and it doesn't matter if your name's attached, if people know who you are; just be a good worker. And I think I've always been a good worker; it never worried me whether I was leading or not, it's just to get in, and to get things known, to get things done, was the most important thing. When my sister Marge was asked why she hasn't moved out, when the area changed... They called this the ghetto, and people were running away. Which is very interesting, because now the Caucasians are running back to the community again; I didn't know if you were aware of this or not, but the very families that moved out have children now returning with their children. It's become the thing, to buy the old homes in the central area, remodel them, and live in the central area. We're changing now, and becoming a much less concentrated minority. When they asked my sister Marge why she didn't leave, and why she has her business here, she said, "But who would care? Because so many people come to me who can't even read." Or they aren't aware of their rights, or their abilities or the things that they can accomplish by having letters written for them, or contacting various organizations. Marge will pretend she doesn't know they can't read. She lets them have their dignity and their pride, and she has kept her prices low, in her income tax. She has worked so many years with the people politically to make them aware, and she said, "Who else cares enough to stay and do this..." And I think she has a point there, and I'm very proud of her, that this is the way she feels.﻿33 MMG: Now, you say that the study of Afro-American history is one of your hobbies. Why is it that you've made time for this hobby, and what has it meant to you? CAT: Well, I suppose Grandma started me, as a little girl, and I used to love the stories she told, and of course, she knew...well, they had a phone on which there was one ring or two rings or maybe five or six or ten families on a phone; Grandma knew a lot of history that maybe she shouldn't know! Because I think everyone along the line fit into the history. She had many amusing stories to tell. Also, she loved all history and entertained with true facts. When I did get to college, I read a great deal and my interest in black history grew. Blacks in France, and blacks in Russia, and all throughout the world, and then I decided, well, what about blacks here? When I found that even the prairie wagon was made by a black in Saint Louis, that the pioneers came across the country in them, I thought, well, it was time someone started concentrating on that. Since I was in speech, and no one View anything about black history, I began giving speeches on black activities and black history in speech classes. My sister Maxine was at the university and she did a sociology study of a black community with a Caucasian girl. They went to the formals, and they went to the tennis courts, they'd watch the people going to work, they'd visit the restaurants, and just all the activities they could visit. There were streetcars in those days. They caught a streetcar at Twenty-third and Madison, and on the way out to the university, the girl turned to my sister Maxine and says, "You know something? Colored people live just the way we do." To me, that was just a big light opening up! The white people didn't understand that we live like they do, that we are human, that we have the same needs, desires, goals to reach, and hopes for ourselves as they do. So that became a sort of crusade with me. I said that I'm going to, every time I have a chance, give a speech letting them know what we're like, and who we are. When I became so interested in black drama and poetry, because of this same teacher I mentioned before, a speech professor who was so marvelous-Mary Bixby, a wonderful woman-she said, "When you have your orals for ^ graduation, why don't you recite some of James Weldon Johnson s poetry? She said she had heard a beautiful interpretation of some of his works. I said, "But I have no accent." When we worked at the Federal Theater, it was very interesting, we had about seventy-five people, we had a chorus, plus the acting group, and they had to import someone in to teach a southern accent to use when we did southern plays. She said, Just do it the way you feel." And so I did "Go Down, Death for my oral reading, and they had the English department and the speech department all there, and they just sat, and it's the first time I had ever had this experience that people were silenced. Their emotion was a revelation to me of how I could move people. The department cancelled all my tests, all oral tests of any kind; I only had to take one written! I was fortunate. I delved more and more into our black literature, and would go out to the high schools, and the colleges—we didn't have too many junior colleges— but to the colleges in the state, and interpret literature. I never did dialect, because I didn't know dialect; I did it with the feeling that I had as a black person. It seemed to affect people just the same. I﻿34 CAT: (cont.) thought if I tried a dialect that was not authentic, it would be false to me and false to the intent of the poetry. MMG: Now, you mention that you've traveled and lived in New York; is there anywhere else that you've traveled? CAT: I haven't traveled too much. New York, Hawaii, and California; for several years, to Jamaica, and to Phildelphia. These were separate trips, of course, when I lived in the East; then also I would go up and down the coast. The farthest south I ever got was Baltimore, and I regret that. That's one of the places I do want to travel to, the South; I'm looking forward to that very much. Oh, one of the things I was going to say, interesting, when you imagine, about traveling, when my sister Maxine was on one of her trips to the Bahamas, the travel guide on board ship who kept them entertained, kept saying to her, "My, but you look like an aunt of mine. You certainly look like an aunt of mine." Finally Maxine said, "Well. 1 don't know where you're from, but my father was from Kingston," and he said, "Well, I'm from Jamaica, too." And she said, "Well, he was a Pitter." He says, "I am from a Pitter, too," on his mother's side. When we arrived in Jamaica, I phoned to try to find or contact other Pitters. The first person I talked to asked me, "Are you interested in the black Pitters or the white Pitters?" And yet, they all are from the same Pitter. And I said, "Well, the blacks"—of course, this is what I was looking for. MMG: Apart from the presumed pleasure of your trips, your travel, have these experiences changed your opinions or viewpoints in any way? CAT: Oh, I love Jamaica, just love it; I wish I had property there. I'm excited about what they're trying to do. The president plans progress and I hope they give him time enough because there's so much impatience. They see a glimmer of light, and people are scrambling for this, but it takes time to reach goals, and I hope they give him the time. New York, I lived in New York, and it was at such a different time than now that I know it would be much different. Then, as I said, it was such an exciting time, and everything concentrated there. It's so interesting now to pick up Ebony and know the people and to have known them as young people, writers, politicians, artists, and opera singers that were there. It was just a bubbling pot of all kinds of activities, politically and socially aware, and artistically aware. And one got to meet and work with them. Some founded the Abraham Lincoln School in Harlem for adults and I taught there. It was real interesting because later when subversive groups were listed, this school was listed, [laughter] James Weldon Johnson's widow was teaching at the school then, and poets that you know of or you read of, their names just aren't coming to me now, they were there. Something that my uncle said is pertinent. You asked had the Northwest influenced us, influenced me, as a human being. My uncle, Samuel Allen, who I mentioned was head of the Urban League and then of the parole board for the state of New York, when I went to visit him and to spend time with﻿35 CAT: (cont.) him, he said, "Well, I want you to meet this person," or that person or another, I had already met them and had worked with them on committees in various community activities. He was really quite surprised. He said, "One of the things that has impressed me," because he had already met my sisters before, "is you young people that I have met from the Northwest seem to know who you are; you walk right in and say,'I'm so-and-so, and I'd like to do this, or I'd like to work with that,'and you are not reticent about what the person's race is or the Importance of the person's position. You just seem to have that push." He seemed to feel that children who have been reared in Harlem, going to school together, staying together as a group, didn't quite have the same type of push. I don't know if that was true or not, but this was a remark that he had made. [break] MMG: This is part three of an interview with Mrs. Constance A. Thomas. The interview continues in Mrs. Thomas's home. The date is August 17, 1977. Mrs. Thomas, could you tell me something about the origins of blacks in the Northwest? How did most people come to the Northwest, and where did they come from? CAT: Well, outside of the first explorers, which began in 1788 and ended in 1805, and the first fur traders, the first black to come was George Washington Bush in 1845. He came to the Oregon Territory and the Willamette Valley. At that time, blacks were not allowed to settle in the Willamette Valley and so he moved to the north which at that time was also called Oregon Territory. He was one of the leaders of a wagon train, and people voted to go along with him to the new territory. Simmons, a white man, was one of the other leaders of the wagon train. They wandered around the Puget Sound area, and in 1845, they became permanent residents of, first, Tumwater, and then in what was to become Olympia, Washington. George Washington, another pioneer, came to what is now known as Centralia, Washington. I would say he came for the same reason Bush did—he couldn't settle in the Willamette Valley, either. William Grose came in 1860 to the Seattle area. Then after that... There were not too many families, but those who came, came to find freedom. They felt that this was a new place, to make a new start, to get away from the prejudices that they found where they were, and the unhappiness, and they thought, just as the white pioneers, that this was a new land, where they would be accepted. I suppose they were quite shocked when they got to the Willamette Valley and found they weren't accepted. Because of their being the ones to settle in this territory, when England claimed that part of the Oregon territory for Canada, the United States was able to say that we have settlers in that area, and therefore, they were able to claim that part of Oregon for the United States, and this territory became Washington State. MMG: The Bush party was a part of this group... CAT: Yes, yes. MMG: Have you been conscious of any significant number of blacks arriving in﻿36 MMG: (cont.) the Northwest, having come from a certain state or a certain geographical region? CAT: Well, there were a few from the Deep South, but they seemed to come more from the middle southern states, rather than the very Deep South. MMG: We noticed in an earlier interview that there seemed to be, just by chance, in talking about different families and their state of origin, that there seemed to be a lot who'd come from Tennessee. Were you ever aware of a number of people who had come from Tennessee? CAT: No, I wasn't aware of that many from Tennesee. I know there^were some from Mississippi and North Carolina and Virginia, but I wasn't aware that there was that many from Tennessee. I knew during World War II, many came from Tennessee, but I haven't really geographically checked for pre-^ World War I as to where they came from. MMG: Once blacks were here, where did they live? CAT: They lived anywhere. Mr. Grose, the first, for example, in Seattle, was right downtown. I believe his son was born there at Third and Pike. And some of the others lived where the YMCA building is. They were mixed in the population. And Belltown, I did talk to several old pioneers who came, and when they couldn't find residence, they settled in a part called Belltown, a poor district. It's between the market, the public market going north toward the civic center. In the section called Belltown. I talked to people who found barns and cleaned them out and washed them down and lived in them. There were other races living there also, it wasn't just black, but several black families did settle down there. MMG: Now this is nineteenth century that you're talking about. CAT: Yes, mid and late century. MMG: Now how about early twentieth century? CAT: The story is told that Mr. Grose had lent a great deal of money to the city of Seattle, and in repayment, they gave him land which is now known as the East Madison area, part of the central area, and a large amount of that land was his homestead. When blacks wanted homes, he would say, "Come and live in this area, this tract where I have..." He built homes for his family along the same block, and blacks did settle there. They were in the East Madison area long before any other races were, outside of the Indians, of course. Then other races moved in. Most concentration was there because of that. Otherwise, blacks lived anywhere. They lived in Ballard, they lived way out in Rainier Valley, Columbia City, these wer little cities at that time, or the university area, where Roosevelt High School is. They were sort of scattered around. All this is pre-World War I. MMG: Yes. Was there any shift between World War I, let's say from the period of the twenties up until World War II, in residential patterns? Do they remain pretty well the same?﻿37 CAT: They still remain pretty well the same except that a great many people who had settled in other parts of Washington State, such as Roslyn or Yakima or Ellensburg, came to Seattle to live. They seemed to settle in the Cherry Street area, and the Union Street area, and the Madison Street area. But until World War II, you never could find one block, I mean just one straight block, from one corner to the other, in which every single home had a black in it. There was no such thing. MMG: Until World War II? CAT: Until after, after World War II. MMG: What would you say was the causal factor for that concentration following the World War II? CAT: Well, the real estate brokers got together and one of them, who knew my mother very well, called her in one day and talked about it. He said, "They are planning to box in the black people because they..." they called them sharecroppers "...and they've been living in the projects." There had been projects built during World War II, and they were integrated projects, but the blacks wanted to start moving out so they could have homes. The real estate board decided that the blacks could not go beyond a certain block beyond Madison, maybe one block or two beyond Madison, and not any certain further toward the lake, and not any further downtown. The pattern it formed was an "L". They said it would be an "L" and it's very interesting because I went to the Urban League and took pictures of the map, as blacks moved in, and gradually, gradually you see it. People in the audience would just gasp when it's shown because within, oh, say a five- to ten-year period you have a heavy black "L" line of showing where blacks live, where before you just had a dot here, a dot here... MMG: Now, was this something that real estate agents did all of their own accord, or was there city and governmental complicity in the plan? CAT: I really can't say. I know the real estate broker said it was real estate agents. I know it was not just white real estate brokers. Some black real estate men were also to blame. They were promised certain properties and they were given certain favors if they also participated in this black blockbusting process. They would move a black, an undesirable black family with many children and so-called not cultured, into a very quiet area, and then they would try to block-bust them, and black real estate agents did this also. I know that they did say to our family, "We know you. Any place you want to move, fine, just say so," you know. "You can move..." So I don't know whether there was any government involvement in this or not at that time, or if it originated with the real estate people. MMG: Let's move on to talk about the economic life of black people in the Washington/Seattle area. How were black people employed? Let's talk about the nineteenth century, the first part of the nineteenth century, up until World War II.﻿38 CAT: Well, I think it's very interesting, when we start from the pioneers, to find out how many professional people and trained craftsmen there were, such as lawyers, newspapermen, teachers, contractors, carpenters, and transfer companies. There was one taxicab company. They were quite efficient at setting up some of their own businesses, hotels and caterers, and this type of thing. Some of the people who came worked in these types of businesses before World War I. A large influx came to work in Seattle during World War I. The men went on ships because we were a shipping city. Many of the men worked on steamships as waiters, bellhops, and eventually some became stewards and cooks. A great many men followed the sea. There were postal workers, quite a few postal workers, and one or two outstanding...such as an immigration officer and meat inspector for the government. We had a doctor on an Indian reservation, Indian... So there was a variety of employment, and many barbershops, several well-known hotels and nightclubs where wealthy people went. Quite a few of these businesses catered to whites. There were shoeshine stands. I remember seeing little shoeshine stands when I'd go into some of the prominent buildings. They'd have little shoe' stands as you'd go in. But there were some jobs they did not fill—the Italians were the garbage men, for example; they were not elevator operators; they were not clerks in stores; they were not street cleaners, any of those types of things. You never saw blacks doing any of these. MMG.: So you're saying they weren't concentrated, then, in any area of employment? CAT: They were concentrated in that they were waiters or cooks or in service, or else they had their own individual stores...many, many more businesses than they have now. And thriving businesses, and their businesses did not cater to only one race; they couldn't have survived if they'd catered only to blacks. They serviced the community. You were just good if you had a good restaurant, or if you had a good cleaning store or a well-supplied grocery store, or if you had a good catering service. Many catered the wealthy families. They didn't rely just on blacks, because there weren't that many. Before World War II, there were only 3,900, about, blacks in the city. There was a movie theater, too. It was well attended with the entire local community patronizing the films. MMG: Were all areas of employment open to blacks? CAT: No, no, that was the tragedy here. Many of the young people could not find employment. What happened here? This was an interesting thing to try and find out about...so many professional people were formerly here, so many people who were well trained, brickmasons who helped construct buildings downtown, and artisans of all kinds. Then, the young people who went to school and were trained and who did go to the university could not find work. They were discouraged, so I'm surprised sometimes to find who went to the university. A name will crop up, someone went to the university, but they didn't finish, there was just no place for them to be employed; or if they did finish, they left Seattle and went away.﻿39 MMG: So, now what period of time is this? CAT: This would be, I would say, in the twenties. They maybe started school in the late teens and would be in the twenties... MMG: So you're saying, then, that the first part of the twentieth century... CAT: ...and into the thirties too, the early thirties. MMG: ...it was more open. By the twenties, it had begun to close? CAT: At one time, remember, I mentioned the Ku Klux Klan, and that type of thing. So that may have been part of it, part of the reason that it started to close, yes. And remember how they closed on Cayton, too, because of his becoming aware? He was so open; he felt this was the place. He always urged black men to come here, "This is freedom here for you." And then there started to be this closing up and eventual lack of support for his newspaper and his causes. MMG: So that between the twenties to, say, the World War... CAT: The middle teens to World War... MMG: ...middle teens to World War II, how were blacks employed? CAT: Of course, there were still many of the little stores and the great bulk of the men were on the steamships. The great majority of the men were on steamships, I would say. The young fellows in high school, instead of going out and getting summer jobs, would go on steamships. And the depression, many of the men, even including my father, who was with a printing company—and was an accountant and left the firm, when he was writing his book—went on the steamships when the firm failed because of the depression. Dad sailed on the steamships to China, Japan, and other parts of the Orient. They'd go to Alaska on ships and also went around the world. We had very well-traveled young men. They made very good money. They dressed beautifully because their clothes were tailored in Hong Kong and Japan. There was a great deal of home ownership, but the men were away. A great many of the men in the community would be traveling. Some of the women did day work. MMG: That's what I was going to ask you. How were women employed? CAT: I would say day work's about it, as far as employment... We did have, for example, L. Biggs, who was a pharmacist; there were music teachers; some worked in some of the little black grocery stores, or shops, that type of thing. Beauticians. MMG: Were there any black professional women? CAT: Yes, Mrs. Graves, who was a podiatrist. Her son followed in her footsteps, and her granddaughter, who I think has just retired, also followed in her footsteps. I would say that she was probably the highest professionally﻿40 CAT: (cont.) trained. And then there's Mrs. Fields, as I mentioned, who was a nurse. But her training was not here; she'd gotten that somewhere else. And there were some women who had their own grocery stores and shops. MMG: Now, among these blacks, both professionals and employees of other concerns, were there any workers' unions or cooperative efforts? CAT: No, I don't think they were accepted in unions. MMG: Were there any black unions? CAT: No, we had several black co-ops that were formed, but were not successful. MMG: Do you remember the names of any of those? CAT: I know one was Washington Co-op... I'm sorry, I don't know the names. In fact, there were several co-op stores, but unfortunately the people did not have a business sense. They did not know how to keep books, how to keep money, and often people in the co-ops felt the co-op belonged to them, so they could walk in and take anything any time they wanted. You can't succeed that way. When I was talking about co-ops, I was thinking about some others. I knew several people who had cooperative farms, for example. They grew maybe one crop, like onions. But nothing came too much of the projects. MMG: Where were those located, the cooperative farms? CAT: Out in the Green River valley area. MMG: And the period of time? CAT: Let's see. Thirties. This was when there was a depression and people were in need. People were on the WPA [Works Progress Administration] and NYA [National Youth Administration], and they were trying various ways, I think, to organize and see if they could do things together as a group. But none of those that I can remember succeeded particularly well. MMG: How would you describe blacks in Seattle as an economic class, from the early twentieth century to World War II? Were most of them middle class, lower class? CAT: I think they thought of themselves as middle class, mostly middle class. MM>. Was their economic level comparable to the white middle class? CAT: I don't think it ever has been, really, but I don't think our black middle class ever had quite the same amount of money as the white middle class. But they seemed to function as well. Whites would often remark on the fact they didn't see how blacks maintained the quality of life they did. Of course, many of the women working in wealthy homes brought that same level of living into their own homes, so that they had beautiful homes and﻿41 CAT: (cont.) beautiful furniture and ate on linen and had the silver napkin rings and their crystal and all the luxuries, just as other people. Many of the blacks whose income, perhaps, was middle-class income, lived as upper-class people did. Now, where the failure is, they didn't have the insurances. They didn't have the insurances. This is what I investigated. The educational insurance, or the economic insurance, or the life insurance, or the fire insurance, because in those days we didn't get these types of insurance. They didn't have the country clubs, and the golf clubs, and all those social activities the whites had, so they were able to concentrate their money more. You have to look at it in various ways as to what you consider middle class, or what you consider that they possessed. To own property was very important and home ownership was important and practically everyone owned their own homes. There were some apartments but very little apartment house living. MMG: In the political area, we know from earlier sessions that your own family was very active politically. In general, to what extent did black residents of Seattle participate in the political life of the city? How much voting, office holding, was there? CAT: George Washington Bush and George Washington, the first black pioneers, had their sons in the state legislatures. MMG: This is in the nineteenth century. CAT: This is in the 1800s, nineteenth century, correct. And then we had a state representative from Tacoma, Ryan. That would be in the early 1900s. And then, from then on, we had no one until Lawyer Stokes went to the state legislature. That would be in the late forties and early fifties, when Stokes came here and met my father. They had a great rivalry. He was Republican and Dad was a Democrat, and they just teased each other every single time they passed each other. The Republicans—most blacks were Republican in Seattle, until President Roosevelt and World War II, when they changed and became Democrats, and eventually the majority were Democrats. They participated in voting. I ran several Democratic headquarters in the thirties and forties. My parents also ran Democratic headquarters. There were some political appointments such as in the sheriff's office. Dad was a deputy sheriff and there were other sheriffs eventually, after Dad. He later was a county clerk and deputy county clerk. We had various appointee offices during the late thirties and into the forties and into the fifties, but not elective offices until there were more blacks here. Although, we almost pulled it off one year with Reverend Davis of the Mount Zion Baptist Church, who was well known in the city. As I said, there weren't even 4,000 blacks here then. Unfortunately, at the last minute, the Communists in the thirties latched onto his campaign to use him and he failed by just such a slim margin; it was a great disappointment. MMG: That's what I was going to ask you, did blacks run for elective office, regardless of whether or not they were successful?﻿42 CAT: Yes, they did; and it was such a shame, it would have been a beautiful thing if Reverend Davis would have been elected citywide, because of his ability as a man. The Communists at the last minute ruined his chances. MMG: I want to go back to one question there with the shift from the Republican to the Democrat Party. I think that nationally the pattern for the black...the big black shift from the Republican Party was in the thirties. Is it your impression that the blacks in Seattle shifted a little later than the national trend, that is, with the Second World War? CAT: No, I think the second...no... MMG: Second Roosevelt term, or the first? CAT:_ The first, with the first, they started shifting then. MMG: So they followed the national trend then. CAT: They followed the national trend. MMG: Okay, all right. CAT: And there were some antagonisms, too. There were some really...people were very antagonistic to people who were starting to shift. The Republicans were very antagonistic to those who started to become Democrats. MMG: What was their reasoning? CAT: Oh, they felt the same old thing, that after all the Republicans had freed the slaves, and Abraham Lincoln was a Republican. But here were jobs and here was food, and here were new programs for people. Anything that helped the poor, helped the blacks, and so blacks changed over to the Democratic Party. MMG: Were there any political clubs? CAT: Yes, there were. There was the Republican Club, and there were Democratic clubs. My father was appointed by President Roosevelt through the recorder of deeds, Dr. Thompkins, to set up black Democratic clubs. There were black Democratic clubs throughout the state. He traveled and set up clubs, for example, in Olympia and in Yakima, and all over. I have the charters in there, and where they'd have their state conventions. As a young person, I spoke at those state conventions several times. We had the Young Democrats, the young black Democrats, and when Mrs. Roosevelt came, I represented them. When I was about sixteen I met her my first time and presented her flowers from our club at her home, her daughter's home. Her daughter had married Mr. Boettiger, the head of the P.I. paper. I met Mrs. Roosevelt at that time. I had lunch with her at that time. The first time I ever had avocados, [laughter] Oh, this is it, avocados and ham. [laughter] She was an amazing woman, because I know, some years later when I met her the second time, I was in a reception line at the * Seattle Post Intelligence﻿43 CAT: (cont.) Olympic Hotel, and as I came through the line, she said, "Constance Pitter! How delightful to see you!" And hugged me and I was just amazed that her memory was sharp. No wonder she was famous. She was a superior woman. I'm trying to think of the year that the blacks and the whites came together and joined these clubs. It must have been in the forties, the late forties. MMG: After the war? CAT: After the war. Even though they now had the black clubs, I traveled, when I was in college in the thirties, throughout the Yakima Valley and other parts of the state with Magnuson and Jackson, and they were all young, they were all young lawyers then. We went throughout the region and we spoke on the street corners, and oh! that was Republican country, and the farmers just threw remarks at us. This was good training for a speech person, to stand on the corner and have to answer those questions from those farmers. That's how I got to know the politicans so well. We, as three sisters, often went to combined meetings because, of course, they would have state meetings now, and the black clubs were represented in the state meetings. From the time we were little children, we would perform on the stage, we'd give yells, "Yaay" this, "Yaay" that, and make up yells and songs supporting the party. So there was a mixture, and meetings, and yet the blacks had their separate clubs. The Republicans, now, I can't tell you about what they did, only that there was a black Republican club also. The state organization was named Washington State Colored Democratic Club, Incorporated. The club located in this city was called Progressive Colored Democratic Club of King County, Seattle, Washington, They received charters in April 1940. MMG: Were there any women's political clubs? CAT: Yes, my mother formulated the first black Democratic club. MMG: Did it have a name, just... CAT: It has a name. The charter is dated April 1940. Their name was Colored Women's Progressive Democratic Club of King Country, Seattle, Washington. MMG: Did any women, black women, run for elective office? CAT: No, not in the early days, that I'm aware of. My sister Marjorie was the first black state representative woman of the Thirty-seventh District in 1965. It wasn't an election. The state legislator, a young woman, died. She was an outstanding person. When she died, Marjorie was appointed to take over as state legislator. MMG: Now what newspapers and journals were available to blacks before the Second World War? CAT: Oh, we had the Enterprise, The Republican, and Mr. Peter DeBow had The Searchlight. They tell me he prowled the town at all hours to get news. Some of the older pioneers I've interviewed discussed him. It is so﻿44 CAT: (cont.) funny to have them tell, "And when we saw Mr. DeBow coming, we moved and hid, because anything we were doing, he told it in the paper." [laughter] You didn't want your activities related in the paper. Some of us received our training on one of these papers. I was a reporter when I was in college, on the Enterprise. MMG: Now, who was the editor of the Enterprise? CAT: Mr. Robinson was the editor. MMG: Cayton was the editor of The Republican. CAT: Yes, in the early 1900s. MMG: ...of The Searchlight? CAT: ...of The Searchlight, Peter Debow. MMG: Which had the largest circulation, do you think? CAT: Oh, the Enterprise. And that was sent throughout the state, because there were sections and reports in there from various communities, such as Yakima, Tacoma, or Spokane. We had a very close relationship with Spokane, Tacoma, and Yakima, and even Portland. Portland was a sort of an appendage to Washington State. There was a closeness among all of us then. A corridor existed between the cities, and the Enterprise, I think, helped them weld that relationship. There was gossip, church news, social news, and political news involving these cities. MMG: Were there any journals or special emphasis magazines? CAT: Just the Cayton one I've seen from pioneer days is the only one I can think of. The other magazines we got were the national ones like the Urban League and other organizations. MMG: The Crisis. CAT: That's right. I think there may have been a paper for the Marcus Garvey people. I may have that name of that paper in there also. MMG: Now how about schools? Were there blacks concentrated in any of the schools in particular? Did they attend school all over the city? CAT: Yes, blacks attended schools all over the city, because of the concentration, as I told you, in the Cherry Street area. Now in my mother's time, more blacks went to Broadway High School. And that would be in the early 1900s, middle 1900s. The Harveys and the Norses and the Aliens all went to Broadway. But there just weren't that many of them, I would say, maybe a couple of dozen or something like that. When I went to school in the thirties, Garfield had been built, and since that was in the Cherry area where so many had settled, there were quite a few attending there. I'd say there were about ninety black students out﻿45 CAT: (cont.) of a population of about two thousand. So that was the largest concentration. I remember where we lived, my sisters were the first, about the first blacks to go to Minor School. I was in eighth grade, and they started to cut the districts up, and so my sisters went to T.T. Minor. Oh, they had a terrible time, because they were the only black students there. My sister and mother had to go to court because my sister was beaten up; Maxine had brown skin, Marge was fair. They didn't seem to jump on her as much, but Maxine had it. The children and some parents had rocks with them, waiting to rock her on her way home, and we went to court about that attack. I stayed at Longfellow, which had the largest group of elementary black students at that time, as I was to graduate. We were just scattered through the school, like raisins in a lot of bread, [laughter] I remember Billy Tolles, several years later, who lived three doors down the street, was the first black student to go to Horace Mann, which many years later became the most concentrated black elementary school in Seattle. MMG: What was the court decision when your sisters were... CAT: Oh, the offenders were fined and were reprimanded very harshly, and forbidden to ever come anywhere near the girls. MMG: The particular parent concerned? CAT: Oh yes, the parent and children concerned, yes indeed. MMG: Did that receive newspaper coverage? CAT: I don't remember. Also, there was a little school down the street from my grandmother's, a Lutheran school, which is sort of interesting because we're Lutherans now. There was a Lutheran church, and there was a Lutheran school, the first Lutheran church in Seattle, and the first Lutheran school in Seattle. There were several black children who went to that school, but they were so fair, they didn't know they were black. MMG: The school officials didn't know. CAT: But they lived with my grandmother. That's how I knew that the first ones went there. MMG: What was the name of that school? CAT: The Lutheran school... That was the Lutheran church that was named Trinity. We just called it the Lutheran school. It was probably called Trinity Lutheran School. My parents bought the parsonage in the fifties and moved it next door here, when the congregation tore down the old church and built the new church. MMG: Where did blacks attend church? CAT: Oh, there were the three main churches. There was Mount Zion Baptist Church on Nineteenth Avenue. There was the A.M.I. Church, African Methodist Episcopal Church on Fourteenth. And -there was the original Grace﻿46 CAT: (cont.) Presbyterian Church on Twenty-second and Cherry. There was a great closeness between the churches. There did not seem to be rivalry between the ministers and the churches. They cooperated. If, for example, the Presbyterians were going to give a cantata for Easter, then we would participate. They would ask any of us in the choirs, members from different churches, and we'd go over and sing with them. The children felt they belonged everywhere. I know my mother was so embarrassed on Easter, because the Methodist church would have their program, and we'd say our little pieces; they always had this activity each Easter. At the end of church, we'd go forward and get our Easter eggs. The Methodist church always got out first so we'd get our eggs at the Methodist church, and run over to the Grace Presbyterian which got out next and get Easter eggs, and then run back to Mount Zion, which always got out the latest, and march down in our Easter clothes just as they dismissed along with all the children who got their Easter eggs there. MMG: Three... [laughter] CAT: We had three Easter eggs, and at home we had a huge basket of Easter eggs for each one of us, but all of us would do that, and it was just the funniest thing, and Mother would be so embarrassed. But we did it... All the people sitting in the churches, they knew where we were from, and here we'd march down with their children and get our eggs. I remember when I was a teenager and they had the national Baptist convention here, and they had me welcome the conventioneers to Seattle. Part of the greeting was a poem beginning, "We wanted to send you Mount Rainier, but the folks won't part with it out here." You know, one of those type of things. [laughter] So we were very close, the churches. We had our picnics together. We had the greatest picnic in the world, our Sunday school picnic, where all of us came, and we brought all our neighbors. So there would be little Japanese children there, and little white children there also, and they had free hot dogs and free soda pop and ice cream. The boys would try to eat twenty hot dogs, ten bottles of pop, contests of that sort. It was always at Woodland Park. Everyone had their picnic baskets open, so if your family wasn't there, you could eat with any family. The zoo was out there too, and they had a big carnival area also. It was beautiful. I know how tragic I thought it was that after World War II when finally the churches again had their combined picnic, and I went to Lincoln Park, they had separated so that the children from the Baptist dhurch had little tickets, and from the Methodist had tickets, and from the other churches had tickets, and they would line up in their own separate lines for refreshments. By then the Baptist church had split, so there were two Baptist churches. There was Mount Zion, and there was People's Institutional on Twenty-fourth, beyond Garfield High School. They lined up and members only gave out ice cream cones as each one presented their ticket, and I thought, "How sad. They're taking away all the love that was there, the beauty of the combined love." But that was because Seattle was growing, and newcomers came with new ideas and﻿47 CAT: (cont.) different ways of doing things. They don't have combined picnics any more. [break] MMG: What fraternal organizations were most popular among blacks in Seattle? CAT: Oh, my. All of them. There were the Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, Knights of Pythias. I guess about all that you could name were here. MMG: What were the women's groups? CAT: Well, most of them were auxiliaries to the men's organizations. And I know when Mother married Father, he belonged to every single one, I think. It was too much! A marvelous thing, though...the Elks bought their own home, which was just beautiful. Do you know where the Speech and Hearing Center is at the top of Madison Hill? On Eighteenth right off Madison there's a large building there where they test hearing? It's a beautiful building, it had been a big mansion, and they bought it and they had clubrooms. Down from T.T. Minor, yes, as you go up past Mount Zion, you get to the next block, to the left, there's a large building, and this was the Elks' home, and they had poolrooms, and they had a poolroom for women, too, which I thought was interesting. This was way back around 1916, 1917, in there, 1918, and they had club rooms, a ballroom, it was just beautiful. The treasurer was not bonded. He absconded with their funds. The members had been thinking—they'd been giving in their money all this time—that bills were being paid. Most everyone belonged there, Dr. Cooper, Dr. Allen, Mr. Gayton, my father, many of the men in the city who were considered of stature belonged, and because of the criminal behavior of the treasurer, they lost the building. There were several businesses started, and several organizations that this happened to... It was tragic that this did happen. They had a tennis club, too, by the way, that was built on the Grose property, it was on Twenty-third and Olive. The men built the tennis club and they had tennis courts there with high fences. They were very good tennis courts. Tennis was quite the thing in those days, and they had their bicycle clubs. I don't know if I'm getting off the subject... MMG: No, go ahead. CAT: Mother said they used to bicycle out to Woodland Park early in the morning, catch the streetcar back in so they could go to church. That's pretty early, at that distance. MMG: Sure is far. CAT: And all their social clubs. They had many activities. They had great dances, black-and-white balls. The first time Dad took Mother to a ball, he came in a limousine with a chauffeur, wearing tails, a cape lined with satin and his high silk hat to take Miss Allen to the black and white ball. He'd bring flowers for both her and my Grandmother Allen. These are some of the things that Mother said just made her fall in love with Dad. He'd﻿48 CAT: (cont.) have a dressed squab delivered at the home, this type of thing. The men were just gentlemen, well, dandies almost, too. She said he called and asked, "Miss Allen, what are you wearing for Easter?" She thought, well, it was to do with flowers, and she described her suit with black and white checks and the gray hat and shoes that she would be wearing. She looked up in church and Father walked in with the exact replica of her outfit that Easter. So the men were classy. They were very social, they had not only many fraternal clubs, but they had social clubs, they had dances and balls and picnics and dancing by the lake. They danced at the pavilion, there was a pavilion where they would go to dance. Mr. Gayton even had a ballroom in his home. They had their own ballroom in the old home off Madison Street. And oh, the Elks picnic was famous throughout the Northwest. People came from California all over to go to the Elks picnic. And interesting enough, in the daytime the children went to the Elks picnic, and that's when you would swing and teeter-totter, and they'd have games and picnic activities. Parents took children home, and ulien the parents went back in the evening, and there was the dancing with the big bands. Not only did the so-called society or middle-class people go, but also the sporting people went, and I could hardly wait to go because exciting things always happened, it was scandalous the next day. I could hardly wait until I was old enough to go. When we were finally old enough, in high school, they let us stay over, it was almost like there was an invisible line down the middle of that dance floor, and on one side a certain type of person danced, and we teenagers danced, and on the other side, one could look over and see the sporting people and free livers. One could see them going outside, and they would have barbecue places set up and entertainment, but you never could go outside, and you could never go out there to get some refreshments, maybe someone could deliver your food in, or you could get your food in certain areas. I think that's rather interesting, that there was this combining—everybody together—and yet there was this separation too, and no one infringed on the other. MMG: Very interesting. There was a good deal of tolerance while it was still clear that there were two groups joined there. CAT: And there was an invisible line, almost like through Seattle. After a certain hour you did not cross Yesler. The library was located at Twenty-third and Yesler, and I'd always go to the library during the daytime. After a certain hour, one never crossed Yesler because certain people lived across Yesler, and only certain people would use that as their habitat when the sun went down, and you stayed on your side of town and they stayed on their side of town. So there were two different groups. MMG: Did you have any other contacts with that group? You mentioned earlier an experience you had at Halloween. CAT: Oh. Yes, there was...as long as children behaved themselves, they were welcomed! So that whenever we had our parties and our dances and our groups, most young people came. Although there were small parties at times when maybe you had your closest friends, we also had the open parties where all the young people could come as long as they behaved. We had less that 4,000 black residents, and we would have as many as ninety young﻿49 CAT: (cont.) people at our home. At times there was really quite a cross section. One girl remarked on it once that she had always wanted to come to the Pitter home to a party, and she'd never been invited, or somehow or another she was not one of the girls who was invited because of her conduct. She was standing on the street corner with a large group of boys under a street light, on our corner, and my father was coming home and said, "Young lady! What are you doing standing on that corner? You know ladies are not ever allowed out of our house. Get in this house immediately." And in the house she went, and she said she was so thrilled, this was the first time she ever had gone inside. He ordered her in the house and she was just absolutely delighted to come to the party. But as I said, as long as you behaved, it did not matter if your family was in the sporting world, or you had a problem family, so long as you behaved, you were welcome. And many of the sporting people's children lived on our side, the north side of the city. My grandmother I, au Gilc: gir 1 living with her; she was reared with us through high school. And it was sad, she had such beautiful clothes, she had a fur coat when she was fifteen, and cashmere sweaters, and she could meet her mother and her aunt downtown and have lunch at Frederick's, and she had tortoise shell combs for her hair, and sterling silver brush and comb and mirror, all those sort of things that I used to just look at with envy, but as friends we were dis cussing this one evening, and she said, "I have all these material things, but I have never been able to sit down at home and have dinner with my mother," you know, and she said, "You may think you have rags, but you have so much more than I have." These children were welcome, and taken care of, and reared beautifully by people on this side of town. Our sporting district was quite different; it was made up of many professional people. Some of these professionals were Dr. this and Dr. that. Several doctors, and layyers, and people who'd been trained in colleges in the East came here. They were often the black sheep of their families, and they were either sent out here by their family or they came out here to get away from their families, and then they pursued another type of life, which would be the sporting life. Some had nightclubs...one of the clubs was very famous, and I remember Doc Hamilton's club. Wealthy people throughout the city came, and in his office he had barrels full of diamond rings and bracelets and things, he just left them in the open there. They had lost them gambling. There was a tolerance policy here with the police, and they just left him alone. Years later when he did get into some trouble and went to prison, they made him the librarian up there. He had a recipe for barbecue sauce, and he marketed a barbecue sauce eventually when he came out of prison. He formulated plans and got his money together for the business when he was in prison. One Halloween, as I was telling you, we thought we were a little older than the other children who were dressed in their Halloween outfits, so we went out soaping windows, and we did cross Yesler and go down Jackson, soaping windows, and up on the hill which eventually became the housing project, Yesler Terrace. At that time there were many of the big sporting houses there. So we tripped up the hill and peeked in to see what was﻿50 CAT: (cont.) going on, recognizing some of the boys we went to high school with, because we heard this party was going on. We just peeked in, and then we ran home as fast as we could. When I got in the house, Mother was sitting on the window seat in the hallway and said, "Well, young ladies, where have you been?" And we looked at her, and I told her the truth, where we'd been, and she said, "I'm so glad you told me the truth. You won't be punished because you told the truth. But I've already had five calls saying you girls were on that side of town, and didn't belong there." The fact was, Doc Hamilton had seen us as we went by, because he had his awning out and he was standing in front of his club, or maybe some sporting women had seen us, or some sporting men, and they called right away to say, "Yourchildren are over here," and let our parents know. They protected us. And as long as your family reared you and wanted you to be someone, they cared for you too. And they treated you with respect and with dignity. When we participated in our parades or would have affairs where we'd try to do public projects, they would contribute, you know, heavily for those times, twenty-five dollars. They would say, "We like to see young people trying to progress and be successful." So there was that support from that section of the community. One time I was insulted by a Christian at the Methodist church, who almost shoved me down the stairs when I came to get a donation to help us with the parade, and here these other people were willing to help. For a young person, Christians not being responsive was confusing. Also, when they had their families visit from the East or from the South, the family members would stay in the homes of prominent black families, and no one ever let on. They were entertained, they were taken out on tours to the mountain and other activities. A tea might be given for them, and none of the people in Seattle would ever let on that their relatives were from the sporting life. Now whether those people suspected or knew, or not, no one would ever say anything. They were that kind of community. MMG: To your knowledge, what were the motivations for entering the sporting life? Just that it paid well? Or were there people who could not practice professions they were trained for, who entered this as a second choice? CAT: I really don't know. I don't know why they couldn't have practiced in the East, whether they couldn't practice there or not, but my understanding was, these were people who were just sort of interested in a freer type of life. Whether any of these men tried to go into business here I don't know, because I do know that other men like Dr. Cooper, Dr. Allen succeeded. MMG: Maxwell? CAT: Dr. Maxwell, others, they pursued their professions, and others were lawyers, and were successful. Their clientele was mostly of the other race, because there just weren't that many of us. I worked for Dr. Cooper when I first left college because I was unable to teach, and the predominance of his patients were Greeks, and Italians, and Scandinavians. He was an excellent dentist, and I was very proud to work for him, proud to work﻿51 CAT: (cont.) for a person who was so professional. So I can't see where, if they had wanted to, and with the kind of money they would have made, why, they could have set themselves up in very fine practice. MMG: What kinds of women's clubs were there? CAT: Oh, outside of the political clubs, there were many social clubs, of course. There were bridge clubs, and there were social welfare clubs to help families, and there were later on in the thirties, sororities. And the beauticians, for example, would have a club, different types of professions would have clubs. And there were all those teas, I was forever reciting poetry at teas. There were frequent teas at the churches or around the social clubs, or around the Y's or homes; it was quite a social life. Up until World War II and through the fifties there were frequent formals. I had two trunks of formals, because we wore formal gowns so often, we had so many formals, and formal parties, and even at our home we'd have a formal sit-down dinner of teenagers. MMG: How or what was the impact of the National Association of Colored Women in this area? CAT: I'm sorry, I have been ill for many years, and I have not participated in the association. The first clubs, even like the Jack and Jills, and the National Colored Women's Clubs were formed while I was ill. I was injured in 1950, so that was the time that they were coming into being here. I was away during the middle forties. So I'm sorry, you'll have to ask someone else more about that. MMG: You've said quite a bit about entertainment and social activities available to blacks...what sort of cultural activities were there? CAT: Well, there were concerts. The first Roland Hayes concert was presented here in Seattle. Roland Hayes was an acquaintance of Professor McGruder and the first time he had his concert in the United States was here, with Professor McGruder, and the young men, Dr. Cooper, Mr. Gayton, my father, many of them ushered in their tuxedos that night... MMG: Where was it held, do you remember? CAT: It was in a theater, and it's on my Dad's tape, I know that. I went to his last concert in Meany Hall, and I remember his voice was small, but so beautiful, so beautiful. There was an event for Marian Anderson when she came, and I remember so well, I wondered why she dressed so plainly, she had a plain gray dress on, and a cluster of jewels at the neckline. I found that white women who were sponsors didn't like black women to look too beautiful, or too ornate, and so she was very careful to dress quite sedately. MMG: Who was sponsoring her? CAT: One of the women's organizations. And Cecelia Shultz, I believe, really brought culture to Seattle by sponsoring so many of the artists. She was﻿52 CAT: (cont.) instrumental in really making Seattle quite a cultural center. And then we had the school... MMG: ...Cornish? CAT: Cornish. We had Cornish School. And some of our black, young people went there. Syvilla Fort, who eventually became a part of Katherine Dunham's dance troup, went there. She was ahead of me in school at the university, and she should have been in Orchesis, the dance honorary. Syvilla Fort was a beautiful dancer. We eventually danced as a team together, and she and Winifred Ingraham and I were all interested in modern dance. We performed the first modern dance in a black church in the thirties at the Grace Presbyterian Church in their basement, which had a stage. They were freer in allowing this type of activity. We interpreted part of the biblical story of Lot and his wife in modern dance. We had drama clubs in the early years. I have pictures of clubs back in the middle 1900s, they had drama clubs, and musical clubs. There were several orchestras over the years. Frieda Shaw had a beautiful singing voice, and she traveled on the H.F. Alexander, singing between here and California as an entertainer. The H.F. Alexander was one of the great steamships, and many movie stars and wealthy people traveled on the H.F. Alexander. The churches all put on, of course, musicals of some kind. There were cantatas, or there would be plays, and of course during Christmas and Easter and holidays they produced fine performances with really lovely music. Local artists, artists from out of state and touring musical groups were presented in the churches. It wasn't the kind of music you usually hear in churches today. MMG: You say they didn't sing black music, they didn't sing gospel... CAT: It wasn't black music, it wasn't... Yes. Not at the cantatas, not at the musicals or concerts. Except for spirituals. And spirituals are different than what they call spirituals today. Spirituals were sung in a different cadence, a different timing... MMG: Different from gospel music. CAT: Different from gospel music. And gospel music has infringed on what they call spirituals, and I think some young people now who think they heard spirituals have never heard spirituals the way that they were sung in those days, which was very beautiful. And yes, the spirituals were sung a gteat deal in the church services. But gospel music was something we did not hear until much later. MMG: You think that had something to do with the influx of, large influx of people from... CAT: From other parts of the country, yes. And I think the Holy Rollers were the first time we ever heard anything different. There was a Holy Roller church in the thirties on Twenty-fourth and Madison, that's the first time we heard a sort of a type of beat, of people behaving differently in church. And I know that's what they called the Holy Rollers. MMG: They were Pentecostals?﻿53 CAT: Pentecostal, mm hmm. MMG: What sort of social services were available to the black community? CAT: I think the first social worker was Mrs. Carter. She was the one a person saw for welfare. I imagine she really handled the black community as far as social welfare was concerned. There were, of course, the church groups, who would find families in need of baskets for Christmas or baskets for Thanksgiving. There were some clubs that did that sort of thing on a small scale, I'd say. Then of course, in the depression there was that Salvation Army. I think they did a finer job of helping people than any other group did. But there was no concentrated effort, I think it was more an individual club-type thing. Outside of that sort of welfare, I think we only had one or two, three social black welfare workers at all. MMG: What civil rights organizations existed in Seattle? And about what time did they come into being? I'm especially interested in any that you might know of before the Urban League and before the NAACP. CAT: Outside of Marcus Garvey, which you might... MMG: The Universal Negro Improvement... CAT: Yes, and I understand. I find it so interesting to know that he had those young people organized, and they had all kinds of activities. MMG: This was during the twenties. CAT: The early twenties. MMG: That Garvey was...and he was active in Seattle. CAT: Mm hmm. He came to Seattle several times. And I talked to a woman who belonged and was one of the officers in the organization, and yes, they did have a newspaper, too, because her husband wrote for the newspaper. I talked to a young man who was in the organization as a youth, too. So I think that was the most social consciousness movement... My father talked of Marcus Garvey, but I was so young. I can't think of any others. MMG: And then after that—the Urban League, the NAACP—were there others? Did CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or any of the organizations that gained special prominence in the sixties... CAT: They became very prominent here, too. MMG: They did? CAT: Yes, they did, in the sixties they were extremely prominent, and their leaders all came here. And we had, we went through the sixties in turmoil. I was living in the university district at that time, and I had a white﻿54 CAT: (cont.) car, and my son wouldn't drive it through the central area, 'cause he said he would have been too conspicuous. He was afraid something would have been smashed, so he didn't dare to drive a white car. So the unfortunate thing happened, as had happened in many areas. It was an integrated area and there were many stores, many small stores. We were within walking distance of seven of the large chain grocery stores, and there were dry goods stores and drugstores, and bakeries, and Jewish bakeries, and different types of ethnic bakeries. The black power movement came into being and there were riots, and one man was killed in the riots. A Jewish man at Thirty-fourth and Union had a cleaning store, and his wife cried and said, "We were in a concentration camp in Germany and we went through all that, and we never thought we'd come here and this would happen to us," when their cleaning store was burned out. MMG: Now where was it located? CAT: Thirty-fourth and Union. Also, ail the grocery stores were robbed, so they were burned out. They even firebombed and robbed the black stores, because they catered to all races. So within a period of almost, say, just five years or so, almost every large chain store had moved out of the area. There was only one left, and that's Safeway, and you don't get the best of produce, only the very poorest, and the ones who can't travel, go there. Because you just don't get the best quality. The dry goods stores were closed, clothing stores were gone, nice restaurants were gone. The central area is really barren when it comes to services now, where before one could get anything, where one could just walk right down two blocks and just get about anything. MMG: What do you think the causes for the riots were in Seattle? CAT: Well, there was a great deal of rhetoric, there were people who came who I feel someone carried...of course, there was the housing pattern, which was objectionable, that we were kept in certain housing areas. But even as much as they were kept in the housing areas, there still were many races in that area. But it was the rhetoric that started, and making people realize that they were dissatisfied with living as they were. There wasn't enough work for many of the young people. And there were people who started saying, "You are not getting your just due, you are not living where you should, or you are not getting this and that," and for some of the children... this was a great thing to hang onto, and an exciting thing to do. I know at one time the young people entered the mayor's office and had a sit-in. There was a minister who was leading it. He was the first one who ever called this area a ghetto. A Scandinavian lady working for me said, "Mrs. Thomas, I didn't know I worked and lived in a ghetto!" We had Chinese coming to our church who said, "We didn't know we lived in a ghetto!" It was this sort of thing, for the first time they felt, "Oh, this is the sort of place we're not supposed to live. This is an undesirable place." People who were visiting from the East or from other places would ride through and say, "You call this a ghetto? This isn't anything like the ghetto that you see back there." But of course, what he meant was that blacks were concentrated in a certain area, not from the looks of the place, but because I think he﻿55 CAT: (cont.) probably was using the term "ghetto" because there were more of one race in the area. The young people went to the mayor's office and had a sit-in, in the mayor's office, and they tripped him up as he came in. I remember seeing it on TV, and I saw the children that were there, and I knew many of those children. I taught in several of the schools, and they were troublemakers, in school. Some had been troublemakers in Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, and in Sunday school, and at Edmund Meany. I talked with one of the older leaders and said, "All right, this is the way you feel, but have people with you who are representative; some of those children you are using or having in your movement are not representative of all the youth of the city, they are children who have been in trouble, and have been in the juvenile court." One young leader was finally picked up by the police because he had thirty or forty traffic tickets. So some of these children found this was a great way to act out some of their problems. MMG: So you see it all coming about through strongly their making use of troublemakers ? CAT: I don't say it all came out because of that, but I said some of it was the result of troublemakers being used. And now, whether those leaders thought they knew they were troublemakers or not, I can't say that. But I am saying that some of the things were done by children who had been delinquent. Then, of course, many of them were not, many of them were strongly moved, felt strongly about it. My own son got into the movement in the sixties on the campus—or seventies, he was on the campus—and when Stokely Carmichael and others came, I was not able to go, and their speeches were taped so I could hear their speeches. They were also interested in the Vietnamese war, they marched for justice. They knew they were being discriminated against on the campus, and they demanded their rights, they demanded representation, their right to go to conferences, their right to be represented on councils. So there were many who felt very strongly about the prejudices that were throughout the United States and that they found here. But also what happened was some of these very leaders on the campus, the very leaders who were preaching against white people and were throwing rocks so that cars could not go through the central area would drive around at night dating white women, and they'd be off at parties with white girls. So it was a pretty mixed bag, some of the things that were going on, and so one questions whether some were sincere or not. Events happened which caused change, and the community did not need to have had this flight away from it as rapidly as happened. Many black, stable black people moved out of the community because of the activities that were going on in the community. They felt, well, this is a ghetto, and we'll move out where it'll be more peaceful, we'll move to Bellevue, we'll move to Mercer Island, we'll move out beyond Mount Baker, which became almost black for a while, there were so many black...and out to Beacon Hill, where the golf course is. MMG; And you think this was spurred in the sixties?﻿56 CAT: Yes. Definitely. There just wasn't a feeling to move; people were quite contented living in this area, until the sixties. People looked for homes, and they thought they lived in lovely houses. And it is a beautiful area, when it's kept up. People from the East or from other parts of the country always think it's so attractive compared to where they're from. And so it was, this great movement came about because of the turmoil of the sixties, the movement away from the central area. And interestingly enough, the movement has become reversed. There is movement back to the central area, not so much blacks as other races starting to come back to the central area. Blacks too. MMG: Do you think that's a positive trend? CAT: Yes. I think it's a positive trend, because there is the fight against city hall to get services; we've had a good mayor who has cared about poor people, and has cared about minorities. That's why he didn't get to be governor, because he was resented so by the police department, by the water department, by the fire department, 'cause he has insisted the minorities be hired. His secretary's a minority. MMG: What is his name? CAT: Wes Ullman. He's hired many minorities in the city government, and they even ran a Chinese against him, to try to get minority vote in some way to defeat him when he ran for mayor. But we've had to fight to see that the streets were kept clean, and garbage was picked up regularly, and streets were paved; the upkeep of this area was neglected after this flight of the people away. One by one there've been grants and there've been money accumulated so to start to clean up the Cherry Street area and the Jackson Street area. We don't have it in our area yet between Union and Madison Street, we're one of those pockets that's been left out. But there are organizations that have been formed, and I've done some writing for them for their little community newspapers, saying that earth movers are coming in, our alleys are being improved, our streets are starting to be cleaned, old trees are being cut down, old houses are being removed, that type of thing. And when you have a mixture of people in the area, you'd get better services. I used to stop the garbage man and say, "Look, I teach down at Broadmore, and I see those streets washed and cleaned constantly, and you haven't been by my house in the last couple of weeks." We just didn't get those services regularly. Because the order for integrated schools has come out from Washington, D.C., Seattle's going to be in a great deal of trouble in this school system unless the schools are more integrated—and the housing patterns are going to have to change, if they want to avoid the busing. Which many people object to, both black and white object to busing. Although people've been bused to private schools in Seattle for many years, they were bused to the Catholic schools, they've been bused to the Lutheran schools, they've been bused to the Jewish school, they've been bused to the country schools, so busing has gone on for a long, long time. Sometimes I wonder what all the screaming is about,about busing. MMG: You're in favor of busing?﻿57 CAT: I don't think the children should spend many hours on buses, but to concentrate on busing as the one thing that people are fighting against instead of trying to think of other ways of trying to bring equal schooling for all children...I think busing is a necessary thing, at present. There has to be some busing until housing patterns are different. MMG: How would you characterize black and white relations from the 1920s, say, to the present, and have you seen changes in that relationship? CAT: When we moved to the family home at Twenty-fourth and Pine, petitions were signed to keep us out. There were no restrictive covenants and they could do nothing. Later, many neighbors became friendly. One didn't until my son was born, twenty-eight years later. When we were youngsters, of course, there were friendships, and yet there were problems, too; you were called "nigger" and you had to fight your way through. There were those that lived near you who you were close friends with and then there were those who were antagonistic towards you. I remember when Maxine was about thirteen or fourteen, and we were in one of the outstanding department stores, Rhodes, and we were going up on an elevator, and for some reason the messenger boy with a rolled-up paper hit her on top of her head with it, 'cause she was a "nigger," and he was delivering something. I took my sister to the office immediately, and I guess I must have been about fifteen, and the office called the delivery service and that young man was fired from delivering. There was this antagonism on his part, and he was from a wealthy family. Eventually, during the war, I read his name in the paper, and I couldn't feel sorry when he was on the missing list. I'm sorry, but I didn't at the time. So we met people who were ignorant, they didn't know who black people really were. Downtown, for example, they'd look at my sister and say, "Gee, you're the cutest little Hawaiian girl." There was cooperation from some, like the Christian Friends for Racial Equality, to see that there was racial equality. Yet getting jobs in the stores, being clerks, working in the restaurants was a difficult, long fight to get into these jobs, a long fight to get into the unions. It's always a mixed bag of... but you'd get along very well with people in your communities because we lived together. During the depression we had a Canadian soldier living in one of our apartments, Harry, he was a man of all work around the house, for example. And of course, there's a great deal of intermarriage and intermixing between whites and blacks in the city, too, so you had that. The sixties frightened many white people. I know some of my teacher friends said they were afraid to come to see me, but these fears were dispelled and they had no problem visiting. They were told, as in my area and in yours, you can be mugged in Ballard, too. These are usually the older teachers. Now the younger Caucasian teachers or Oriental teachers, they'd come to my home, and one of my dearest friends as a teenage girl had always eaten in restaurants. Her family was wealthy, they never had eaten at home on their holidays. The first Thanksgiving dinner she ever had in a home was in our home. So there were those good friendships, of give and take.﻿58 CAT: (cont.) At Garfield in the sixties, many white students, even though some of them lived in the Garfield area, went to other schools. And Garfield became predominantly black, all their teams became black. For example, when my nephews, who are in their thirties now, went to Garfield... They had a huge band, 150 or more. They presented concerts and operettas. They had a stage band and my nephew was the top tenor saxophonist in the state, and a special scholarship was given for him to go to college because of that. There was such a variety of things. And then when it all became black, one would see the Garfield banner come out at a game, it would be so pitiful, only twenty-five or thirty in the band, for example. They no longer had their musicals and their plays, and their teams went down to the very bottom, their teams were losing everything. Not only did the whites flee, you see, the blacks who had talents fled the central area. They went out to schools all over the city, or their families moved to Mercer Island or other places, and so there was a drain, I'd say, there was a brain drain, a talent drain, an ability drain in the central area, of blacks in all kinds of professions, and in school. Something that bothered me definitely were professional people who made their money in the central area and would not contribute to the central area, would not contribute to the YWCA, the YMCA, or community projects. One of our doctors located very closely in the core area made the remark, "So I take my money every night and I run as fast as I can out of the central area." I resent this highly. I feel they make their money here, they should contribute here. I mean, if you've made it somewhere, then you help those who can't help themselves, or contribute to the organizations in that community that are trying. We have a metropolitan Democratic women's organization in which my sister has organized many of these ladies who do not have degrees, or have professional titles. Some have trades, others may work in homes, or they may be salesladies or secretaries or computer operators, but they are becoming politically aware, and independent in their way of their thinking and their way of knowing how to go out and get the things that are needed for this community. I think that other people who are educated should contribute and also help people. Our YMCA is not the Y that it used to be, a functional, active Y where so many young people were going out to camps and were going skiing or going swimming. Now we have these two marvelous pools here. One is one block from my home, and it's mostly used by white people. I see station wagons full of women bringing their children to swim here. Caucasian. They go to Garfield, white people in the community swimming at Garfield High School. Very few of the blacks swim there. When my nephew was supervisor at Medgar Evers pool he had those black children come there early in the morning, and they worked, they worked so hard they were the second best swimming team in the state of Washington. He went to instruct at Evergreen State College—and he wished he had the time now to get in there and get those kids back working hard. We had a party last week for teenagers, and two of them were from Nathan Hale. They were on the swim team at Nathan Hale High School. They said that all white children were swimming; they kept looking around at the Garfield pool and saying, "Where are the black swimmers?" There were all white swimmers on the Garfield High School team.﻿59 CAT: (cont.) That's sad, that they're not using the facilities that are there. Why aren't they? Somehow, someone's failing in the program to get these students into these activities. We all swam when we were youngsters. We had no pools, we walked to the beach and twenty-five or thirty of us would walk home from the beach every night. We swam if the sun was shining, if it was raining, what do we care about your hair! My nephew the other day had some teenagers at a pool. He had them all get in the water and line up, and started to teach them how to swim. "My hair," some cried. He said, "You hair has kept more of you from progressing in swimming than anything else, because you're so afraid of getting your hair wet." He said, "Quit thinking about what the boys are going to think about your hair and get that hair down in that water and swim, and stop trying to swim with your chins up." We didn't worry about hair, we went in the water, all of us. There were black children all over the beaches, we all swam. And I worry about the young people, and wish I could get in some of these programs and find out what's happening, why are they not participating in many programs. They don't know how to work, to cut lawns, or want to. There have been some summer programs which have been for children, where the children get the money but they really haven't worked hard for that money. This is not fair for the children and for the community. I understand that this year is much better. With the CETA program, the children are being actually put into work jobs where they are working in offices and actually working in stores, and using cash registers and actually working. * MMG: Could you say what CETA stands for? CAT: No, I'm sorry. I just got CETA from the community paper that is left on the porch. But I think it's a government program in which money is given to the city to hire teenagers to work. It said in the paper for the first time they were really doing something that was beneficial. I have a goddaughter who's working in the offices at Seattle Pacific College on this program. There need to be various programs. I think that Carter's going to have a type of NYA program, and a CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] program, and I can hardly wait to see it start, because I saw these in the depression. Young people worked in the woods, and worked in the parks, and those who were artistic had a chance to paint, and those who had other talents were able to use their abilities. We need this type of program very much, and not just for blacks, for all youth. MMG: Could we go back to something that you mentioned just a bit earlier when we were talking about race relations? You said that there was a lot of interracial marriage in Seattle. Why do you think that is, and what effects has it had overall for the black community and for black-white relations? CAT: Really, it's hard to say why it is. We're isolated, of course, way here in the country. Even Bush was an interracial marriage, so the very first black who came to the state had an interracial marriage. I think many people fled looking for a better life from their part of the South and came here, so there were probably already mixed marriages. If you look at the pictures of the people who lived here, then you can see that they * Comprehensive Employment and Training Act﻿60 CAT: (cont.) were of mixed blood, Indian, black, and white. Many Irish evidently intermarried a great deal with blacks. This was a place where people came and passed, because they could get away with it. Even from the early days...I was surprised sometime in the sixties when I was asked about a doctor, and I thought if there had been a doctor all my life who had lived out in the north end, and was black I would know. I learned from my father there was this black doctor, and he'd never lived in the black community, I'd never heard his name before and didn't know anything about him. So that there are some who came here and passed. Then also they lived in mixed areas, districts, so they would Intermarry with some of the people who lived next door to them. There were many Scandinavians, women were brought over to work in wealthy families and there were black chauffeurs working for the families and the chauffeurs would marry with these women. Also there was no ban against interracial marriage in Washington State. There-- fore people from Oregon and California would come up here, and every summer since I was a little girl, I would see out-of-state licenses, and ask about them. One would see white women with black men who came to Seattle to be married, because they couldn't marry in their states. And then they could return to their states and they were legally married. When one looks at the people coming from, say, the Ellensburg area— no, the Yakima area—there was much interracial marriage between Indians on the Yakima reservation and black residents. An older lady showed me a picture, a large picture of young people who were here, say, in 1913, 1914, 1915. I said, "Who's that?" She says, "Oh, that's so-and-so who went such-and-such and passed," and, "That's so-and-so who went to San Francisco and passed," and, "This is the family that had to move away because of the scandal," because the black man had something to do with the white woman, and they were not allowed to marry in the family, and he was given the mixed children and took them away with him. Seeing that we were rather isolated from many blacks coming in and out, that pattern of interracial marriages was set up. In the thirties, men from the South came here. They were allowed to do something forbidden, and desired contact with a woman of another race. Not always to marry, just to have contact with them. But of course, some ended with marriage. And interracial marriages are still going on, and there is crossing over the other way now, there are black girls who're marrying white men. Sometimes black men may have married very cheap white women who may have been prostitutes. On the contrary, there are black girls marrying professional men, college men, well-trained men, men who can care for them very well. There are several businesses downtown owned by women whose husbands are quite well-to-do, and who have financed them—for example, an exclusive dress boutique. MMG: How are these marriages regarded by the black community, and with whom do these couples, to your knowledge, primarily associate? With the black or white community, or with other interracial couples? CAT: Well, during my mother's time, these interracial couples associated with the black community. Since there's a larger group now of interracial couples, some of them associate with each other. We have an interracial church, there are interracial people that come to our church who are﻿61 CAT: (cont.) married. They associate with both white and black, and other interracial groups. It depends in which stratum of the society you're in, as to where you're accepted. MMG: And how does the black community regard it? CAT: Oh, the black women are extremely resentful. And the black educated girl, woman, even more so. It's so unfortunate because on the campus you see the black men with white women, and our young men training to be doctors and dentists and walking through the lobbies with the white women. A counselor to some of the young women finds it very tragic. She had a dinner at her home one evening where she had all of nurses, of her class, doing graduate work, and she could not believe it, she went out and laid her head on her refrigerator and said to her husband, "Do you believe what I am seeing, that every single girl there had a man of color come to pick her up?" Either he was West Indian, or African, or American black. The girls were white, and one was Filipino, and one was Oriental. They had said, "May our boyfriends pick us up?" And she replied, "Yes, of course." It really struck home, that this was happening. Also, evidently there are beginning to be other mixed relationships between... We have many Samoans here now, and there was a friend here yesterday who showed me a picture of her granddaughter, and I said, "What a beautiful child! What's her father?" Well, he's Japanese. So there are other races that are mixing, too. MMG: What do you see as the long-range effect for the black community as the result of such widespread intermarriage? CAT: I have not associated with the social clubs in the past few years, so I don't know what's going on there. I imagine that there're not too many of these couples with the social clubs, like the so-called high society. Having been ill for a very long time, I have not been to dances and to formal dinners. The Urban League, of course, is mixed, or political groups, also. When Sam Smith is running for office and has an affair, there are many whites and blacks there. I can't say about the private parties, the private dances, the private home groups. Yes, there are, when I have been out, there have been mixed couples at these affairs, and I think you could probably answer some of that yourself, too, because you come here, you've seen some of it. MMG: Well, I could, yes, but I really want to know what your perceptions are, whether you think this is a positive trend or not. CAT: Well, I think for the black woman, it's a very unfortunate thing. What can she do about it? There is, I hear, an organization that they have in the East, where black women come down real hard on the white women when they see them with black men, or when they're away from their black man. I don't know how far that would go here. You said, Why not do something about the black man? I think people should have a right, of course, to associate with whom they wish, to marry whom they wish, but I think that we have so much to accomplish, we have so many goals to reach, that it is unfortunate that not enough of our young people, men and women, are combining to make us stronger as a race.﻿62 CAT: (cont.) In Seattle there is not a strong sense of identity. I think that we become diffused, andyeil have marvelous friends among all... interracial friends, I have people that do wonderful things for me. But their children are also going with interracial children, and they're marrying out. We have a couple in our church, and she's Mexican and he's Filipino, and the children are marrying black, white, Filipino— it's becoming a truly interracial family. It's a beautiful sight to see them go up and take communion, they're all colors, from the same family, and they all get along very well, and live anywhere in the city, and they all seem to be proud of each other, and care for each other, among those that are as black as your tape recorder to those who are fair. So it's really hard to say. It's good to see people get along together, and some of the marriages are extremely successful. I have seen men whom I know would not have been as successful if they had not married the Caucasian woman to whom they were married, who pushed them, who kept with them. I don't know why it was that they were able to push this man harder than the black woman was able to, if perhaps he gives her more respect because she's white, or because he is more aggressive or because she has the contacts and could see that he gets the contacts. I know one young man, and he's extremely successful, his wife and he work together beautifully as a team. He was a person who loved skiing, and swimming, and outdoor sports, and there just weren't any black girls out there skiing, and swimming and participating in the sports and the activities he was interested in, so he didn't meet black girls there. He wasn't inclined to be the social kind, dancing and partying. The girls he met were there in sports, and they pursued him and eventually he married one, whom he's been very successful with. People want to have like interests, and sometimes it seems that some blacks get so tied up in being black, and it takes a lot of time solving problems, that sometimes one grows in one direction, doesn't expand one's sensitivities. Therefore, if you are a sensitive black person who enjoys many things, and you meet one of an opposite sex of your own group who does not, they're one-faceted, then it's difficult. I suppose then if you meet someone from another race who has like interests, you can become attracted and marry. MMG: Well, let me ask you one last question here, and that regards race relations between blacks and Orientals, both Chinese, Japanese, and other groups. CAT: Well, in growing up, we found the Japanese to be extremely friendly. They owned many of the stores, the grocery stores, and specialty shops. Of course, the ones we met mostly were the workers, they were the farmers, the ones who had the little pottery stores, and, of course, they were working on the same par with one's self. One lived next door to them. We got along quite well, we went to their restaurants, and it was interesting to find out later—I didn't realize it then—but when Dad would walk in and would say, "Hell, Papa-san, and Mama-san," they were Japanese, and the Japanese were running Chinese restaurants. We were very welcomed, and they really enjoyed having the black families come, especially the seamen, because they were traveling to the Orient and had been there recently, compared to the Orientals, and so they were so glad﻿63 CAT: (cont.) to talk to the blacks about what they were seeing and what they were doing in their country. I thought it was quite interesting one time when my father went to Japan, before World War II, there was an interracial conference of all the dark people of the world in Japan. I was a freshman in college and I wrote a paper about this, and my English teacher gave me a D and told me it was the most preposterous thing she had ever heard, that it had to be a lie. Japan was way ahead, long before we were, recognizing the Third World. There were delegates from Ethiopia, and from all over the whole African continent. The dark world meeting in Japan. The Chinese were a different story. Maybe it was because the Chinese were the most discriminated people against here in Seattle. There were riots against them, they were lynched, they were run away from here by the Scandinavians and the other pioneers, and so the Chinese seemed to want to have the favor of the whites. They would do the things the white people would do against the blacks in order to be approved of. So one found that one was not as welcomed in Chinese restaurants, Chinese stores, or Chinese homes. Even in school, Ruby Chow, who's now on the county council, would not speak to one. Now, of course, she does because she wants the black vote. MMG: She also kept blacks out of her restaurant. CAT: She definitely did, and now when she allows blacks in her restaurant I wouldn't step a foot in it; none of our family has ever been in her restaurant. When she wanted to run for county council, she became friendly to blacks, and opened her restaurant. Of course, newcomers, blacks who didn't know it, were friendly with her and have gone to her restaurant, and one sees them on TV in her headquarters. She ran against a black man who had a great deal of ability, and he just missed getting elected, which was so unfortunate. But Ruby Chow, I'm sure she didn't care two cents about us, really. She hasn't done anything for us since she's been on the council. During the time the Japanese invaded China, the dance troupe was here, of Katherine Dunham. My family and my uncle entertained the entire troupe plus her musicians. We took them to a Chinese restaurant—I think it was the Twin Dragons—and as we got to the top of the stairs, the manager came and said, "I'm sorry, there's no room here." This was in the middle of the day. Katherine Dunham just drew herself indignantly to her full height, her husband was with her, and her manager, and she said, "We have just danced in New York for Chinese relief to help General Chiang Kai-shek, and have given all these thousands of dollars so the Chinese can survive in China, and I shall never dance another benefit for China." My father said, "I am going to the Chinese consul tomorrow concerning your restaurant." And the manager opened up the door immediately and led us all in—there was plenty of room. We sat and were well fed. Dad went to the Chinese consul the next day about the attitude of Chinese restaurants to blacks, and their attitude did change; they weren't all that great, but one certainly could go to the restaurants and they were polite.﻿64 MMG: What time period was that? CAT: This was when Japan invaded China. It was in the forties, early forties, I guess it would be. Must have been about '42, around there. And the Chinese... Well, we had two blacks and a Chinese man representing the Thirty-seventh District. He belongs to the Metropolitan Democratic Club, and he's very cooperative and a delightful young man, because he really cares; he has worked hard for the community. So there are individuals who are fine people. At club affairs he'll wait on tables and do anything else needed. In high school, some of the young Japanese would run with the so-called neighborhood gangs. I'd meet one fellow called Mush—"Mush, where are you heading?" "I'm trying to catch up with the rest of the jokers." He thought he was a joker, too—that's the slang word used then by young blacks for each other. The most popular girl in high school was a Japanese girl who sang jazz with great style. She married a black musician and went to Chicago to live. The Japanese were put in the camps. It was sickening to see them pick up these Japanese. The Japanese family next door to us came to our house and the father said, "Mr. Pitter, I'll sellyou my home for $500," because people were just taking their things for practically nothing. Father said, "No, that's unfair, I would not take your home. I will watch your home for you while you're away." So he rented his home to a white family. My father watched over the property and when the family came back to the city, they had their home. He had owned the little vegetable store in the small shopping district near us. The older people did not return into their businesses, as they had lost everything. But we always had lots of good vegetables because he grew them in his yard. His daughter sang at my wedding when I married—we were that close. I talked to some of the young professionals here just lately, a few weeks ago, concerning the Japanese relationships, and they felt that the Japanese had no resentment against the blacks, even though blacks had come in, had moved into their areas. The blacks had to use their storefronts, which had originally been their stores, as housing because there was no place for the blacks to go because of this housing situation. They were very resentful to the whites, over what had happened. They talked to the blacks, trying to get them to understand what had happened to them, and how resentful they were. We went out to see them when they were out at the racetracks, where they were confined before being sent to Hunts, Idaho, to a relocation camp. One of the fellows said, "Oh, please get me some fried chicken! This Oriental cooking is killing me!" They had been so integrated out on the islands of Puget, and in Seattle, and in the farm valley, they were accustomed to hamburgers and fried chicken and other American food. When they went to Hunts, Idaho, the Japanese from this area had a very difficult time adjusting to the Japanese from Oregon, California, and other places, because those Japanese had lived in Japanese concentrated areas, in Los Angeles, and other places, where here the Japanese had intermingled with the blacks and whites. They really had some difficulties adjusting to﻿65 CAT: (cont.) other Jap anese and their ways, because other Japanese were very ethnic. They shipped their dead to Japan. That wasn't the pattern here, as in California. The young black professionals told me they felt that the Chinese were more distant, very difficult to approach. Mr. Quintard Taylor, when he wrote on relationships, said that at the university he contacted professional Japanese, and he asked them about black-Japanese relations, and they said they felt there was very little contact. Many of our professional black people move out and don't know what the black people in the so-called ghetto feel and are doing. Professional Japanese also have their classes, and they don't always know what's going on with the other sections of Japanese... MMG: Do you think there's a definite social class level involved... CAT: Definitely. In Japan, and here. There's an organization over which Mr. Woo, I believe, is head of, contractors and builders. He is trying to get work for all minorities. I talked to a Japanese teacher who has been very political—we worked in politics together and in teachers' organizations—and she said she feels that among the laboring classes, the trades, all trying for the same jobs such as truck driving and the manual labor jobs, there is antagonism. They're all trying for the same piece of pie. So she feels there is antagonism and distrust in this area. She felt that this Michael Woo would be a very fine person to get in touch with if one wants to know more about the Japanese-Chinese relationships that exist now, among that class. MMG: And blacks. CAT: And blacks, yes. Our biggest problem, I think, is not with them so much as with the Chicanos, now, because where the blacks were the largest minority group, the largest minority group in the state of Washington are now the Chicanos, some feel. The Chicanos first came in and said "Let me have a little piece of the pie. Let me cooperate, brother." Now they want to take over. They want to be independent, on their own, and they're out to get their big part of the pie. I think there's going to be a lot of difficulty in that area. There already has been on the campus. Oh, also, with the Chinese, many Chinese have come in from Hong Kong, and they've gone to schools like Franklin and Lincoln. There has been difficulty between the black students and the Chinese students, and there was a riot at Franklin High School year before last, where knives were used. With the American-Chinese, there hadn't been that problem before, but with the Chinese from Hong Kong, there has been a lack of understanding. I don't know enough about the situation, but I do know there has been a problem. MMG: What about black-Indian relationships? CAT: Well, as I said before, there was some mixing, some blacks were part Indian...but there just isn't too much contact that I'm aware of. The Indians stay pretty much to themselves. They're trying to build their own pride now. They have their cultural centers now. Before, one would﻿66 CAT: (cont.) see them on the streets in skid row. Sometimes one would see a black man with an Indian woman, but there wasn't too much contact in my day with Indians. Although I understand there was intermarriage earlier with blacks among the Indians. In fact, I heard one black family had an Indian princess marry into their family. I don't know if that is factual or not. In later years, there just wasn't so much intermixing. One could see people who were part Indian, and there's very few really full-blooded Indians. MMG: Well, we've reached the conclusion of the formal questions I had prepared. Is there anything else that you would like to comment on, any area that we haven't covered that you'd like to include? CAT: At this time, I can't think of anything. MMGr Well, thank you very much, Mrs. Thomas, for your interview.﻿CONSTANCE ALLEN THOMAS..