 Sandra Watson: Olivia Pearl Stokes: Sandra Watson: Olivia Pearl Stokes: On the question of blackness—one of the values that I find most meaningful is that when the sixties arrived, I had had experiences with eminences that were black. When I was ten years of age, sitting in the...I was sitting in the Abyssinian Baptist Church in the gallery—standing on the platform of that gorgeous marble pulpit, pure white from Florence, Italy, was Dr. Mary McLeod Bethune, with a face as ugly as God ever made. Her comment that night was, "Look at me! I am the most beautiful woman you'll ever see." My mother with her five children, sitting in front of Dr. Bethune, we all snickered because we were seeing beauty eyewise. "When we get home," she leaned across to us and said, "we'll talk about that lovely statement Dr. Bethune just made." And we all stopped giggling. We learned of beauty of soul. Dr. Bethune was only one of many great Americans that God had created, that it was my privilege to know in my lifetime. So that when a young professor at Rutgers in the sixties said to me that black history didn't begin until he was born, I wept, for he thought it began with him and his generation. He didn't know of the African contribution and of the African pattern of life, which we had learned as children, of their rules, their governments, their crafts and cultures. How did you learn this as children? I mean... From our mother, who had been immersed in African culture from the missionaries from the time she was ten years of age. In this country? Yes, in this country. She didn't go to Africa till she was seventy-one. And she learned all about Africa, and all﻿2 OPS: (cont.) of the things from outstanding missionaries, one of whom was in her life for forty-eight years, Dr. Mattie Mae Davis, who served in Liberia at the Suehn Baptist Mission. SW: Now, she was white or black? OPS: Mattie Mae Davis was black, and she worked in Liberia for forty-eight years. She was our missionary from the Abyssinian Baptist Church. SW: And she taught your mother? OPS: No, she would come home from the mission field, and talk to the people in our church, through workshops, addresses, and visits in our home. SW: Where was this? Where was the... OPS: The Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York City's Harlem. And our church, and my mother and others would write them. Mattie Mae Davis would tell us about Mrs. Cora White, who was a missionary before her time. That was the one that my mother started supporting when she was ten years of age. She was a black missionary from North Carolina. Our families belonged to churches—from the time my mother was a child, before age ten—that had sent black missionaries to Africa. The missionaries would come back, or write letters home, and tell us about life there. So that when I was born, my mother was twenty-five, and she had already had years of knowledge about Africa. SW: Where was this? Was this in... OPS: In Middlesex, North Carolina. SW: In North Carolina. OPS: And New York City. Those are the only two places Mother ever lived, other than visits abroad. So that when we went to Africa in '63 to visit eighteen independent nations, my mother was seventy-one years of age. SW: And what was your mother's name? OPS: Mrs. Bessie Thomas Stokes Vann. We knew black history. We had had C. C. Spaulding in our home, the great North Carolina businessman who set up the North Carolina Mutual. He was mother's personal friend. He never came to New York in the years of my childhood or life, but what he came to our home. SW: Why did he come to your house? OPS: Because he was a friend of my mother and the Thomas and Stokes families. SW: And how did she...how did she have these types of friends? I mean, through her church involvement, through...﻿3 OPS: No, because I guess we were what you would call middle-class or upper middle-class blacks. We were born into property. Both of my grandfathers had lots of property. SW: In North Carolina... OPS: Yes. My grandfather, T. 0. Stokes, died at eighty-six. He gave the land for the Stokes Chapel to the community—it's named after the family. Today it is 'a federal landmark on Route 64 in North Carolina. It's a federal marker saying Stokes Chapel. And there's a whole reserved section of the cemetery, that is in the church cemetery, that is reserved for the Stokeses, because there were so many. It's the historical or heritage family church. My grandfather had...on my father's side...I don't know, had eight or nine children. And they were all significant—they were clergy, teachers and gentlemen farmers. And he had, all of the years that I knew him, over two thousand acres of farm and timber land. So we were land wealthy, and the Stokeses were very well known people. I was never in my life taught as a child to beL..v • inyscii. Mother never taught us to behave ourselves. Her expression whenever we left home was, "Remember, you are a Stokes." That's all we ever learned. And I was thirty-two years of age, studying at the University of Maryland, when I asked Dr. Prescott, the eminent child psychologist from Harvard, teaching at the University of Maryland, what that meant. "What does it really mean when somebody says to you, 'Just remember, you're a Stokes?'" So that when all these children and young people in the sixties went through this business of "I am somebody," or, "I am a man," or whatnot—that was strange to me because I have known, I think I've known even before I was born, who I was. Into our home came Walter White, Mrs. Bethune, Lester Granger, Dr. W.E.B. DuBois, Channing Tobias, Nannie Burroughs, Mattie Mae Davis, Benjamin Davis, Dr. Mallory, A. Philip Randolph, C. B. Powell, et cetera. SW: And how did these people influence you? I mean, when you were young, did you listen to them... OPS- When I graduated from elementary school in the sixth grade in New York City, Fred R. Moore, the editor of the New York Age, was our graduation speaker. He was brilliant. When I grew up in the Abyssinian Baptist Church,'from the time that I was age eight, Dr. Adam Clayton Powell, Sr., had Dr' Benjamin Mays as our guest preacher—and that was how I met Dr Benjamin Mays when I was a little girl. And one day Dr. Mays said, after Dr. Powell, Sr., died, that it was an interesting experience that as guest*speaker he was not invited to dinner, because this hospitality was a normal church pattern. I said to him, "There are hundreds of people in this church that would be honored to have you for dinner. Come and go home with us." And so he became a regular guest in our house and in other homes that wanted him. But you see, in the black community, the average person had always been fearful of approaching great leaders. But we were taught as children that we were as great as anybody.﻿4 SW: Who are "we"? OPS: All my sisters and brothers, all the Stokeses. SW: How many brothers and sisters did you have? OPS: I have five. Four by my father, and one by my stepfather—there was five of us. And we were all taught that God made us significant persons, and that every other person in the world was significant, and that you had a right to go and approach them no matter what your age level. My mother was a teacher in her early years, my father was a farmer, a gentleman farmer... I grew up in a family with ten acres of fruit orchards. I didn't even know that people sold fruit until I came to New York as a child. SW: What period of time are we talking about when you say, when you came to New York as a child? OPS: I came to New York when I was eight, in 1925. My father died when he was thirty-three. Then my mother sold the farm back to the Stokes family. You know, in the Stokes family, you don't sell it to outsiders, you sell it back to the family. It's heir property, and it stays in the family. And so mother came to New York to rear her kids and educate them, her four children, and finally her fifth one. She had wanted always to come to New York. My father didn't want to leave the farm. But on the farm, we had ten acres of fruit—apples, pears, plums, grapes, watermelon, cantaloupes, and cherries. But in New York, they sold fruit. In North Carolina, there were four children, and Mom and Dad— that was six of us. And we each had our own fruit trees. SW: Each child? OPS: Each child. We had ten acres of delicious fruit for the family. SW: How were you viewed, how was your family viewed by the other blacks in your community? OPS: I don't know, because all the Stokeses had land. There were nine aunt and uncle Stokeses, and we would go down into town and hire white folks to work on all our farms. SW: What was town? OPS: Middlesex, North Carolina. My father and my grandfather would hire all the whites that wanted to work and all the blacks, and bring them up to the nine farms. And you would hear the expression, "The men are working on Harmon Stokes's farm today, on Ronimus's farm two days from now, on George's farm, on Lula's farm, on T.O., Jr.'s farm, and when they get through those nine farms, after about twenty days, they might go back and work for somebody else." When I was five years of age, my mother said to me one day, when she and my great-aunt were cooking meals for﻿5 OPS: (cont.) the farm hands, "If those men say ugly words to you"—those men being white and black, meaning those white men—she didn't say "nigger," or whatever—"calling your name, you do not have to give them water." And we were carrying pails of water for the workers, and I was five, and those men never said ugly words to any one of the four of us. SW: Why? OPS: I don't know, but they never did. But if they had, we would not have had to give them water. And that was my first lesson in human relations, racism, and it wasn't just...it was really my first lesson in racism. We grew up being kind to other people, no matter what their color or their race. When my grandfather died at eighty-six... SW: Who was your grandfather? OPS: T. 0. Stokes. When he died at eighty-six, 3000 people came to his funeral and only 5UU could get in the church. There were more whites than blacks, because of his respected standing in the community. And all of his children, when they married, were given 300 acres of farm land and some timber land. And when my father, Harmon, died at thirty-three, William Harmon Stokes, we had 300 acres in farm land production. He died in March, and the farm had already been planted. My mother stayed that year, and then left in the fall of 1923 to come North, stopping first in Washington, D.C. SW: And it stayed within the family? OPS: She had to—that was family heritage. So that what I was born into was perfectly normal for me, a family that valued education, that valued property and acquired it, that valued work with your hands and your brain, and that valued relationships with all kinds of people. We were taught that you did not call white folks ugly names, and you didn't call black folks ugly names. You didn't accept white folks or black folks, except as they valued what you valued. Character, not color, was valued. SW: What was your family's political involvement in the area in which you were brought up? I see the economic influence... OPS: My great-aunt, my mother's aunt, was one of the strong supporters of the Marcus Garvey Back-to-Africa movement. SW: Who was she? OPS: Miss Alberta Thomas. Her father, William Allen Thomas, was really an interesting man. I was about two years of age when he died; that was my mother's grandfather. I remember going to his funeral. Because the people cried so, I remember their putting him in the ground. And I can go today to where they put him in the ground. On the fiftieth anniversary﻿6 OPS: (cont.) of the filing of his will (I wasn't aware of it), I walked into the Louisburg, North Carolina, courthouse and asked to see his will because I was looking up legal rights to Mother's land. It's the most interesting will I've ever read in my life. It told all about his wives and his children, what he wanted them to do, and what they were capable of doing. None of his children have written a will as unique. He was the son of William Allen Thomas, a white man, a member of the North Carolina state legislature and a member of Congress, who'd never owned his black son publicly, but who gave him significant land. My grandfather on my mother's side, my great-grandfather, lived in a fourteen-room house with fourteen acres of land in his front yard. SW: And when was this? At what period of time in history? OPS- In 1918, when I was two years of age, he was an old man. Years after, on Sunday afternoons, when I was yet a little girl—I must have been four, five, six, or seven--I would sit on the stone fence that was at least five feet high and a foot thick, around those fourteen acres of land in my great-grandfather's front yard and count the passing cars, and look at the different makes of cars as they went by. I later learned that my great-grandfather's father was William Thomas, the white man, who was the first and only white chief of the Cherokee Indians. In North Carolina, in Cherokee territory in 1972, I walked in one day and as a curious educator, began reading the history of the Cherokees because I knew that my mother's mother was one-half Cherokee, and that my mother was one-fourth Cherokee, and that I was one-eighth Cherokee, and therefore officially a member of the eastern tribe of the Cherokees. I was doing some research trying to establish these roots, which I have since established. I walked into the garden at the Cherokee plantation in Cherokee, North Carolina, on the reservation, and saw a Stokes aster in the flower garden. SW: What is a Stokes aster? OPS: Stokes aster is a flower, a big beautiful flower that had the name^ Stokes on it. And I was struck and curious. I took one, brought it back to New York, to the Botanical Gardens, asked them to look up its history. It was found that the Stokes aster was brought to this country as a flower from England in the 1750s by Dr. Jonathan Stokes. The Cherokee reservation has a replica built around life in the 1750s—so that was consistent. Dr. Jonathan Stokes of the Episcopal Church. He was the uncle of Anson Phelps Stokes, Sr. So in 1953 when I became a professional in Massachusetts, I realized that possibly I had some relationship to the family of the Phelps-Stokes Fund and the Phelps Stokeses. I began to search that out. But before I went to Massachusetts, in 1953, while in New York, I was elected in 1945 a delegate as a young adult in my twenties to the World Youth Conference in England. I was given a partial fellowship to go but I didn't have enough money. My mother had bought a beautilul nine-room house in Harrison, New York, for the family, and when I was﻿7 OPS: (cont.) given this fellowship to go to England and offered this conference, but I didn't have the money, she sold the house and gave me the money to go to the World Conference in Europe. I called Anson Phelps Stokes, Sr., of the Phelps-Stokes Fund in search of additional funds. He had never seen me, and just over the phone, he said, "If your name is Olivia Pearl Stokes, you can have a hundred dollars, sight unseen." And two days later, I received the check. One of my secretaries, from working here in New York with the Baptists from the period of 1941 to 1952, was a young lady who went eventually to be secretary to the president of Voorhees College in Denmark, South Carolina. She found the name Olivia Phelps Stokes in a book that was there at the college; the Phelps Stokeses are Episcopalians. She sent the book to me, and I wrote Dorothy Richie back saying, "Yes, we are distantly related. We, the William Henry Thomas Stokeses, are the black side of the white side." In other words, the Anson Phelps Stokes family had roots in the South, in North and South Carolina, way, way back. And apparently, I don't even know how I got my name... My mother gave me the name Olivia Pearl Stokes because she heard a lady had that name, somebody in history. She liked it. But apparently it was related to the fact that there was an Olivia Phelps Stokes in South Carolina. The Olivia Phelps Stokes of South Carolina has a niece in New York City whose name is Olivia Phelps Stokes. For years in New York, we were both listed in the phone book as Olivia Stokes. I received her messages, and she received mine, so finally we, without conferring, we both put in P. That didn't solve anything because we both had £ as a middle initial. In about 1950, I decided that I had had it, and my name had to be written Olivia Pearl Stokes, because there was Olivia Phelps Stokes. One morning in church, in the Abyssinian Baptist Church, somebody brought in a long article from the New York Times, and it said, "Olivia Stokes marries John Hatchett, Jr." I happened to be away from church, somewhere speaking that morning. My mother kept the article, and when I returned home, she said, "Why didn't you tell me you went away to get married?" Teasing me, of course. And I said, "Oh, dear, again some more confusion." Well, finally, in 1953, Bishop Anson Phelps Stokes, who was head of the Episcopal church in Massachusetts, the diocese of Massachusetts, head of education for the million and a half Protestants, from 1953 to 1966, Bishop Anson Phelps Stokes and I sat down one day, with the resources from the genealogical society, in which there are two volumes on the Stokes family, and we found me in that volume. We found we were fifth cousins, and from that day on, he called me cousin. [laughter] And people...white people would say, "There's the bishop's cousin," or, "There's the bishop's wife," because I was light enough; they didn't know whether I was white or black, I don't know why—I always perceived myself as black enough to be considered black. But anyway, that's part of the heritage. So I think the family land, the extensive﻿8 SW: OPS: (cont.) land held on my father's side by my grandfather was acquired partly as a gift, partly as payment for work, and then as his children got older, they just kept buying land. SW: How did they maintain the land during that period in history? OPS: They were fanners. Grandfather had nine children. Each received a farm when they married and, you know, worked. So that my grandfather and all of his children just hired workers, and they just maintained it by farming. You know, 'cause I'm saying the land must have been important because so many blacks have lost the land, and started losing the land. OPS: We never lost it. I don't know, on my mother's side, there was significant land... The reason I went into Louisburg was to check on the deed that my mother had left me when she had died, and her father had five or six children, so I was just checking all the way back on her side. So there was significant land on both sides of the family, and we were taught never to live without a piece of land. Until this day I cannot sell the last piece of land that I own, and my sister keeps saying, you know, "Let's sell it." And I say, "Why?" And she said, "Well, let's buy some other, you know, somewhere else." But we're landowners, we have to own a piece of land. We've always owned cooperative houses. In New York City, we've lived in a cooperative since 1941. We are believers in owning property—a house to live in. SW: What was the relationship that your family had with the larger black population in North Carolina? OPS: We were really the leadership group. Sometimes I reflect on the church, the Stokes Chapel, which I knew from the time I was born, that's the only church I knew in North Carolina, because we went there. And it was the leading church. My grandfather gave the ground for the church, and they built the church that would seat five hundred people, and Stokes Chapel was... My grandmother led the choir, my uncles were the preachers, the members of the family were the deacons, the deaconesses...you know, they must have hated the Stokeses. [laughter] You know, I can't tell you what... But we were the leaders of the church, and that went on for eighty, ninety years. SW: From what period to what period? OPS: Well, even until today, which is 1979, it's the first time in the history of that church for over seventy-five years that the main leadership has not been Stokes. There are still some Stokeses that are cousins and whatnot around, but they're not the main leadership any more. But that goes back from now, '79, it goes back into 1890 probably, or even earlier than that. Because my mother cannot remember any of her people ever having been in slavery, nor my grandfather on both sides, none of them.﻿9 SW: None of those were in slavery? OPS: I have only one great-aunt, and I never could understand this as a child, Aunt Merritt, who was loving and everybody adored her. She was very dark. And her sister, my father's mother, was very light. She could pass for white. And I never could understand this as a child. And finally one day, when I was old enough to understand sexual things, my mother explained how white men used to take black women and use them. And that was the first time we learned about slavery and that kind of...the intimate family life. But as far back as my mother or anybody could go, we had been without slavery that we know of. I'm sure that my grandfather on my father's side probably had some knowledge, but I never, you know, talked to him, because he died when I was young. SW: Could you talk a little bit about your educational background and the early educational foundation you had in North Carolina? OPS: Yes. Education for the Stokeses was a very important thing. Every child... I mean, we were a community unto ourselves, we were so large, and every child was expected to go to school, go to elementary school, go to high school, go to college, you were just expected to go on to school. That was also true on my mother's side, the Thomases—they were all teachers, preachers, educators, master's candidates, you know, trained... Even when you were a farmer, you went to Hampton to learn to be a good farmer. I went to a little rural school, until I was in the third grade, in North Carolina, and then we moved to New York City. And fortunately, when we came to New York City, we were put, my sister and I, she's eighteen months younger than I, were put in the elementary school that had the first black woman principal, Mrs. Gertrude Ayers. SW: Where was that located? OPS: On 135th Street and Lenox Avenue, Public School 89. We were told that Public School 89 and Public School 136 were bad schools, children were bad. Our father was dead at that point. My mother said to us, "The children may be bad, and the school may be bad; you go to school to learn, and you are not to be a problem." We went through all of the schools. When I was a little girl, in the sixth, seventh, eighth grade...eighth and ninth grade, we were told about lesbianism in Junior High School 136. And that was in the thirties. And my mother sat down and explained to us, when we were in the seventh grade, what it was to be a lesbian or homosexual. And that this was happening, and we didn't have to join it. We could ask our mother anything, and she told us what it was, very factually. SW: When was your mother's birthday? OPS: She was born on June 22, 1893, I guess, something like that. SW: So you went to the first...﻿10 OPS: So we had this first black woman principal, and I loved that woman, until she died at age eighty-six. She must have been in her thirties —I don't know how old she was—but she must have been in her thirties when we met her. We followed her for fifty-some years. She was an inspiration to us. But that was just like another great black American that had come in your life. We came in 1925 to Abyssinia [Abyssinian Baptist Church], and here was this beautiful church in 1925 that had a professional educator, Dr. Horatio S. Hill, who was director of religious education. It had this beautiful minister, Dr. Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. Mother wanted this religious experience for her children—that was part of our education. SW: Where did you live at this time in New York? OPS: We lived one block from the church, 18-20 West 138th Street. SW: Was that called Strivers Row at that time? OPS: No, Strivers Row is 139th Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenue. SW: Were you living in a brownstone or an apartment? OPS: No,we were just living in an apartment, a nice apartment building. And there was a little candy store right near the house, and as kids we loved it. I had an uncle, who was my mother's sister's husband, who was studying medicine. He would come up from Howard University in the summer to be a redcap at Pennsylvania Station to get enough money to go back to Howard to study medicine. He would give us a quarter, and there would be four children, and that would be five cents each, and we would go buy ice cream. I would buy apples. I could get five apples for my five cents. [laughter] My sisters and brother would eat their ice cream and want my apples, and then go begging my mother to make me give them apples. Mother said, "No, each of you had five cents, now you have to wait. If she wants to give you an apple, that's fine." But that's how much it affected me to be away from the fruit... SW: Oh, right... OPS: ...of our farm, you see. I couldn't stand... And until this day now, my sister's been in Africa for eighteen years married to a surgeon, an African surgeon, a medical doctor, and she still has love of fruit. Apples are imported there, so she has to pay a dollar and a quarter for an apple. And when I go to Africa next week, I'm going to slip four apples in my bag, and six peaches, and hope that, you know, in ten days they'll be all right when she gets them. But this is the way fruit affected us. Now in terms of the community, and the relationship of the Stokeses to the community, we were standard setters. So that I have never waited for other folks to set the standards for me. I know what it is I want. I lead, I don't follow. That's always been what we were taught to do.﻿11 SW: Did you... Were the Stokeses involved in government or basically religious leadership? Was it civic leadership? OPS: No. During the time that our elders were there, there was no blacks in government positions. If so, we'd have been in there. Carl Stokes is my cousin, and Carl's grandfather is my grandfather's half-brother. So Louis and Carl are our cousins. But their grandfather moved to Virginia, and from Virginia to Alabama, and there was no continued communication. Rembert Stokes is related to the Carl Stokes family. He's a college president. So that from a political point of view, there was no way in which we could be in political structures, but we were very political people. SW: So you used the church and other... OPS: Well, the church was the launching pad. You see, the black church has always been three things to the black people, and this was true at Stokes Chapel. It was the center for all the social life, and launching all the talent in the congregation, membership, community, and receiving people. We gave concerts—they have all the choirs, and people would come. SW: And social life? OPS: It was a social life. It was, secondly, the center for the movement for freedom, for civil rights activity. So it was always there that we were political, and we would... Civic leaders, and the community betterment societies, and my grandfather helped people keep their land by loaning them money and all that kind of thing, so that they could pay their taxes and fight the system that way. SW: Were you able to be involved in banking at all—the family? OPS: Let me finish the third thing that the church was. It was the spiritual center. You know, in a sense, the black church has been the psychiatrist for the black people. They could come, and it was all right to give vent to your feelings when you'd been hurt by the white man on the outside. So it was also like the country club—socially, it was your country club, in a sense, cheap country club, I call it. That's what the church has always been. Now what was your question? SW: ...your leadership in the church. I just want...in terms of the economic structure of the black community, were you involved in banking in any way? You said that they would lend people money so that they could pay taxes. OPS: Well, not to my knowledge were we involved in banking as professional people. When my grandfather's youngest son, George, my uncle, died about four years ago, he had been a principal of a school for thirty years. He had been a pastor also for fifty-two years. So he had money in the bank. He had influence. He had the original house that his father and mother lived in, and owned eighty or ninety acres of land around the house, and all of that. So that we were influential at the﻿12 OPS: (cont.) bank because we had money there, but not only did George Stokes have it, Ronimus Stokes, his brother, had some there. They had successful farms, so that they could go to the bank and borrow money, and get fertilizer, whatever they needed. You know, if you were a Stokes, you'd just sign your name. And I guess this was true on my mother's side. It was like, I guess it was like, well, you know, the two prominent families marry each other, you know, that kind of stuff. SW: Right. You mentioned, well, you alluded to the fact that you missed North Carolina when you came to New York. What was your life like in New York when you were...in your early childhood? OPS: I came to New York when I was eight years of age. Our life was exceedingly good. We lived at 18-20 West 138th Street. Up the street was a lovely Roman Catholic church which we didn't go into, but the priest was very nice, and he liked us, and we liked him, so we always visited with him on the steps of the church. He tried to lure us into that church when there was the depression in the thirties, because people were hungry, and we weren't hungry, so we didn't need to go for food. But we went by that church, hailed to Father Murray, who was a very outstanding civil rights leader in the community, who was finally transferred to the South by the Roman church because he did too much for the community. We went to Abyssinian Baptist Church. My mother soon married again because she needed some help with the children. She met a very fine Christian deacon who was in another church, a Mr. Lester Lee Vann. SW: What is your place in terms of the children? Are you the eldest... OPS: I'm the second child, and I have a brother who is older than I am, about two years, I guess. I'm the second of five children. SW: The first girl? OPS: First girl. We went to Abyssinia, Abyssinian Baptist Church beginning in August 1925. It was the first black church in America with a master's degree educator who developed all kinds of programs, created after-school programs for us in Bible study, in music and art, in drama, in education—everything we wanted was at that church. Right around the corner was the YWCA. So we had the combination of the Y, the church, and then those two organizations were linked to the world. The Y was linked to the world, our church was affiliated with the Protestant Council of the City of New York. So that as we grew up, in leadership, we were immediately linked to the whole world. I became active in the youth movement in all the Protestant churches in New York, and finally, in 1941, became the secretary of the United Christian Youth Movement of North America, traveled all over this country and Europe. I became president of the New York State Christian Youth Conference, for years worked in different offices there, and then﻿13 OPS: (cont.) became president. And on that trip in 1941, went around the country as its secretary for the United Christian Youth Movement of America. Martin Harvey was the president, the first black president, the first president of the United Christian Youth Movement of America. He was a professor finally at Southern University. And Dorothy I. Height was in the United Christian Youth Movement. Dorothy and I are, grew up together—Dorothy is about eight years, seven or eight years older than I am. And we grew up together in the United Christian Youth Movement. In Harlem, we founded the Harlem Christian Youth Council, and led that. All of that emanated out of our relationship to the church. SW: Well, you weren't a shy child at all. OPS: Oh, no. I've never been afraid of anything or anybody. Never in my life. SW: So in terms of your education... We were talking about your education and childhood. So you were at P.S... OPS: P.S. 89, and I went on to Junior High School 136, and at 136 a white English teacher named Miss Wright kept saying that I had to go to the school for gifted students, Hunter College High School, and I never knew why. She kept talking about style and form in writing and all. I didn't know what she was talking about. But anyway — SW: What subjects did you excel in in school at that time? OPS: All of 'em, except spelling. I was an A student. I couldn't spell— that's the only thing I ever failed in my life in school. I never spelled well. I always spelled well enough to pass; I never failed, but I never excelled in spelling. And until this day, I use the dictionary a great deal because phonetics was something I couldn't learn. I just never could, even after taking six courses in phonetics, and I've never coped with that. But in — I think that has something to do with my early training, phonetically, in the South in my first three years of school. And Miss Wright in Public School 136 wanted me to go on to Hunter College High School. So I was admitted to Hunter College High School. I did not know that it was a school for gifted children 'cause I didn't know that I was supposed to be intellectually gifted. SW: You didn't take an examination? OPS: No. On the basis of my recommendation and all, I went on in. I guess my grades were high enough, and the recommendations were great, so I took no examination. SW: How many black children were there? OPS: And it was interesting, Judge Watson's daughter, Barbara, who's now with the passport division in the State Department, was in the same high school class I was, and her father was a judge at the time.﻿14 OPS: (cont.) Barbara used to say to us at high school, "Have you seen my chauffeur?" And we'd look at each other as students and say, "Have you seen my chauffeur?" And her father would send a chauffeur down to pick her up, but we were never invited to ride. When she got on the subway, days that the chauffeur didn't show, or she got on the trolley in those days, and we'd all look at each other and say, "Have you seen my chauffeur?" But now Barbara and her sister are very friendly and all that, because you know, now I'm Dr. Stokes. OPS: ...went to Hunter College High School, and while there, my stepfather died. My mother had been married to him only eight years, and she was still in her thirties, and this was really kind of tragic. She was about thirty-eight. My stepfather died... I was in the end of the tenth year, going into that fall, I would have been going into the eleventh grade. I realized then that going to college was going to be more of a problem because of his death. So without saying anything to my mother, I changed over to Wadleigh High School, to take a commercial course and be equipped to be a secretary, while I went on to college at night part time. When I transferred to Wadleigh, I discovered that I had so many credits from Hunter that I skipped the eleventh grade, and went directly to the twelfth grade of high school. I skipped a whole eleventh grade, went into the twelfth grade because I had the points from Hunter—I carried so many majors—and graduated from high school in three years. After high school, I went into City College because I was sick of women's schools. I went into City College where I could be with some men, and because people told me that it was so difficult. I decided that if anybody could learn it, I could. So I went to City College at night for twelve years, working full time, days, and finished my college work. SW: What were you majoring in at the time? OPS: I majored...actually, I didn't quite finish my undergraduate work at City College 'cause I shifted to NYU [New York University] at the end of my undergraduate work and majored in presocial work and education. Pre-social work was the...education was the major, presocial work was the minor. And then went on for my master's. I finished my undergraduate work in '47, having begun it twelve years before, and my master's in '48. Then I was given a fellowship to Columbia University Teachers College to go on with my doctorate. Educators there said I had a perfect A grade in my master's. I knew educational methodology; what I needed was philosophy. SW: Were there any educators at this time that influenced you in your undergraduate work or your master's work? OPS: In sociology and psychology, there was Dr. Zorbaugh who was head of our department at NYU. At the master's level, Dr. Samuel Hamilton was in religious education, and he was very influential at NYU. I did my master's in religious education and education. And he was very outstanding... And then when I got to Columbia, at the doctoral level,﻿15 OPS: (cont.) Dr. Harrison Elliot, Dr. Lewis Sherrill, Dr. Osborne, Lyman Bryson, all those people were in the field of philosophy and education. So I had a marvelous experience. When I finished my doctorate, they rated me in the highest grade level. I defended the dissertation in May '52... SW: What was the dissertation on? OPS: What was it on? It was on leadership. I did an analysis in my dissertation of leadership education for the Protestant churches in the city of New York with particular emphasis on the agency that I was serving, the Baptist Educational Center, and made recommendations for its future. The Baptist Educational Center, of which I was associate director, was training leaders in the church. It was an in-service training center, sponsored by the American Baptist churches. During all my studies, I was active in the church, in one way or the other— speaking, writing, training—professionally active. I did my undergraduate, my graduate work almost all in a period of fifteen years, and carried a luil-time job through, and yet came ual at the tup of my doctoral class at Columbia. They have three categories: good, better, best. SW: And you were best? OPS: I came out in the top group. And the night that those professors approved my doctorate, they asked me, as is the custom, I gather, to go to dinner as a new professor, with them. I took one look at 'em, and said, "Gentlemen, may I have a rain check?" I just wanted to walk through the park and go home. Years later, I went back for that dinner. But I had determined to get my doctorate before I was thirty-five, and I did. I was one person who got a doctorate by accident. I happened to be working with other people, and I was either getting too engaged in work—x was spending sixty-six hours a week in work—and the other people's minds were not stimulating me, so I had to stay in the academic community to be stimulated. So I was one of those persons who didn't want, I mean, I had never planned to get a doctorate, I had planned to marry Dr. George Johnson at Howard University, who was head of the law school. And he was so busy with a divorce that took forever because his wife was under psychiatric...you know, problems, that we never got that one solved. But I have always had a marvelous romance life—I never had enough time to spend with...but I've had a quality set of romances... Some day I'm going to write a book on the loves in my life. SW: Would you want to talk about that now, or do you want to... OPS: No, I think it's more important to talk about the people that keep helping young people's minds, the environment which motivates and feeds your mind to be a contributing citizen. In the life at Abyssinian﻿16 OPS: (cont.) Baptist Church, for us which began in 1925, on August 8— we'll never forget that date. We went in, put our hands in the hands of Dr. Hill, the educator. My mother said, "These are my children. Educate them." And I was eight, and the others were younger, and my brother was older. We met during that period, in that church, and in movements from that time, Walter White, head of the NAACP. Mrs. Bethune was speaker in our church, Dr. Channing Tobias, head of the Phelps-Stokes Fund—all these were great leaders in that day. SW: They spoke at the church, and they worked in the church... OPS: All of them were speakers at our church. They were not workers in the church; they were invited guests to that church. But Adam Powell, Sr., and Adam Powell, Jr., kept that church in the front line of American Protestantism in terms of activism for the movement for freedom... Lester Granger, who was head of the National Urban League... And then as volunteers, we would get on committees, and boards, and into movements, you know, in these different organizations. Our church was taking a position. Mattie Mae Davis was our missionary in Africa. Benjamin Davis was our Communist congressman, and we supported Ben. Ben was Harvard University educated. And when I went to Russia in 1945, for two or three months, I came back with a pen to give him as a gift, thinking he would be pleased. He said, "Olivia, I'm not related to the Communists of Russia. I'm an American Communist." And I still have that pen, not him. SW: How did the congregation react to his political beliefs? OPS: They didn't buy his political beliefs, but they bought the fact that he was a Harvard-trained man and wanted blacks to go somewhere. So we voted for him to get him into the council because we knew that he couldn't make the council Communist, he had only one vote. So that, you know, it was no problem with that. We just didn't buy his Communism, you know. Actually, what Ben wanted basically was good... equality for all black people. And he thought the only way to get it was through Communism, and some of us didn't agree with that as the only way to get it. That marvelous person who hired me when I was eighteen years of age, Mrs. Cecelia Saunders, executive at the YW. She was a great lady; she was an older woman then. But just to be associated with Mrs. Saunders, and it was by my desk that Lester Granger would come in and go to eat at the Y dining room. The Y was a great place to eat at that time. And the food was good, and everybody would come. Mr. Henry Kraft was over at the YMCA as executive. These were people who were doing things, and Mrs. Saunders had a marvelous way of working with her staff. For instance, I was director of the information desk. There were two telephones on it. Mrs. Saunders had a theory that anybody who came to that information desk should have the information she wanted, about anything in the world, in five minutes. Mrs. Saunders and her husband would come by and test﻿17 OPS: (cont.) you. One day they came by and asked me, "Where do you buy an alligator in New York?" And I said, "At the zoo." That was the correct answer. You had the New York Times every morning, and you were supposed to peruse it, and anything that anybody called about, you were supposed to know how to find the answer. If one was asked about the U.S. Office of Education, you had to know where a person could reach that to get further information. So I became very skilled and specific and information conscious. I'd never forget. I was civic minded and curious as a person. One day I went down to Radio City, just as a citizen, to enjoy entertainment, and saw a minstrel show. I came back that evening to work from five to eleven at the desk, and sat down in the quiet of the evening and wrote a letter to the manager of Radio City protesting white folks being made black—just out of my youth, curiosity and resentment. And I wrote on YWCA stationery out of my innocence. The next day, the manager was on the line of the YWCA asking what he could do to correct the race problem. That day Mrs. Saunders invited me in <xr>i shewed me the power—that was my introduction to the impact of power—that the Y had in the world, and what I had done, and how I bad unconsciously, and without authority, used this instrument. But after that, she did a lovely thing—whenever anybody died, she would write a letter to a friend and say, "Today so-and-so died. And that person's contributions were such-and-such." I was the secretary at night on that desk and had to read these letters, stamp them, and close them. Well, in her letters she was really writing to us young people what she believed in there, or that she would share. And she was a marvelous person for identifying talent and training you. She was a tough administrator, but a very sensitive, lovely woman. A. Philip Randolph was introduced to us. He was in the civil rights movement then. As I say, Fred R. Moore was an old man then—he had been a speaker for my sixth grade graduating class. C. B. Powell was in his heyday at the Amsterdam News. Dr. Benjamin Mays was the leader of the academic community in Atlanta, and always up here as a preacher, and he was a columnist for the many black papers. SW: Did you meet J. Rogers and Patterson and... OPS: Yes, Rogers had his bookstore at 125th Street and Seventh Avenue, and was writing books, he and Mr. Micheaux, so you met them at the bookstore. SW: Who's Patterson? What...I'm sorry — OPS: Fred Patterson, head of the United Negro College Fund. Yes, who founded the United College Fund, as a matter of fact. Marian Anderson used to...I used to meet Marian Anderson in the hall of our cooperative house at 1945 Seventh Avenue. We moved from 18-20﻿18 OPS: (cont.) on 138th Street to 1945 Seventh Avenue, in 1941. We lived at 18-20 West 138th Street from '25 to '41. In '41 we moved to Seventh Avenue and bought a seven-room co-op apartment. And Marian Anderson would come in that house to her accompanist, William Lawrence, who arranged the spiritual, "Let Us Break Bread Together." So I used to see Marian Anderson in the halls and be grateful that we had been...and would stand and talk to her. I received the Marian Anderson Award in music because as an alto I led the choir at the church. Marian Anderson said, "If your family doesn't have money to continue you in music, don't go that direction. You have talent, and go somewhere else, because it's a hard road to go." So I went somewhere else, and used my music as a hobby, as something I enjoyed. And I've always been grateful for that. SW: Did you play an instrument or used to... OPS: I went to a high school that required that you---before you could graduate, you had to write and read music. Hunter College High School required that every student who graduated had to write two pieces in sharps and flats, and you had to read music, and you had to play the piano. So I learned all that there, but Mother had us in private music as well. I don't play the piano now, for I wanted to play a horn, and Mother was afraid that if I played the horn, that it would be too strong for my lungs, it would blow my lungs out. So she wouldn't let me play the horn—that's the only thing that she ever prohibited me from learning. So that we met Max Yergan... You know, we were in, as youth in the height of Harlem's black renaissance... SW: At that time, did you understand how important these people were? OPS: Well, we knew they were the leaders. We knew they were writers, but the Schomburg collection of black culture, the concerts at the library...for us, it was just the Harlem quality of life. It was the environment that we were nurtured in, and these were the people who were doing beautiful things, and we wanted to be where beautiful things were. We didn't have the historical perspective; we just knew that this was the renaissance...you know. We enjoyed cultural enrichment. SW: What a marvelous time to be alive... OPS: I went to see Black Nativity by Langston Hughes, and it was interest- ing. That night, there were a group of white southerners in the audience, and they were singing every spiritual as well as we sing it. And Langston and I talked afterwards about the fact that these people had been reared in the same culture we had in the South, knew the same songs, and could sing 'em, and had as much fun as the blacks. But you see, most blacks don't know this. And Countee Cullen was one of the greats. They were all about ten years older than I was, you know, ten or fifteen years, but I was young enough, I was in the right kind of high schools and college, so I was a part of all of﻿19 OPS: (cont.) this. You see, when Dr. James Robinson started Crossroads Africa, and Jim and I used to sit on a stool and have ice cream cones together, and chat about Harlem's needs and gifts... But you know, one of the interesting things, when I went to Boston, in education—in 1953, first major work experience outside of New York. I had my doctorate at that point. But let me just back up before I went to Boston. I had worked for the YW from '35 to '41. From there, at nineteen, I was invited to accept a position at the Baptist Educational Center. And I worked there from '41 to '52 as associate director of the Baptist Educational Center which trained in a school over 500 church people in 157 churches every week, from all over Harlem, Westchester, white and black, but mostly black. But we were related to the white Baptists as well. And then I resigned the Baptist center in '52, after I received my doctorate, and went to head the Merrick Community Center out in Jamaica in Long Island. Jackie Robinson and Ella Fitzgerald were on the board, and at that time Noble Sissle's band was going. I had met Noble somewhere, .ad he had been unhappy with some marriages he'd had. He met me in Saint Paul's Church on 132nd Street and was impressed with what I did, and the speech I had made. So one night he came to the Merrick Center to pick me up—his wife was dead then, I guess—and I was having a board meeting, and some people came out and said, "Noble Sissle is outside...wonder why." They were talking to me as director of the center, and I said, "I know why he's here, he has come to take me home." And these people, all these black elites who lived in Saint Albans, Long Island, which was really the place to live at the time___you know, Jackie was there. I said, "Well, it's as far to Manhattan as it is from Manhattan to Saint Albans." But it was interesting... Jackie didn't think the center was attractive enough to send his sons, so I said, "Well, then as a board member, your job is to make it that way." So we got together. Then as a result of that contact, I was invited to be Jackie's sports writer for his material at NBC.* SW: See, it always seems...you met the people, you were in position to meet___the people... OPS: This is God's guidance... SW: That's what I am saying... OPS: This is God's guidance... SW: So many people that you met, and then you were able to utilize their skills in doing... OPS: I want to say it... I've never pushed, I've just been led as if God had just said, "The next door is through here. Go." And when Jackie invited me to be the writer at NBC for him, I didn't know anything about sports...that's the most interesting education I ever had because I'm a nonsports person from the word go. I went, for NBC ^National Broadcasting Corporation.﻿20 OPS: (cont.) wanted me because I had a doctorate and was a researcher. And they wanted to offer me $8000 and Jackie $20,000. And I said, "No, he has a bat and I have a doctorate, and you're not going to swap with me for that." So I refused to work for NBC for $8000 and stayed at the community center. SW: When was this? OPS: That was in '52. So I refused to work in that setup, and I got a call to be the director the the Department of Religious Education for the Massachusetts Council of Churches. They didn't know I was black when I got called to Boston. They were looking for an educational director for a million and a half Protestants. And when they discovered that I was black, they still invited me. I was a woman, and it had been a nan's job and all that. And the head of the board happened to be a woman, a white woman who's now about eighty-eight, and I called her the other night. And we became such good friends. I went up for the interviews; she was charming, she was an Episcopalian, :ihe was on the staff of Bishop Stokes—although he hadn't come yet, he came after I did, a couple of months. And they hired me. The Presbyterians couldn't believe that a black woman could have a doctorate and thirteen years' professional experience. SW: Now, how did you hear about the job? How were you... OPS: Through the National Council of Churches. The National Council of Churches has connection with churches all over America, and they called me one day and said, "This is open, and we want you to apply. And we're sending your credentials." And I got a call to come, letters, and all of that. And I went up to all the interviews in '53, and started in March '53. There was racism in the church, and racism in the society—I had a whale of a time trying to get an apartment where I wanted to live. SW: Whew, this is 1953, and you are heading a... OPS: I was heading a million and a half Protestants of Massachusetts, and there only 120,000 blacks in the whole population of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. SW: Okay, now what was the job... Specify what the job was to be. OPS: My position was to direct and plan with thirteen denominational executives and their staffs the educational program for a million and a half Protestants... SW: Oh, my goodness. OPS: ...in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.﻿21 SW: Weren't you scared? OPS: No, no, no. Because I had been on committees of the National Council since I was fifteen. SW: Urn hmm. So you knew how they worked... OPS: So I knew how they worked, I knew the structures of the church, I had been interested in theology, and had been trained in theology and education, so I wasn't afraid. We had a marvelous time. And I was the only black. SW: Did you have anyone that you brought up there? In other words, did you bring anyone to work with you? OPS: No, I didn't carry a soul. Just myself. My secretaries were mostly white...one of my secretaries was the daughter of the man who designed Williamsburg, one of the designers of Williamsburg in Virginia. And one of my secretaries was a Lutheran girl who's in California now; we keep in touch. She's a beautiful mother and teacher. We just had a marvelous...fourteen years, 1953 to 1966. SW: What do you feel were your major contributions during that time? What are you proud of during that period? OPS: Well, it was fascinating. When I went there, the first thing that I saw was that Massachusetts, being a recreational center in the summer, people thought they had to give up their religion, their activity, to go make money on the beaches... So we started educational programs at the resort center churches at midnight, when people were off, seven o'clock in the morning, eight o'clock in the morning, all kinds of staggering schedules for workers, so that nobody had to give up anything they valued in religion. They couldn't believe this, but it worked. We set up schools in all... Hyannis...1'11 never forget being in Hyannis when the Kennedys were in, and Jackie Kennedy, John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy were on committees with me at Freedom House in Roxbury with Mrs. Snowden. We were in political things together when Governor Herter was at the State House. Once while I was there, in those fourteen years, the emperor of Ethiopia came over, Emperor Haile Selassie, and the governor sent for me to come to a reception, you know. And the emperor asked me if I would now come—this was in the late fifties—if I'd now come to Ethiopia, because I had been invited before I finished my graduate work to go to be the Minister of Education to Ethiopia, and I said I had to finish my doctorate. I still didn't go to Ethiopia, but it's my favorite African country. Ethiopian people have not been under colonialism, and there's a different spirit, and there's a uniqueness, and there's a distinctiveness in Ethiopia that just isn't found anywhere else in Africa. They are very poor people, and the revolution I hope will bring economic equality to a people who've had ethnic equality all along. And I look forward to some day getting back to Ethiopia when it progresses economically.﻿22 SW: When was the last time you were in Ethiopia? OPS: I've been to Ethiopia on six different occasions in my experiences in Africa, in my nineteen different trips to date. I was there at the day the emperor was deposed—I was there that day, that week. That was, I think, '75. I have to look up the exact date. But Ethiopia is a fascinating group of Africans, absolutely beautiful. One of my second accomplishments in Massachusetts was a rather interesting one. It really proved to a lot of white people that black leadership could be equal or superior. I'll never forget the day that the president of the Urban League asked me to come and in ten minutes tell his board how I got that important position. And I said to him, "I will come, but not for ten minutes, because it took a lifetime to be prepared to serve in this position. And I will tell you that story, but I will not do it in ten minutes." My being at that level gave me an opportunity to serve in the Massachusetts senate as clergywoman who prayed for the opening of the senate. And it was the first time that those legislators had ever seen a woman, and a black woman, lead them in prayer. That was in the sixties. So that in more ways than one, the contributions that I made in white churches in thirteen denominations, leading those groups, in relating to the universities was pioneering efforts. I taught four courses in the Christian ministry program at Harvard. I taught as a guest lecturer at Andover Newton, at Boston University, at Tufts in the early childhood [program] as guest consultant. All this gave them an opportunity to see a woman whose doctorate came from Columbia University, who was as capable as any of those that they had and maybe even more than some. SW: At the time that you were there, were you...had you been ordained as a minister? OPS: No, I accepted ordination in November of '66, but I had been invited to be ordained by the black Baptist clergy of New York as early as 1942. And I resisted ordination, because in the black church in America, particularly in the National Baptist Convention, Incorporated, there was just no place for women clergymen. The head of it, Dr. J. Jackson, opposes women clergy; the clergy themselves wanted to use you as secretaries and not educators and not pastors and not associate pastors. So there was really no point in going into a secondary role when as an educator you could be in a primary role. SW: You couldn't have made... OPS: And as educator, I could enter places I could have never entered as a minister. I could enter the same pulpit as Bishop Stokes, but if I had gone in as a clergyman, I'd have been second and third and down the ladder. In Massachusetts, in order to be a guest speaker at an eleven o'clock in an Episcopal church, the clergy has to get permission from the﻿23 OPS: (cont.) bishop because you're a non-Episcopalian, and you're nonordained. Because I was a graduate of Union Theological Seminary, the bishops in the dioceses of Massachusetts said, "Any church in the diocese that wants to invite Dr. Stokes is welcome to do so without ever having to come to me anymore. You have blanket permission." This occurred with the Lutherans, and with the Episcopalians, and when I was moving from the Massachusetts Council to the National Council of Churches in 1966, I knew that I was then going to be working not with thirteen state denominations, but with forty-two national denominations across America and the world in the Protestant community, of which there are 295 different units in the World Council of Churches. The World Council of Churches where Dr. Potter, the black Jamaican, is executive head, there are 295 different Protestant national bodies. Recently when he spoke for the Abyssinian Baptist Church, in June of '79, Dr. Samuel Proctor, our pastor, invited me to leave my seat in the audience, come to the pulpit, and be the hostess for Dr. Potter because of my relationship to him and the World Council of Churches since 1950... I was a delegate to the first World Council of Churches meeting in Evanston, Illinois, in 1954. I went to Nairobi, Kenya, as an official delegate for the National Baptists, Incorporated, of the World Assembly in 1975. I'd been active in many church world meetings. So that, really, my second contribution was just being a capable educator, administrator, both in higher education, and teaching at the universities. It was very interesting being a staff member on the Massachusetts Council of Churches... every staff member held a doctorate. This was a requirement—I was the only black. This was a requirement so that we would not be snapped up by the many Boston colleges. The Protestant community saw the churches as equally important as general or higher education, so staff were invited to our counterdepartments at the colleges to be consultants, to be lecturers, to be guest teachers. And we didn't have to worry because our salary scales were equal to theirs, and eminence, and all the rest of it, which was a very nice arrangement. On my board of education for the Massachusetts Council of Churches, my department board, were five doctorates, so that it was my opportunity for the first time to work with my peers at a level where you didn't have to think only about race. And when I gave them my expectations of what I could see we might plan to accomplish in the first three years, they looked at me and said as a board, "Dr. Stokes, we won't finish this set of goals if we have twenty years." But in three years we did a check, and discovered many changes. Educators had deepened their theological studies, because education was thought of as methodology, and in the church, for me, it was theology and the story of Jesus, and how He lived, and how He affected lives, and how He found ways to share that with other people. We started with theology; we brought in the Greek Orthodox church, and now, Archbishop Iakovos, who is here with﻿24 OPS: (cont.) the Greek Orthodox church as the Archbishop of North and South America, was a bishop then in Boston. We had a lot of opportunity to learn... The Greeks, the fundamentalist Christians, the Pentecostals, the liberal Christians—all together came out with great new strength. It was just a marvelous opportunity. We produced books in education for use in the churches. My second contribution was really being a competent, capable educator in the Christian community, and that reflected at the national level, the international level. SW: So you didn't have to deal with racism at that time? OPS: Oh, I had to deal with racism, always everywhere. You always have to deal with racism in America. I'll never forget the third night that I was in Boston, I delivered an address, and I pointed out that one of the issues, for me, in this society and the work of the church, was to deal with the whole question of race relations— we didn't call it racism then. And I said, "At supper tonight, we sang that song about little darkies..." black darkies or something, I don't even remember, but it had darkies in it, and blacks, and darkies... I pointed out that people of good will innocently were not analyzing what this did to those of us who were minorities. The next day, fifteen people called my director or sent letters in about the fact that I referred to their being, you know, unchristian because of this. And he called me in, and he told me that I wasn't supposed to be dealing with race relations, they had a social action person who was supposed to deal with race relations. And I sat there listening to him, then I finally said to him—he just died this week incidentally, my executive—I said to him, "Dr. K," I'll leave his name out, "as a religious educator, I was born black, I was born a woman, and I now have acquired a doctorate, and I can never erase any of those things until the day I die. Further, as a black person, I've experienced bad race relations and good—I've had the best of what America had to offer, but that wasn't good. And as a woman, I've experienced sexism and discrimination as a woman." Now I want to talk about that problem in relation to the position of college president, because I've been invited to be a candidate for the office of president of four colleges, and never quite made it because I was a woman. And I said, "You have the privilege as executive of this Massachusetts Council of Churches to hire whom you want, but as long as I am director of the Department of Religious Education, I will always talk about the issue of human relations, and race relations. So you can fire me if you wish, but I told the board before you came, 'cause I was here two months ahead of you, that I would stay if I found out that the executive was somebody I could work with in terms of philosophy." So that ended that. SW: What was his response? OPS: Nothing. Silence. And I got up and left. I have never found it﻿25 OPS: (cont.) necessary to compromise. I don't...I've never wanted for bread___needed bread...I have never been hungry, never been dependent, so I've always felt free to... You know, if I didn't have that job, I'd have another one—the Lord opened that door, and He'll open another one. When I was going to Massachusetts, my brother, the oldest child in the family, Clarence, said I ought to stay home with my mother. I was then thirty-seven. I ought to have stayed home with my mother, and he didn't think that I ought to go to Massachusetts. We were having breakfast on the morning before I was leaving, and my mother said, "If that's the job Sister wants, and that's the job she's been trained for, and that's the position that needs service, let her go. And that's where she ought to go." My mother was not the one to follow me. She was going to keep her apartment—she had a beautiful seven-room co-op apartment in Harlem, New York, and was going to stay there. She was always a homebody, a homemaker. But my brother had studied for two years at Hampton Institute while he was in service. He was in the navy, and then he had started his own business in New York. SW: Which brother is this? OPS: The oldest one, Clarence. And he had a store, what do you call it, luncheonette, candy store, and whatnot. My youngest sister, Bernice, was as pretty as a picture—she took after my father's mother; my father's mother was part German, and Bernice took after my father's mother, and looked like her. She was a secretarial graduate. She died when she was twenty-three, because she was so busy entertaining these handsome soldiers and all during World War II that...she had to stay out every night, all night. So she lost her health fooling around with, trying to be the glamour gal. But she was a very lovely girl, and that was one time the family was sorry that it had enough money to pay two medical specialists, because they tried some kind of new special innovative instrument, and consultation of eminent doctors, and this instrument blew her lungs completely out. That was once we were sorry we had enough money than...we wished we had been poorer than we were. But anyway, the experiment that they hoped would cure the double pneumonia that she had blew her lungs out, and she was gone. I guess the head doctor who advised her took fifteen years before he could admit to us that this had been an experiment. We knew it all along 'cause they asked us to invite these specialists in. But Bernice was a very lovely person, and she died at twenty-three. Everybody loved her in the church, and you know, she'd been...actually, she was keeping company at the time with now Judge Robert Mangram, Robert Mangram, who's now a New York City judge. So they were having a good time. Beatrice, my other sister, was eighteen months younger than I, was always like my mother. She loved to sew and decorate a house. She studied at the Parsons School of Design and the Dior School in Paris. And she married an African medical student that I introduced﻿26 OPS: (cont.) her to. They've been married now twenty-eight years. They returned to his country of Sierra Leone when the country became independent in 1961. She now lives there as his wife. They've had a very rich life at the top of the educated class and the political and diplomatic involvement there. She's entertained emperors and whatnot because he was the head doctor at Yenegama Hospital Center for the national diamond mines. World leaders economically interested had come from all over the world to view the diamond mining process. So that Beatrice has had a very enjoyable African life. SW: Does she have children? OPS: No. She helped put her husband through medical school, and then had a health hazard one month before they were leaving, and I said, "Go to my doctor." And he found a tumor in her the sne of a head, and I don't know why her doctor hadn't found it in a year of exams. Anyway, he took it out, and that was the end of that, a hysterectomy. And she's never wanted to adopt a child. My sister doesn't love children like I do. She loves to play with them and dress them. But I'm very fond of children. SW: Do you have a close relationship with your sister, even though she's been in Africa for twenty-eight years? OPS: Yes, we have a very close relationship; earlier she was closer to Bernice, the other younger sister, until she died in 1943. And I was closest to my youngest brother, Lester Lee Vann, who was the one by my mother's second husband, Lester. And he died at nineteen in 1946 as a result of the war. We had three family members that died as a result of the war—Clarence, my oldest brother, my youngest brother, and my sister all died as a result of World War II. So that I won't look at a war picture, I won't go to see anything related to it, and I'll do anything to avoid relating to war. I've been known to reduce my salary because they wanted the money to go into guns for Vietnam. We've had it with war. My youngest brother died in '46, my sister in '43, and my oldest brother died as a result of injuries and war-related marital disappointments in 1970. It was an interesting group. So now, my sister and I are very close. I've been to Africa on nineteen trips since 1958. I usually run over every year or eighteen months to see her. But always taking a group and then let the group return to America, and then stop off and visit with her. SW: A little while ago, you mentioned that...you said that you feel that you had been a victim of sexism in terms of your career options that were available to you. Do you want to talk about that? OPS: Yes. When I was led and planning to work in religious education, my peers would say, "Why in the world are you going to get a doctorate in religious education? That doesn't pay anything, and﻿27 OPS: (cont.) you don't get any status," and all of that. But that didn't interest me, status and high salary. I wasn't worried about the pay—money has never been a concern of mine. I knew I'd get what the going salary was, so that was that. I chose to pursue the field of religious education, and I was the first black woman in America, I guess in the world, to get a doctorate in religious education (1952). There had been ten black men who had gotten doctorates in religious education ahead of me in 1952, but I was the first black woman. Columbia University and Union Theological Seminary were particularly interested in that, my studies. They said, "We need this kind of person in this society. The black church is a very significant part of the society." Gunnar Myrdal had done his study on American dilemma, and the church was seen as the strength of the black people, and so I pursued it and stayed in the church. But then I found that the black church wasn't hiring religiou? educators. The only black church that was hiring was the Abyssinian Baptist Church, at any decent salary level. SW: And you were already involved... OPS: ...and the person there was Dr. Horatio Hill, so there was no opening there. Well what we... OPS: Trained professionals in religious education were being employed in councils of churches around the country. Councils of churches are groups of denominational bodies at the local level. There might be thirteen different denominations in all the churches in a given city— say, Chicago would form the Chicago federation of churches—and these would do it on the basis of denominational bodies. Well, as a girl, I had been involved in the New York City Council of Churches; as a youth and as a young adult, in the National Council of Churches and the New York City Protestant Council of Churches. I was employed professionally at the state level, in the Massachusetts Council of Churches, as my first position. And everybody was amazed that, one, a black woman could get this position; two, that a woman could get it; and three, that you weren't going to deal with trivia, you were going to deal with major religious and social issues. That position was so educationally and spiritually fulfilling that I turned down, two years after I accepted the position, the chairmanship of the Department of Psychology at Jamestown College in upper New York State. And I stayed in Massachusetts, heading education for the Protestant community for fourteen years, and thoroughly enjoyed it. When I was ready to leave, I was considered for the presidency at Bronx Community College in New York, and had met with the search committee, and they had said to me as I left the interview, "Dr. Stokes, it would be a privilege to work with you." That sounded like a recommendation to me. But these were nine people...members of the search committee. When their recommendation went to the board,﻿28 OPS: (cont.) which was made up of twenty-six people, eight of whom were over age seventy-six and white males, and they were ready to integrate, but they were going to integrate with a black man. They weren't going to put a woman there, 'cause it was just as hard to be moving into new areas as a woman as it was as a black. SW: What time___what year was this? OPS: This was in 1966. And so they brought on Dr. Colston from Knoxville College. Edler Hawkins, a board member and pastor of a Presbyterian church in the Bronx, said to me, "Olivia, why didn't you let me know you were a candidate? I would have gone to bat for you." SW: It doesn't seem... OPS: And I said, "Edler, you're about the only one I didn't think to call because I just thought people did not have to candidate or be political to secure the presidency." SW: Politic— OPS: ...politic, you know. Well, that was the first one I lost, and then in '66, '67, '68, the same thing occurred with Florida Normal in Florida. There were forty-some candidates, they reduced them all down, and finally were two of us, a male and a female. And that search committee went on the telephone for two weeks before they could break the deadlock on who should be the president of that college, either I or the man. Well, finally they broke it in favor of the man, but they had to call every one of our references, and talk and talk for two weeks. Again, I felt that was just...the man had been related to, I think one of the foundations, and I hadn't... You see, I had never really...I wasn't educated in a black college, I hadn't attended a black college, so there was prejudice against you for fear that you didn't understand the black community. They just didn't know the nature of Harlem, and my involvement in It. Then, that was...twice I was considered for the presidency of Spelman. The first time, I was too young—the Rockefellers, who basically support Spelman, said I was too young, too radical, you know, and too northern. Dorothy I. Height was a candidate for the same position and Dr. Marion V. Cuthbert was considered too old. She had been teaching at Brooklyn College. Dorothy didn't have an earned doctorate, and so, I was too young, too northern, and too radical. I'd just come back from Russia. So I didn't get it the first time— they hired a man. Then the second time that I was a candidate for Spelman was the last time before they hired the present president, Dr. Stewart. And the chairman of the search committee was the young adult, brilliant woman, who was the lawyer for the children's movement in Mississippi in the sixties. And because she didn't happen to know who I was, I couldn't have been anybody; she wanted somebody who was going to stay with the college for fifteen years. What she didn't know was that the average length of a college presidency is five﻿29 OPS: (cont.) years, but that didn't bother her. She didn't bother to do her research on that, as brilliant as she is. So that, I was too old for her and unknown to her—she was a very influential lady. So I came on up, nevertheless—the others fought, so I got up there. Then, when it came to me and the man, they chose the man. So this has gone on, you know, until you're fed up with it. An interesting thing happened at Columbia University Teachers College. I'm a graduate of Teachers College at the doctoral level. And immediately after I graduated, one day, somebody wanted a candidate from Teachers College who was under thirty-seven, who had a doctorate, and who had thirteen years of professional experience in education. And when the computer pooled all of that, I was the candidate. So I went in at the invitation of the placement director. SW: What position was this? OPS: I don't know. They just called me and said that they had a request for an educator under thirty-seven, with thirteen years professional experience, with a doctorate from Teachers College in philosophy. So I went. And when I walked in, the personnel director at Teachers College looked at me, and he said, "And my God, you are a Negro," and turned as red as a beet. And I said to him, "Yes, and I graduated at the top of my doctoral class, and I have all the credentials." And he said, "But I'll get you a Fulbright." I said, "I don't want a Fulbright. I want the position that you called me about." And he didn't say, "I couldn't recommend you," or "I won't recommend you." And he didn't, because the very expression, "My God, you're a Negro." And that made me so angry, it just added to the fire that was necessary to struggle for freedom. And I walked out, and I went to work more for the church then, because it was...I felt for preventative, in order to help change men and women like that. So I said to him, "You don't have to get me a position. I can get my own positions. You sent for me, I didn't send for you." So then I received this call to Massachusetts, and had opportunities to teach around at different educational centers and places. I was delighted. But I was always interested in working in the church because I could have been in general or higher education, and I figured, we've got enough blacks, that's where all the blacks go, let's stay up in religious education. But Protestantism is very middle class and upper middle class, and black Protestantism has been basically evangelical, more affective than cognitive. We've had miseducation by clergy, and undereducated clergy, so that you have a lot of black middle class who have not continued in the institutional church, who are on the periphery, who haven't given up faith, but they've given up the institutional church. And this has been a very... SW: How do you think that they can come back to the church? I mean, what steps... OPS: Well, I don't think they should have ever left. I think that, the﻿30 OPS: (cont.) Bible says that, "He who has, has to share with those who do not have." And I think you get education and training in order to get in, and serve your people, or any people. So I think that the suffering that you have to go through in order to give leadership in the church is no more than the suffering you have to go through in being vice-president in a corporate structure that doesn't want a black vice-president, or being the first... Or the black young women who are going into corporate life and find it very painful, all these invitations to horizontal positions in order to rise vertically. So that, I just feel that black middle class have to, black educated have to get back in the church and make the church the strongest force we've ever owned. They must do lay theological study, and come to a strong set of beliefs and dialogue with each other. And just take over the church for the race, 'cause I think that's our only salvation—the making of the church the kind of strong institution that serves our people, politically, socially, and spiritually. And that's a heritage that we haven't yet grasped. SW: You don't think so? I mean, looking at our history, you don't think that we have... OPS: Well, we pay lip service to it, but we don't render leadership service to it. It is the church and the church institutions that have produced our leaders. But our black middle class at the moment is just doing its history lesson halfway on this. They're not doing anything about grasping that institution, and making of it what our ancestors made of it. SW: Why is that? OPS: Because we embraced the values of materialism, and the secular standards, and we follow unconsciously the white norms of success, instead of defining success in terms of what we are doing to move our people to freedom. SW: What___ You've mentioned that three times, to move our people to freedom. What is your concept of freedom for black people in the world, or people in the world today? OPS: I'd like to start with it in terms of this country. SW: Okay. OPS: Because if we can get freedom here, we can be a model, maybe, that will help somewhere else in the world. But it may be that the new third world nations in the world will be the models for us. I'm not sure, because I think God works in cycles, and there was a time when the black cycle was on top, and then there was a white cycle, a white control—it looks again as if the world is going back into dominance by blacks. But I'm not sure that it will finally come in my lifetime, worldwide. But in terms of this country, I think that freedom for black people is total involvement in mainstreaming. You see, one of the things that I had the joy of pointing out to the Panthers was﻿31 OPS: (cont.) that basically they wanted a piece of the pie, not revolution. SW: But mainstrearning in America today is materialism! OPS: Yes, but you see, the Panthers wanted what the others had, and then we can change it, but first they desired what whites have. The Panthers wanted what white Americans had. Nine of their ten points were "Let me into the system, be it bad or good." They only had one revolutionary point, and I pointed this out to 'em. SW: And which one was that? OPS: I don't remember. I'd have to go look up my notes. But they weren't revolutionaries, they were asking for "in," into the system. Once you get into it, on an equality basis, then most blacks say, "The system's lousy. It's not serving the whites or the blacks any good, so let's change the system. But until you change it, let as in to even that which is no good." Now, that's one way to go. Success from my point of view... SW: Not success, we're talking about freedom now. OPS: Yes, I know, but success and freedom. My feeling about success would be for black intellectuals to sit down and decide what it is that are our black goals, and go to work in the fulfillment of those goals and objectives or agendas. In America, materialism has destroyed the basic Judeo-Christian values on which this nation was founded. Our God is money. Our God is vertical mobility. Anerican families' God is a house in the suburbs. The major goals that this country was founded on dealt with building a nation in which every person had an opportunity to use his God-given talents for the good of the whole community. We have moved from community good to individual fulfillment in terms of the acquisition of material goods. The blacks have gotten caught up in this, they are rugged individualists and no longer the community people, remembering that their heritage was out of Africa, or their heritage was out of the struggle to survive during the days of slavery Now, we have 6 percent of our people who are above $25,000 per family, and probably 2 percent who are individually above $25,000, and we have about 40 percent of us who are in middle class America, with about half or three-quarters of us still below the poverty level, when you come to the expensive inflation which we have now. And the poverty level today is defined by the federal government at $6500. But they didn't count inflation which would make it around $7000 for a family of four. That's just working for survival. So that we have one-half of thirty-five million people below, you know, $12,000 a year per family. And a lot of those... And the directions of America I wished I had the pyramid economic chart that I work with all the time with my college classes and the church groups.﻿32 OPS: (cont.) But the decisions about the directions of America are basically made by two groups of people at the top—the wealthy and the well-to-do, and that gets down to $50,000 and above, and the people from $50,000 to $25,000 are the implementors of the decisions made, the middle management, made by management at the top. And then those below $25,000 are trying to get into the $25,000 bracket, and so they behave that way. And this is where blacks are caught. And you don't have enough intellectual young blacks, like DuBois, and the Wrights, and all of our past history, who are willing to bend their interests or lead movements among the masses that are down below $7000. Now for me, freedom and success in the black community is taking the goals of democracy and working to achieve those goals in the system by organizing black people to vote, to get an education, to be responsible participants in community structures, to be change agents in the society, and take their models for this struggle from the leadership such as Dr. King, Andrew Young, and then finally move us as educated black people into changing the nature of America. And a minority group can do this, because you can take a pain in your finger, and it can so upset the body that you have to pay attention to that finger, in order to get that whole body comfortable. Well, we need to be the irritants in a democracy, and that for me is success, and we're not that, and we're failing with a large significant number of college-trained black people, men and women, who are not willing to deal with the black masses; they are for only self-fulfillment. SW: Who do you see today that is trying to move blacks towards freedom, and are looking to help those individuals who are below that poverty line? OPS: I think there are two major groups I'd like to cite at the moment. The first movement is the one that Leon Sullivan, head of...was leading...head of OIC, Opportunities Industrialization Centers. Leon started himself as a poor boy who's moved way up to the board of General Motors, and never lost the common touch. He started playing basketball in the streets of Harlem, served the Abyssinian Baptist Church as assistant pastor, learned the masses from Adam Powell and that whole movement and struggle, and then went on to Philadelphia, organized the kids on the block in basketball and taught them to be somebody, and then got fifty members of his church to give ten dollars a month until they raised a fund of $50,000 and started to work for the development of youth. Then he went to government and to private industry and developed skills centers called OIC's. Now OIC takes anybody who walks in off the street, who's a dropout from school, and they are, as a goal, trying to mainstream these people, get 'em into training and thinking about moving up economically in the life of the society as responsible citizens. And I think Leon Sullivan is one of those persons who has done a tremendous job. It's tragic at this moment that there﻿33 OPS: (cont.) is a movement among some of the more "liberal," as they define themselves, blacks, saying that his—Sullivan's—principles which he's trying to get implemented in industry around the world really is not far enough, because basically Leon is a reformist. He's saying the American system needs to reform, to admit blacks to full equality. He knows the American system is not what God would have it be, nor what many Americans that God created or others would have it be—he's not fooled about this. But he's saying, "Let's get in the door, and then maybe we'll have to change the door, but at least let us in." Now, the National Council of Negro Women has done a tremendous job in Mississippi, in Harlem, in other places with their projects for reaching the masses of people. The Southern Christian Leadership Conference, headed first by Martin Luther King, Jr., with Andrew Young, then Abernathy, now Dr. Lowery, has worked at the grassroots all along. One of the organizations that's been the most grassroot, for which it gets no credit, is the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. it's done a tremendous civil rights job in this nation in getting money and support, and being the civic legal link whenever the crises came in black America. And it has not had professional leadership at the local level, like the Urban League. The Urban League has had professional leadership in 254 cities in the country. So that there have been significant movements among blacks. But you take some of the black pastors, Adam Powell, Jr., led a mass movement in Harlem for twenty-two years, right at the grassroots. Abysinnia [Abyssinian Baptist Church] has a very diverse membership __there are several Ph.D.'s in the congregation, lawyers, doctors, judges, you name it—but 98 percent of that congregation are folks who worked as, you know, the chairman of the deacon board for years was a cleaner of one of the big office buildings in the city, and the one we have now isn't much better. The members are carpenters and just plain blue-collar workers in 90 percent of that church. There are teachers, and educators, and nurses, and doctors, but the majority of that church is just the ordinary working people, and they supported Adam Powell, Jr., like an army, for years and years and years. The Adam Clayton Powell Memorial Room in the church is their tribute, not only to Adam Powell, but to the involvement of those masses of people in the support of his work, as their representative in Congress. SW: Were you involved--- OPS: In Chicago. Let me talk about one big movement in Chicago. It was led by a Pentecostal pastor whose name I'll share when I recall it, who developed a tremendous organization among the Pentecostals basically, the very, very emotional people who believed that everybody should have their full democratic rights. And this guy studied under Saul Alinsky, and developed extreme expertise in the political area, and made all kinds of changes in Chicago, educational, housing, and political systems.﻿34 OPS: (cont.) And you know, it's been the grassroots people across black America who've gotten in all of these elected people. The only illustration that they didn't elect was Senator Ed Brooke of Massachusetts. Now all these other black people that have been elected to office have basically been elected by the masses of people, moved on by local church leadership in the main...civic leadership, you know, the Urban...the NAACP, and the black militants have made their contribution. But the other large group I wanted to cite that's done a lot with the masses has been the Muslims. The Black Muslims have reached farthest down, picked up the black guy in the gutter and his family, set some standards, gone into the economic arena, and done a tremendous job of reaching people that no other segment of the black community has reached. SW: Why do you think that happened? Why do you think they were so successful? & OPS: You know, C. Eric Lincoln wrote a book on the Black Muslims as a graduate student at Boston University. I was in Boston and helped him do some of the research for that book, and we dialogued very often. The Black Muslims became successful because they went into the prisons and began to get black men to understand what manhood was. Then they would organize in a very authoritarian, totalitarian way, those young men and women into structures, and offer them what the'mainstream of America offered any person if they were equipped to go; only in the Black Muslim movement. They always talk about how effective it is. But the number of blacks who've gone in it, got oriented to mainstream, and left it, is significant. I know quite a number of them, girls who thought that was the way to go in the sixties married and couldn't find totalitarianism under blacks any more attractive than under whites, and less, and they left. SW: But it was able to shape certain areas of their lives more than... OPS: Well, for some, it shaped many, and many are still following. For others, it shaped it, and they have rejected it. I'll never forget the day when I was at the National Council of Churches as a national executive, and a young lady came in with a baby carriage on the seventh floor into my office, and I walked in, and said, "What can I do for you?" And she wanted me to get her out of her Muslim marriage. Well, I knew the rules, because I'd helped with the movement, I... After the Attica [New York] prison riots, the very next Wednesday after Attica, I went to the mosque to see what was going on, because I'm a student of their movement—not that I approve it—I think they have done some marvelous things, but I also think that in order to achieve what they did, they had to set the rules which I couldn't live by. SW: It's the only... * C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America (Boston: Beacon Press, 1973).﻿35 OPS: They met a need, and whenever you meet human needs—that's all the church exists for anyway—whenever you meet human needs with basic good standards, you know, people respond. SW: Now, why didn't the Christian church use that tactic? OPS: Because they had moved toward the white models, and the white models never did have to use the Christian church as its main instrument. The white people had other instruments, economic, political, and educational. SW: ...the state... OPS: And when the black church started aping the white church, and did not have the economic support—white folks have never had to depend on their church, they had to depend on their economic system, the political and educational system. Black folks had to depend on the black church, and they didn't know how to make that black church the system that they want. And the whole group of young blacks that we've educated for the last twenty years just basically walked out of the church. The greatest missionary movement in this country is to black, middle, and educated, college people. They are simply out there not awake to the potential power that there is in coming back to the black church, the one great institution in this society, and the black community. SW: Why? I don't understand that, when their parents were the ones, OPS: No. So many of the young people who are educated today didn't even have their parents in the churches. You said your mother— now you're a good illustration—your mother didn't like to go to church, but she sent you. Well, that's happened for two generations now. But I bet you your grandmother attended church. But you see, the young black educator doesn't have tolerance with unlettered people. And the uneducated people have power. It's presence power, and it's voting power, and we don't have that kind of tolerance—"I'm not going to waste my time"—and they don't have any sense of commitment to group development, community group development. So you have to take a miracle man, like Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., dropped here by the Lord Almighty, to coalesce the group. And when he dies, there's such a rush for power at the top that the movement drops its power. Andrew Young should have become head of that movement, but Reverend Abernathy, who didn't have the skills, and who was dedicated, and who wanted to do what he thought was the right thing, insisted that that's the way King wanted it. And I'm sure King would have been happy if Young had been head. That's the tragedy of our race at the moment. Now, you take... success for me would be to see all of our college black graduates say to their black sisters and brothers who are leaving high school as dropouts, "Look, friend, the only capital black folks have is education." And those black college people ought to be out there fighting for quality education, in the systems controlling public﻿36 OPS: (cont.) schools. What are they doing? Trying to find private schools and building little private schools for their children. These are the tragedies of our race at the moment—the absence of commitment to the movement of the people. They are almost unconscious escapes into mainstream America. SW: The individualism... OPS: ...their personal, yes, individualism, their personal goals of success. And those goals of success are the same ones that are leading America, led England down the stream too, Carthage down the stream, and people get corrupt, they get more corrupt, and after a while, enough people at the bottom get dissatisfied, and when 51 percent get dissatisfied, we'll have a revolution. I said to my students at college, "If you're interested in a revolution, you don't belong in a college. But if you come here to learn, then let's learn. If you want a revolution, I'll help you lead one, but not in here, I want it out there. But you're not going to be successful iu * involution till you get 51 percent of the people wanting what you want, or dissatisfied with what is, and we're a long ways from that. So your options are to learn, so you can be a 'change agent.'" And this is what black America needs to be telling black kids, and we ought to be having not these little, puny remedial schools. We ought to be having mass education, volunteer black people in churches all over this nation all day Saturday and Sunday, and not having them all look at TV and seeing people shake themselves all the time in dance. Why has the white man given us money to go culturally blind through dance? And I think dancing's beautiful, but that's not enough. SW: As Fanon said, "There's a role for it." OPS: But dance is not going to get most of us economically or politically anywhere. And it's those black women in the NAACP who are laborers in industry and factories and houses, and low paying jobs as secretaries or whatnot, that are out there fighting for blacks to get moving up. They're the unsung heroes in the race. We have less and less volunteers in significant agencies for black women and men. And success to me is when we start taking our share. Of course it's hard, we want to do the same things anybody else does, but that's not going to make the world a better place. We now go to Africa, and Africans don't care whether we come over there or not. They're about nation building, they're not about race relations. They have nations to build, they have an economic system to build. They have political systems to build. Africans are not interested in being palsey-walsey with white folks—they got a whole nation to build. They are not interested in discriminating against women either because they don't have enough educated persons, so they're using woman power, not because they're women, but because they're educated...﻿37 SW: ...because they need... OPS: They have the economic opportunity, and they need 'era. And so, the women are clever, they know how to handle their men, so they get these top positions, and they move on. When I first went to Africa in 1958—it wasn't the first time, but one of my trips to Africa, it was in 1958, and again in 1963... When I was walking-around in Nigeria, meeting with top diplomats and other leaders, the folks wanted to know if I didn't want the key to the private room in the hotel. I didn't know what they were talking about. Finally one of the hotel managers said to me, "Dr. Stokes, you would be protected. I see you're having this diplomat and that one, you're having these conferences and whatnot. If you want any of these men, I'll just give you the key, and there's a private room"—because in Africa, sex...—"and you'll be absolutely protected." Sex is as common as drinking a glass of water in this country. Everybody is expected to have it whenever he wants it if he is a man. And so, he said, "What do you do?" And I said, "Well, I texi you, in America they wonder because I'm single, and in Africa they ask." I said, "But what I do is my own private business, and the way I do it, and with whom, and when, is my private business." But when I was in Ghana in 1963, a woman newspaper reporter told me that any woman, that the men considered any woman—me or others, no matter whether I was an ordained minister—a prostitute if you were not married. So I said, "Well, I don't care what they consider me. You know, you know what you are yourself, so far as I'm considered that doesn't touch me at all." But when I first started going to Africa in '58, '59, '60, all through '68, the men used to say to me, "I wished I couldn't see your face, because your mind is that of a man, and your face and body is that of a woman." These are basically Muslims who reside in West Africa. But even the Christian men are influenced by the dominance of Muslim culture. So that, when you talk about freedom and success, my definition of success is trying to build a world in which everybody has a chance to be a person, aware of his potential, and given opportunities to develop his potential, and to have an opportunity to live as a decent human being, comfortably, to go to school, have cultural enrichment, make his contribution as a citizen—that's what success is. It doesn't mean being president; we only need one a country. You know, it may or may not mean being a legislator. And when you look at Africa today, they need the whole volunteer movement that has made America significant. They don't have it, and we're fast losing it in this country, in our goal for money. So success to me is not the achievement of a bank account that you can't take to heaven, success is in terms of the values that you have embraced and that you exercise by your daily behavior, to help your fellow man become a citizen, who enjoys life and people and makes his contribution.﻿38 SW: I'd like to... You touched on your various trips that you've made. I'd like you to talk about the experiences that you've had in Africa, and what you've been doing to involve other people in the African cultures. OPS: Well, the first thing I did on Africa was to write two youth books because I became tired of blacks being considered a problem. White folks look at black folks always as a problem. It just made me angry. I grew up and I wanted the white churchmen to consider me a person, not always a problem, but they just looked at every black as a problem. So I wrote two books, and I involved Africans in the writing of them. One was Why the Spider Lives in Corners * and this was a children's book, 'cause I figured if you start with children and help them learn, maybe you'll change the world. So I involved African writers... This was the first time the National Council of Churches had had an American writer who took most of the money for the writing and turned it over to African writers who did the basic writing and the research. The book has turned out to be very popular and a well-written book. It was written in 1971. men the second book, I wrote ihe Beauty of Being Black.** I wasn't interested in Africa or changing nations, changing developing cultures. I was interested in what Africans were, and so I took their poetry, and their sculpture, and their folk stories, and their customs, and put them in a second book, The Beauty of Being Black, and created a book for youth. And the title comes from a poem. And I just finished some educational resources for the Presbyterian church—they will probably be out in '80 or '81—on black heritage discoveries, and it's for families, starting with the fourth-grade children, or I guess even younger, and going through youth and adults, on resources from the black experience, mostly African, that they can use on vacation, on any kind of leisure time experience. The mother can sit down for two hours with children and read. That was a hard one to do, because there is so much material. And one of the fascinating things that the church is doing in East Africa, and they are developing some dynamic Christian education material, highly professional people doing this, the best material that I've seen on helping a young girl understand what pregnancy is all about, from conception to birth, is done by the African church. And I involved it in this booklet, and they...and it's so apropos now because they started with their thirteen-year-olds, so that in church school now you learn all about sexuality, which I think is so terribly important, and I just lifted it right out of the African-Christian education book and put it in mine. What have I done in Africa? My main reason for getting involved in Africa other than through the church was to take American educators in the board of education of the city of New York, or any school system in the country, to Africa to change their image of Africans. So that they could return and do curriculum writing. I've had curriculum writers from Seattle, from Boston, and from New York Olivia Pearl Stokes, Why the Spider Lives In Corners: African Facts and Fun ^ ed. Louise Crane (New York: Friendship Press, 1971). Olivia Pearl Stokes, The Beauty of Being Black: Folktales, Poems, and Art from Africa, ed. Louise Crane, (New York: Friendship Press, 1971)﻿39 OPS: (cont.) return and write textbooks, analyze the existing textbooks, and correct them. One of my students has published her own book for the sixth grade in the New York City schools; two others are in the process. So that my main emphasis was changing the image in American textbooks on Africa, and doing this through the school systems. The second purpose was to help church people see that African churches are now a very dynamic part of Africa, and they have developed leadership to the point where the Africans prefer to do the leading and have the missionaries as fraternal workers, which I think is good. Many of the missionaries felt that if they left, the work wouldn't go on. What they found out, for whatever crisis came up, and when they went back, the church was stronger than it was when they left, and had multiplied. So that we now have more than fifteen thousand independent churches, they're called by various names in various places, where African leaders are taking initiatives in developing the churches and using the instruments of their culture, the drum, and .ix.s^times removing the organ, or just keeping it silent, sometimes using the piano and the drum, going back to their own value systems, marching and dancing and singing. I went into a church in Ibadan, Nigeria, and found it really very interesting. All those who were members were dressed in white, and sat in the front half of the church, and all those who were nonmembers sat in the back half of the church. But that church in Nigeria, in Ibadan, was just typical of the change that's going on. One of the lovely experiences that I had in the church was in Ethiopia, and I wish they'd bring this exercise in Christian faith to the American scene. When a child is blessed in the Ethiopian church, the father takes it to the altar, not the mother, and the mother is in a back room looking on, on the side (which is discrimination of a kind I don't like), but anyway, all the fathers take the child to the altar. Today when we're in the midst of this liberated sexual behavior,'which is neither love nor good sex, kids are having children and leaving the responsibility to mothers, sometimes to the grandmother. And it's really a tragic thing, and you would wish that the fathers were called to the altar by the mothers and the church, so that they would assume more responsibility. When people tell me, "That child doesn't have a father," I said, "Every child had a father, maybe he's not responsible, but he's a parent." SW: That's right. OPS- "Every child has a father; you mean, he doesn't have a responsible father " Sometimes they don't have responsible mothers, because many of these young ladies today, after their child is no longer a toy and they've gotten accustomed to it, are not responsible mothers. And'it's tragic what's happening to black children, and if you want to test this in a research way, as I do very frequently, because I speak at eleven o'clock services on Sunday to a black congregation, start talking about the family and the number of unwanted children﻿40 OPS: (cont.) that are born into this black race, and you will get the greatest "Amens" you've ever heard, right in any audience, consistently right across the country. So that, we're having young people growing up who do not understand their sexuality, and the church is not teaching them, and it should. And too many homes give little guidance, and the kids are exploring and discovering their bodies, which is normal and natural, without any guidance. The kinds of behaviors that they see in their parents are no models for their behavior. So it's really tragic, and this is one of the things, again, the educated black young person ought to be organizing families around, and dealing with new spiritual value systems. One of the outcomes from our African experience was an attempt to try to look at values, and at the National Council of Churches we asked George Thomas, on the staff of the Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta, to put together a book* on young black adults and the new liberation family attitudes. We produced this, and I did the foreword, and that was done when I was on the staff, trying to look at the new value system for black families. SW: Earlier you talked about your travels to Africa—now you've been traveling there for over twenty years, twenty-five years? OPS: I started in Africa in 1958, this is 1979. SW: So, for over twenty years. What are the changes that you've seen during this time? I know that could fill a volume. OPS: Well, it's a fascinating question. I've seen many changes in leadership, and a kind of maturing of leadership. When the first leadership went in, they were so excited over getting in that they mimicked the colonial leadership. SW: The neocolonialists. OPS: And then they began to discover that just relating to their political heritage from the country that had colonized them wasn't enough. They also discovered that while they were politically independent, they were economically not free. So their second goal was economic as well as political independence, and many of the African nations are moving toward economic independence, with less dependence on their former colonial system, more dependence on the World Bank, more cooperation among each other. A third observation would deal with the political organization, the Organization of African Unity, and the attempts there, both continent-wise and regional, to be significant to each other as nations, and to be a kind of ecumenical court and forum and all, for discussion of their goals and what they want to have happen on the continent of Africa. And this is fascinating and very worthwhile. * George B. Thomas, Youn^ Black Adults: Liberation and Family Attitudes (New York: Friendship Press, 1974).﻿41 SW: What have you seen in terms of westernization, culturally? I mean, are you seeing African cultural systems destroyed or modified in such a way? OPS: Africa is embracing the West in so many ways, so fast, that even when my mother was there in 1963, she said to me, "Sister, I'm glad we've come now because it's going to be just like Harlem later." And what she meant was that one fails to see the preservation of their value system. Africans are so busy with change and urbanization that they couldn't separate what they did on the farm and the values there, and preserve those values in the city, in new forms. And so, I think that this is the same problem that happened in America. We moved from the agricultural society to the industrial one, and lost the sense of community. This is what I find happening in Africa, the loss of the sense of the community. And you become isolated individuals fighting each other and moving in ways that are not healthy for anybody. When the new nations began and became independent, the young people left the countryside by droves, and just walked to the city. They were going to get a job in the government. Thousands of them would just be on the road, and there were no places to live in the city, no nothing. It was just awful—the YW's, YM's and the Salvation Army, all moved in as fast as they could. The women and men began to build hostels to help the young people. And prostitution flourished, crime flourished... SW: I know, especially in Nigeria. OPS: ...and it was just, you know, tragic. The other thing that's tragic in Africa is that Africa is so rich as a continent for agriculture; that one hopes that success in Africa is not industrialization, but the world's food basket—cocoa, coffee, diamonds, all the rich resources that God put into the bottom of the earth. Africans need to develop these and share and import. And they're mimicking the West, computer society, and all of that. You know, maybe 10 percent, maybe 20 percent of every country needs to be westernized, but only mechanized to be agricultural. It is rich, and they're neglecting this. So what's going to happen? Some western or multinational corporation is going to come in there and buy the farms, and you're going to find American blacks going over there buying these huge farms... We already have one—one of our dentists left the USA. He was going to go to Africa and serve the Africans. He's a great guy, now a Ghanaian citizen. His goal was to go there and set up a general practice, and serve those who could afford to pay. He started trying to interest Americans in the whole movement of slaves from the west coast to our country as he embraced his African roots. It's been a very significant but slow education. There were forty-two different places in Ghana alone where Africans were taken and whipped into slave attitudes and then moved across the sea. Many American blacks are totally unfamiliar with African culture—we may have the same color, but culture is so different that it is unbelievable. It is better for black Americans to be related to people of other colors﻿42 OPS: (cont.) who are their same culture. But try and tell this to some of these young men and young women until they experience it. We talked about the significant changes in the church in Africa. The tremendous dynamism of the All-Africa Council of Churches is one of the world's most fascinating and meaningful acts of God, in this time in history. It's doing tremendous things, politically, socially, and for youth, in all Africa. I think another interesting thing is the commitment of the governments to education—they see education as very important. The colonialists went in there and educated the people only enough to serve them, and now the Africans are having to commit, and most of them are committing almost one-half of their national budget to education, in many countries. And they are putting up schools. So that almost every country now has many, many more elementary schools—elementary school is not required in all the countries. There are only a few countries that have compulsory education, 'cause they don't have enough teachers and enough school buildings. SW: Nigeria's just started... OPS: But they are beginning to see that every child should have a primary education through the sixth grade, hopefully the eighth grade in many countries. Africans are setting up secondary schools and colleges and more and more good secondary schools, so that education has become a major priority, and rightly so. Because still, on the continent of four hundred million or more people, probably less than a hundred million have ever been to any kind of school. Take the country of Sierra Leone, West Africa, 95 percent of its people today are illiterate, and this would be true for many countries you could name. And the highest average income in 1976 was between three and eight hundred dollars across the continent of Africa, and lower than that in many. Rice in Liberia, where they had the recent problems (1979), was raised from twenty-two dollars a hundred pounds to thirty-five dollars a hundred pounds in one fell swoop. That created a national riot because the people's economic condition was less than $800 a year per family; they just couldn't afford the higher cost. So they found out that the level of increase was from twenty-two dollars to twenty-two dollars and fifty cents, and the people were willing to try to go this far. In Liberia they've done magnificent things under that new president called William Talbot, and he's been very conscious of rural village needs and self-improvement. Africa is really fascinating. Let's just think for a little bit about the role of women and women's movements, both in Africa and the United States. And some of the things that I feel and have been involved in as a woman. It was, I guess, in the late fifties and early sixties when in a conversation with a very dear friend of mine, Dr. James Robinson, who was heading Operation Africa, Crossroads Africa, that he made a statement that went like, "The real revolution that's occurring in Africa is in terms﻿43 OPS: (cont.) of the role of women." As I reflected on that statement, coming from a very sensitive leader in our Harlem area with an international outlook, I said to myself, The role of the black woman in America has never really been recorded. Her contributions to the society, to the development of the struggle of black people to achieve, her contribution in the church has just really been omitted from black history. As historians begin to write black history, they seldom include—to the extent that is desired—the contributions made on the role of black women. So I designed and talked with Houghton Mifflin in Boston, a major publishing company, about doing a book—this was back in 1960—on the African woman. And because the African woman in Africa had a different development than that in America, as the African nations became independent, beginning with Ghana, Nigeria, the others, the African nations could not afford to discriminate against trained leadership. So they included women on an equal basis in major positions as the colonialists were dismissed from the country or left because of independence. And you found African women who had been educated by their parents, chiefs who were affluent enough to send their daughters to England, or educated by missionaries—many of the women had been here or educated in some of the French-speaking universities or the Belgique. But mostly African women with the new independence, those that were highly educated, rose very quickly to position of chairmen of, membership on major boards like Mobil. They became members of cabinets in Liberia in 1963. As an illustration, we had twenty-four distinguished women in high diplomatic and civil service positions in the country; African women have become members of the delegations to the United Nations. I can think of Uganda, East Africa, and almost every African delegation had some distinguished woman. So that the American black woman living in a country with larger numbers of women and submerged in two cultures, the white and the black culture, could not move as fast as the African woman to the top of the ladder. African countries have women as ambassadors, for instance, from Nigeria and Ghana to Liberia, or I think in America we have had two women that I am aware of as ambassadors, Dr. Mabel Smythe is our present ambassador, I think, to the Cameroons, and we've had the Honorable Patricia Harris to Luxemburg. I can't think of any others that we've ever had at that diplomatic rank. We've had our first black woman in the cabinet in the person of Patricia Harris, who came to that eminence by virtue of being the executive head of one of the leading Greek letter organizations among black women, Delta Sigma Theta, Incorporated. That threw her into the limelight of the Washington scene, and her ability was quickly recognized and she was catapulted into significant positions. You take the life of the late May Chinn, M.D., whose story was recently in the New York Times magazine section in April 1979, has had a tremendous, difficult time as an American woman in a discipline that was particularly male. So that in law, in medicine, and uniquely in the church, black women moved into what were predominantly male positions, and have succeeded﻿44 OPS: (cont.) there with a great deal of stress and strain, but have made many contributions. Teaching, particularly at the elementary and secondary levels, had been, along with nursing, domestic work, secretarial levels, the areas in which American black women were stereotyped. Today it's gratifying to see that the young thirties, the young twenties, college black women are being invited, because of affirmative action, a change of climate in the culture as a result of the impact of the civil rights movement of the sixties, are being invited into business and industry, and being trained there for organizational life and the corporate existence. The black church has probably given the black woman the largest and the most extensive opportunity for leadership development. If it were not for black women, there would be no black church. And the black church hasn't done as much training of these women, but the natural, internal gifts that God has given them and their commitment to their faith and their dedication within the congregations have given them opportunity to rise to what I call natural leadership. They've been selected and they have given of their various diverse gifts of leadership and their gifts of talent, too. The development of teaching in the church school, adult education, but more the development of financing—ways of raising funds to support the church— these have taken very many interesting channels. For instance, if a woman were interested in the arts or music, her ways of encouraging her group to raise money would be launching talented young people. This also goes to the concern of black women in the church for their youth. They would discover that from the young people's choir there was a talented young person, or from the senior sanctuary choir there were talented persons, and they would present them, and from the launching of this kind of talent, many of our young people have moved into significant roles in the entertainment fields in the society. Black women have also been the spiritual leaders of the black church. They have been those who have with the pastors studied and prayed about the Scriptures, and supported the struggle for keeping the hope of the race alive. Even when the church becomes the center, as it always has, of the civil rights struggle of the people, it's been the black women who have been there singing, supporting, cooking, hoping, cheering the black ministers as they chose to lead the congregations into support of the struggle for freedom and liberation from inequality and injustice in the society. There were two major components, I guess, in the black church—when it comes to what level women can rise to in the leadership within the church the area of top position ministry has been closed for a long time. 'This has been thought to be the province of the black male. And in the predominantly white denominations, Presbyterian, Episcopalian, the American Baptists, the Lutheran church, black ministers could serve black congregations, and there were very, very few black women pastors in those churches. In the predominantly black denominations, the National Baptists of America, the Progressive Baptists, the A.M.E. Zion, the A.M.E. church, and the C.M.E. church, again, the black male was the pastor historically. Within the last ten years, we begin to see those official bodies struggling with the concept of women in ministry.﻿45 OPS: (cont.) Women have been allowed in the connectional churches—the A.M.E., and the A.M.E. Zion, the C.M.E.—to be assistants, to be elders, to be deaconesses. In the Baptist church, the black Baptist churches, one became a deaconess because you were married to a deacon. It was not an official position in the church, it was rather a kind of spiritual, social position in the church that did not require any defined roles, the roles which the deaconess carries in the Baptist churches, that of assisting her husband, visitation of the sick, helping to prepare for communion, washing the communion cups after the service—the men prepare the communion—and helping to raise the budget for the church in special events. In the connectional churches, the deaconesses' position is an offical position of the church, and they carry some of the ministry. But with the rise of the women's movement in America, following the civil rights struggle of black people, black women have been going to seminaries and seeking to be trained in theology in order to become pastors of congregations. There is a growing significant number of these young women now... SW: Where does the encouragement come from? Are the families supportive or is this from the larger women's movement as you mentioned? OPS: I think the motivation is from within the women, supported by the struggle of the women's movement. I certainly don't see the encouragement from the clergy; I don't see the encouragement from the black church, except in rare cases—one rare case would be the Reverend M.L. Wilson of Convent Avenue Baptist Church who encourages women and who has opened his pulpit through the years to distinguished women. In the black Baptist churches, which is the largest body of church women, there has always been, for fifty years or more, an annual Woman's Day. And the original purpose for Woman's Day is really to share the talents of women because they were segregated and discriminated against in the church. Women demanded to be given a total day for themselves. Their goals have usually been financial, to compete against the men and raise fabulous sums of money on that one day. Dr. Nannie Burroughs tried to teach women that that day ought to have spiritual goals as well as financial goals. I have tended to alert congregations as I have been invited all over America and the world to speak on Woman's Days. But really it's another form of perpetuating discrimination. Women ought to be a part of every Sunday service, in the leadership as well as in the life of the congregation. My own role as a black womanin the Christian community has been unusual. I come from a family that believes in leadership. In North Carolina on Route 64 is Stokes Chapel, which just this October 1979 is celebrating the fiftieth anniversary gift of my grandfather to the community for the development of a church. And his oldest son is being honored for having contributed more than fifty years to the development of that church. So that I was born into a situation where the family put its emphasis on leadership education and the faith. The women in the Stokes family were public school teachers and outstanding community leaders, so that we never had any problem being servants of the Lord and volunteers in the community. We were not given the﻿46 OPS: (cont.) opportunity to preach—I can remember having the invitation to speak at Shaw University, and my uncle, who was my father's youngest brother and a pastor and a principal of a school in North Carolina, saying to the president—after I had made some significant analyses of what I felt the black church ought to be doing and the role of the pastor—that I had no right to speak to male clergy in that way, in a direct and with as many recommendations in it, with the kind of analysis that I made. And President Strassner said to him, "Did she say anything that was not true?" He said, "No, but how can a young woman"—at that point I had finished my master's and was working on my doctorate—"how can a young woman have the courage or the audacity to speak to clergy so boldly?" SW: How did your mother feel about this? Was she alive at this time? OPS: Oh yes, Mother was alive. Mother felt that anything I did was fine. My mother was my greatest supporter because she felt that r-od had created in me gifts that I had to express. Mother was always supportive. But you know, my uncle's comment didn't bother me. He discovered later, when he was executor of my grandfather's estate, that he had not fully complied with my grandfather's will. My father died when I was seven. He [the uncle] failed to send us the money which had been willed to us, and so I took the opportunity to sue him. He realized that when I was seventeen years of age I knew what my rights were, and so that he learned early that I was not to be put off. But I came to New York at age eight, after my father had died when I was seven. Mother brought her children to New York for education and placed us in the Abyssinian Baptist Church that had a professional director of religious education in 1923. We came in 1925; Abyssinian Baptist Church had a professional director of religious education with a master's, and we were under his guidance. Mother said to him, "Educate my children." That membership's ministry exposed us to interracial, intercultural, interreligious activity in New York City. And in that channel we moved and developed. I became the head of the Protestant youth movement in the city of New York on an interfaith basis, the New York City Council of Churches, the Harlem Christian Youth Council, and then I became the secretary, president of New York State Christian Youth Council... SW: How were you received by the nonwhite members of the congregation or the councils that you were involved in? OPS: I've never had any trouble with white folks in those circles. I had a marvelous time, even many opportunities to be married way back in the forties. SW: Were you looked at as someone special, therefore, they could deal with you in one manner, as opposed to how they felt about black people in general?﻿47 OPS: Well, I guess so. I guess in those days, the term token was maybe something they thought of. I think they thought of me as an unusual black, and maybe in that sense it was unusual to find blacks who had come out of a highly educated Christian education program, who understood the total educational system that was highly developed in the Protestant community that was white, and who possessed the kinds of gifts that God had given to me. So that I moved into the United Christian Youth Movement in the 1940s, midway, as 1941 to 1943, I was secretary to the United Christian Youth Movement of America. Harvey, Martin Harvey, who was a black young man in the A.M.E. church, was the president of the national movement, which was very unusual. He was gifted. Dorothy I. Height was in the movement—we all grew up together. Martin and Dorothy are about seven or eight years older than I am, but we all grew right up and I helped raise money for Dorothy to go to Oslo in 1957 for the World Council of Churches meeting. Then I was serving as president of the Harlem Christian Youth Council. I remember in 1941 as secretary to the United Christian Youth Movement, that I went around the United States as secretary speaking in twenty-two different cities. It was then that I met Dr. George Washington Carver and spent a whole day as his guest. At that time he was only receiving Christians, only those that came with a letter of introduction from another Christian. That was one of the great moments of my life. SW: Do you want to reflect on that day in terms of what you talked about or what exactly...his life at that time? OPS: Well, I remember, yeah, I remember, I remember Dr. Carver saying to me as I took to him the letter of introduction from the honorable Reverend Dr. Mays from California, he said to me, "Miss Stokes, come in. You're welcome, you are a Christian, these are the only people I'm seeing. I'm busy; I only have two years to live, and I cannot stop." And we talked about what God's gifts had been to him and how he wanted to use these to help his people understand the gifts of the bowels of the earth, the peanut, the sweet potato, all of that, and the scientific approaches. He talked about how material things didn't matter to him. I sat at his desk part of the day. He'd never taken the brown paper off the desk, there were letters on that desk that had been there a long time, never been opened with checks and all kinds of things in them. He didn't have time to do that—he was in the scientific field. I stayed with him all day, and he never stopped even to eat his lunch during that day, and two years from that day, he died. He had as if a direct line to the Savior; he was a mystic, really, very, very beautiful, humble man. It was truly one of the great moments of my life, to sit at the feet of someone who knew Christ almost in a conversational, friendly way. Well, opportunities like that came to me not only from Dr. Carver, but to sit under the leadership of Dr. Adam Clayton Powell, Sr., who encouraged me as a young woman to develop all of my talents. Through the New York City Council of Churches which was then the Protestant Council, I just moved into the whole Christian education movement.﻿48 OPS: (cont.) So that when I finished my undergraduate studies in sociology at New York University (1947) , I decided that I would take my master's in Christian education, which I did (1948). And again, my professors recognized what they termed a "gifted person," though I never realized that my brain was any different from anybody else's because it had always been mine. But a ninth-grade teacher in Public School 136 insisted that I go to Hunter College High School for gifted children, which didn't faze me at all. I wasn't even aware that it was any unusual thing that Townsend and Hunter College High Schools were the two high schools for those students who were above average. Only after my stepfather died, when I was seventeen, and was in Hunter College High School, that I realized then that I couldn't go on to college immediately without support, because we didn't have the kind of family finances that would make that possible without his being alive and working. I switched immediately from Hunter College High School to Wadleigh High School to see if I could take commercial subjects that would enable me to get a job as a secretary and continue my education at college nights. I switched from the tenth grade at Hunter College to the twelfth grade at Wadleigh. I've really never been through the eleventh grade in high school. I went on to finish my master's in Christian education, worked with Chinese students during that time, then went to Columbia Teachers College for my doctorate. I was the first black woman to finish a doctorate in Christian education, not only in this country, and I did it in three years. I was saying to some friends the other day that I had never yet met another person from Columbia University who had finished a doctorate in three years. I'm sure there are some, but I haven't met them. SW: You were working, weren't you, at the time? OPS: I was working full time, sixty-six hours a week in Christian education. And came out at the very top of the graduating class at Columbia University. SW: When you mentioned that you had worked with Chinese students, I don't think we discussed that... OPS: Well, I've always been interested in international affairs and peoples of the world, and when I was working on my master's, teaching, student-teaching, my assistant was a Chinese graduate student who'd been in the USA from China but fifty days. It was a joy to work with her. But I was always, beginning at age fifteen at International House, buying gifts and participating with international students. I always gravitated toward international people who were different than all those around in the community where I lived. So that I finished my master's with an A; I worked full time during that. As a matter of fact, I finished a bachelor's, a master's, and a doctorate in twelve years, and worked full time. Columbia University Teachers College decided that I was unique in education, that there was a need for Christian education people in the black﻿49 OPS: (cont.) church, and so they offered me a fellowship. When the fellowship was up, I still didn't have the money to continue, and on the basis of excellent scholarship, they offered to loan me all the money that I needed per year, because I was an A student. Columbia University also felt that the field needed blacks in the discipline in which I was studying. And so they loaned me all of the money that I needed to go to school from 1949 to '52. When I finished my doctorate in May of '52, I owed Columbia University $5900, which took me seven years to repay. That launched me into Christian service, into Christian education, at a level that my own peers felt was a waste of my years of study—they just did not see me, nor was I ever encouraged by my peers to go into the field of Christian education because they felt that I would not get a good salary. I would be paid poorly. They didn't see any openings, they were not futuristic at all. But my mother always said, "Do what God leads you to do. And you go." SW: What were the areas of study during that time in Christian education? OPS: Well, for my doctorate, I did all my work in philosophy of religion, Western philosophy, because my master's totally had been in education, educational methodology, theology, major issues in the life of the community and the implications for the church. SW: Who were some of your teachers at that time in the doctoral level, and have you maintained relationshipswith them, or have they, have you followed what they've been doing in terms of... OPS: Well, Dr. Harrison Elliot, professor at Union Theological Seminary, who wrote the book, Can Religious Education Be Christian?, was the leading person at Union Theological Seminary and Teachers College. He said to me that I had the most beautiful master's he'd seen in a long time, but what I needed at the doctoral level was philosophy. I adored him. He died when I was in the middle of my doctoral dissertation, and that was a great personal loss. Then Dr. Frank Herriottcame on, Dr. Herriott stayed at Union for a while, and then retired. He lives now in New Hampshire. There's a friendship relationship, but not a close one any more. I studied with Dr. Lyman Bryson at Teachers College, Dr. Ernest Osborne, I studied guidance with the famous Dr. Ruth Strang, and Dr. Esther Lloyd Jones. So that these were some of my distinguished professors. At Union Theological Seminary, outside of courses in theology, I'd taken all of the methodological courses at the doctoral level, so that there wasn't a single course there, except major issues in Christian education, that I could take at that level. Therefore I concentrated totally on Western philosophy, philosophy of religion, comparative religions, and theology. SW: What were the most challenging subjects at that time? * Harrison Elliot, Can Religious Education Be Christian? (New York: Macmillan, 1949).﻿50 OPS: Well, I guess it was Western theology, the great ideas in religion up through the ages by great theologians. Because I think I was born analyzing things. To analyze is as natural for me as to drink a glass of water. I just have that kind of mind, so that great ideas became very naturally. I loved the field of philosophy. SW: Did this level of study in any way isolate you from your peers in the church, in the Harlem community, or were you able to effectively relate? OPS: Well, that's an interesting question because it didn't isolate me. At the time that I was working both on my master's and my doctorate, I was serving as associate director of the Baptist Educational Center in Harlem, which is a part of the American Baptist Convention, which is white and black. And I was serving as director of youth and women's work and spending one day a week training a hundred in-service ministers. I was always considered a person, though I was highly educated, could always get down to where the lay people were. But in terms of working with the professional staff, I was not stimulated by them, and that's the reason I kept on studying. I'm one of the few people that received a doctorate by accident—it was not my intent to get a doctorate. I'd planned to stop with a master's and marry the dean of the law school at Howard University, who was in the process of getting a divorce. And that was my goal and not a doctorate—I got a doctorate by accident, and got it in three years, carrying a full-time job and came out at the top of my class, so you know, there must have been something somewhere. My executive in the Baptist Educational Center wondered if I wasn't spending more time at Columbia University than I was spending on the job, and so he would at will pick out any two weeks and ask for my hourly schedule. Each time that he did this, he discovered that I was working from sixty to seventy hours a week, in addition to going to Columbia University, and so it got to be an embarrassment to him that I was more than putting in the required time and still coming out with a significant work at Columbia. SW: So you were not isolated as much as you did not feel stimulated, intellectually stimulated? OPS: No, he had been out of Yale twenty-eight years, I guess, and was sort of repeating what he learned at Yale, and I didn't find that stimulating. He wasn't being current. The other staff person was a woman who was married and involved in children and kind of pedantic in terms of, you know, what general education was saying about the development of children. Christian education didn't seem to me as relevant as it ought to be to the problems of people in the black community. So in order not to inform them that I didn't feel they were stimulating me, I just kept on going to the university. And that was where I got my stimulation, and that's what I had to do to feed myself. So I went on.﻿51 OPS: (cont.) But at the end of my doctorate, I was given a chance and encouraged by a black male, Dr. J. Oscar Lee, an outstanding sociologist and preacher. He was a professional on the staff of the National Council of Churches. Dr. Lee informed the Massachusetts Council of Churches, that was looking for a director of religious education, that I was an excellent candidate. He and one of the white men, Dr. Roswell Barnes, and Dr. Quentin Miller, gave me a reference to Massachusetts, and gave my credentials. The Massachusetts Council of Churches, which is one of the strongest councils in the country serving a million and a half Protestants with a Board of Christian Education that had five or six Ph.D.'s on it, was not looking for a woman or a black woman. When they reviewed my credentials, they popped up out of several other candidates, they sent for me. I went, and we had... The chairman of the board at the time was a Christian woman in her sixties. She was quite fascinating. She very lovingly and honestly said, "We weren't looking for a woman, we weren't looking for a black woman; we are amazed but we're delighted, and if you can take on meeting today with all of these committees, and it's whatever they say..." The professional directors of religious education, the board of white ministers with two blacks on it, the heads of denominations, the Christian education directors of the thirteen denominations, the Council of Churches executives from eighteen to twenty councils—I met with all these committees in one day, and when I finished, all of them said, "You know, she's unusual, she's wonderful, let's have her." So I was invited in March 1953 to go to the Massachusetts Council of Churches. I accepted. They thought they had done something great, and I did too, because I had said to someone in New York City that I was a woman, I was sure they'd hire a white man. But they didn't, they hired me. And the head of the Presbyterian Christian Education synod for Massachusetts was so amazed that he wrote to some of the black Presbyterian people that he knew in high positions in New York, and asked them if this woman really had the credentials of thirteen years of professional service and an earned doctorate. He couldn't believe it. SW: How old were you at the time? OPS: Thirty-six. SW: Hmm, young woman. OPS: Once on the job, the Urban League invited me to speak to their board in Boston and tell them in ten minutes how I received this significant position. So I informed them that I'd be glad to come, but it was not a ten-minute story, that I had to go back to my roots in North Carolina, my family roots, and the support of both my Indian family and my black American and all, my heritage, and that my whole life had been developed in such a way that I was competent to carry the position to which I had just been called. Well, I served there for fourteen and a half years and had the most exciting, dynamic, meaningful experience. But I will never forget what the council executive had said to me after I had given my second address. When I arrived in Boston, there were forty-two invitations to speak on my desk. That had never happened to any staff member on the Council﻿52 OPS: (cont.) of Churches. On the second address, I spoke about the need to erase from our songs and our literature the whole question of "darkies," racism, and deal with that. And the executive said that I was not supposed to be talking about race relations in Christian education—did I tell you about that? SW: Yes, we discussed that in an earlier session. OPS: Okay. But my department chairman was very supportive. She loved it; we developed a beautiful relationship. I introduced her to the Greeks, and even today, only yesterday, I called the archbishop of the Greek church in North and South America, whom I had known very closely in Boston, for he was then the bishop of the Greek church, and whom I met in an eight-day conference at Yale under the World Council in 1957, and every year since then we've exchanged birthday cards. Only yesterday, we said we needed to sit down and talk about the condition of the world and the role of faith and the role of the church. Well, I introduced my department chairman to the Greeks, and to all the White Russians. We had a perfectly marvelous experience. That administration in Boston will, I think, remain one of the major achievements, not only in terms of the joy that I received and the cooperation of the Christian education executives, and of a board that had five or six Ph.D.'s on it, so that for once I was working at my own level, with a great deal of joy and beauty. Of course, there was some racism, but it didn't really block me or stop me. Where it was a problem, we dealt with it. I introduced theology to those educators who thought Christian education was methodology—we just had a marvelous time. I stayed there for fourteen years. SW: Could you discuss the circumstances surrounding your ordainment as a minister? OPS: While I was in Massachusetts, in order to speak in the Episcopal churches, one had to have permission of the bishop. I was getting so many invitations to speak in Episcopal churches at the eleven o'clock hour, and also in the Lutheran churches, both of whom require permission from their headquarters, that the bishops, two of them, of the Episcopal church on two different occasions, said to every one of the 280 churches in the east and 290 in the west, "Let Dr. Stokes speak. You don't have to invite...she has carte blanche in all our churches." Now mind you, in the state of Massachusetts, from the period of 1953 till I left in 1966, we had less than 150,000 blacks in the whole state. So I was dealing with a million and a half whites, not blacks. So that I was given carte blanche in all of the churches that needed it. I realized that when I was invited to the National Council of Churches, that there were forty-two denominations, not thirteen, and that I would have to get permission﻿53 OPS: (cont.) from about ten or twelve of their bishops. So I decided to accept ordination. In order to avoid the red tape of getting permission, I accepted the invitation of my own church, the Old Cambridge Baptist Church in Harvard Square, to be ordained. I had had Reverend Ernst Klein as pastor for a number of years, and Dr. Samuel Miller had been the pastor previous to Reverend Klein, and these two men had talked about ordination to me. Finally I accepted. In the Baptist church—it takes twelve churches to come together to form an ordination council —I presented a paper on ecumenical Christian education and received very high honors in the ordination process. This was really in preparation for coming to the National Council of Churches, where X would be serving in education, and frequently would be invited, as I have been since I've been in the field of Christian education, to speak at eleven o'clock services. I really had never planned to really be a pastor because I have always wanted to be basically an educator. I think that a Christian educator can do almost more than a pastor. But the opportunity for professionals in the field of Christian education in the black church has been very, very limited. Unless you were in; one of the white denominations that had a structural, formal, planned education, the black church, whether it's A.M.E. or Baptist or C.M.E., have basically had a volunteer, not a professional staff. So that the opportunities for persons holding degrees in Christian education came mostly in the YWCA in the early days. Persons like Dorothy I.Height, finding no opportunity in the church, moved on to the YWCA. Many of our black Christian educators did. I worked for a period of my undergraduate, from '35 to '41 in the YWCA. Then the neitt level of operation were in the councils of churches. The councils of churches are units of state councils of churches across America, and we've had a significant number of professional blacks, men and women on staff. There are probably ten to fifteen black men that have gotten doctorates in Christian education in this country, but they then serve as pastors or assistant pastors because, again, there were no educational jobs for them in the church, and so they went into the ministry. I moved into the coOTic.il of churches movement, and never was at the local level—I started at the state level. When I was in Harlem, I worked from 1941 to 1952 ±ra an area work of the American Baptists, in Harlem and Westchester serving 157 churches for those ten years. We were training the ministers in an in-service program every Wednesday. We were training the women and the youth, and that was an exciting, delightful ten years of my life. And from there, I went to the Massachusetts Council of Churches. Then from the Massachusetts Council of Churches for fourteen and a half years, I came back to the National Council of Churches in 1966 in the middle of two major strands in the society. One was the middle of﻿54 OPS: (cont.) the civil rights movement. I had an opportunity to move into that, and had a call one day from Andrew Young and Martin Luther King, Jr., asking me if I would join them in Chicago, and become staff in the movement, S.C.L.C. [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and serve as the liaison between the black and the white community, and to help them with black-white relationships. SW: How were you identified to them? I mean, did they know of your history, or... OPS: Oh, Martin was growing up in...working on his doctorate in Boston, so I knew him before he married Coretta. We were together in Boston when he was finishing his doctorate. I knew C. Eric Lincoln, who's now at Duke, when he was working on his book, The Black Muslims in America. I helped with the research on that book when he was in Boston, at Boston University. I knew Coretta—she was at the New England Conservatory of Music when she was going with Martin. Andrew and I worked together on the staff of the National Council of Churches at the same time. He was there ahead of me—Andrew's younger than I am by several years, but he was at the National Council in the youth movement, and I was the representative from the Massachusetts Council of Churches on the committees of the National Council. So I knew him, and when I went to the National Council in 1966, he was still on staff. So they were coworkers, and our lives...so they knew me and what I was capable of; I was older than either one of them, of course. In 1966 or '67, whenever Martin was in Chicago in that great movement, I said to him, "My mother's health will not allow me to leave her." I had one sister who was married and living in West Africa, and had been since '61. Mother was beginning to face the loss of memory, senility, in a serious way, and I needed to be with her, and moving her to Chicago with me, and moving all around as the movement would have required, would just not have been feasible. And so I gave two years, '66 through '68, to my mother, and worked with the National Council during that time. She died in January of '68. By then Martin was out of Chicago. I had worked with our deacon board to bring Martin to serve as pastor of Abyssinian Baptist Church. At the time that Martin was assassinated, I had a letter in my bag from Dr. Benjamin Mays indicating that if the pulpit at Abyssinian Baptist Church—Adam Powell was then in a political upheaval—were to be vacated, Martin had agreed to come and serve us. SW: Wow, that would have changed... OPS: ...that would have changed his life and history and America's. Well, that letter was in my possession at the time of his death... SW: Oh, my goodness... OPS: And it had come from his advocate, Dr. Benjamin Mays. When Martin﻿55 OPS: (cont.) died, Dr. Mays called me. We were very close friends, 'cause he had always encouraged me, as did Dr. George M. Johnson, the dean of the law school at Howard with whom I was deeply in love, to go on and finish my doctorate. Dr. Mays called me to say that his son in Christ had died, would I please come to the service. And I knew that we had been together in the National Council. We had been very close as professionals, and it meant a great deal to both of us to sustain each other in a time when he knew how deeply I was involved with what Martin was trying to do, and Andrew, and their work. I had an interesting experience just the other day when Jesse Jackson came back from South Africa, I had my godson visiting me, who is now a deputy ambassador in, deputy to ambassador in the State Department, and whom, as a teenager, I sent on a trip to Tanzania, as a gift. He then came back and moved from the field of writing where he has great competence to the field of political science. I had him with me at the U.N., and Andrew came over and hugged and kissed me, and said, "Olivia, I have often wondered why George Moose was such a bright guy. He never told me about you. He's your godson, now I know why he's got the brains he has." And I feel terribly proud of George—he's a very capable, dedicated young man going into the top levels of diplomatic services in this country. SW: So when Jesse Jackson... OPS: So when Jesse saw me, he told those who were around, "Do you know, Olivia Stokes has been so extremely helpful—she first got me on CBS [Columbia Broadcasting Systems, Inc.] when I was with the National Council of Churches setting up issues conferences..." The NCC had held a major conference in Atlantic City, and we invited Jesse as a guest speaker and consultant when he was head of Operation Breadbasket for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. That day when Jesse first thrust his hand into the air in Chicago after the black athletes had raised their hands in salute in Mexico, and Jesse carried that to the American black community and the white community—he was wearing my glove, my black glove... It was a fascinating incident. He had been ill, and was in the islands resting from mono... What is it? SW: [laughs] Mononucleosis. OPS: ...mononucleosis, an illness, and had just come back, and I was in Chicago on council business, and he saw me come into the church. I had black gloves in my hand. He went in, and I went and sat down, and after a while an usher came over and said, "Reverend Jackson would like to borrow your black gloves." And I said, "For what?" But I handed my gloves to the usher, and the next time I saw them, they were on Jesse's hands up there announcing to the world that he had joined the radical Christian forces. I've always supported Jesse—I think he's one of the outstanding Christian innovators in helping to mold the nature of our society. So that being at the top of leadership... I'll never forget. A leading psychiatrist in the society, Dr. Menninger, the son of Karl Menninger; and the leading black, and one of our very top black﻿56 OPS: (cont.) psychiatrists, Dr. Charles Penderhughes of Boston, observed me for one full year before they approached me requesting to study me. SW: Did we tell this before? OPS: Then they came and asked me if they could do a study of me because they were doing studies on maturity. SW: Yes, yes, we were going to get back to that subject. OPS: Okay. They then revealed to me that I was a member of seven different minorities, they named these, and I was amazed. I was delighted to be studied by them or do whatever they requested in psychiatric treatment for a year. And it really wasn't treatment, it was just dialogue. I made two stipulations—one, the sessions had to be held in my house; and two, I wasn't going to lie down on any couch. SW: What school of thought were they from, in terms of — OPS: I don't know. I guess between the two of them they had all the leading psychiatrist ideologies all tied up there. They kept saying, "No matter which way we turn you," and I wasn't aware that they were turning me, "you always bounce back." Finally they gave me a definition of maturity. I had always thought of maturity as vertical, and they defined maturity as circular or horizontal—membership in a variety of different communities. They said I had membership in the church and in the arts, in health, and social issues, international relations, women's work—they named it. And when they checked it out, I did have significant membership in all these diverse areas which was very, very unusual, and one of the psychiatrists, the black one, Dr. Penderhughes, said, "You have deep appeal to men, and you relate beautifully to men. You love men." And this is interesting. "You've come to a level in the church that most women never reach—you're at a top level." And then the question, "Why haven't you accepted ordination?" And I said, "Well, I'll tell you, a black educated woman has problems because of what the society has done to black males." Then there are the stereotypes about religion in the black community, based on the tragic experiences and the limited experiences that most black Americans have had in the church. The greatest missionary field I know, in education and the church and Christian education, is to the black educated persons of the last twenty years. Most have just moved out of any responsibility in the Christian church and community. They haven't left the faith, they still believe in Christ, but they don't do anything about exercising responsibility or educating themselves in theology. This changed a little bit and new interest came when we had the whole development of the black theology movement in the late sixties. SW: Would you like to spend some time talking about that, that movement? OPS: That's been an interesting development in theology. I remember^ when James Cone wrote his first book, Black Theology and Black Power, I did an James Cone, Black Theology and Black Power (New York: Seabury, 1969) .﻿57 OPS: (cont.) analysis of it for the black clergy of Boston and Cambridge, Massachusetts. I said to them, "It's a fascinating book. It is an accurate analysis of the existing theologians, what they have focused on, and what they have omitted from their theology. Their omissions represent an absence of sensitivity and awareness to the black perspective, the black.heritage, the black viewpoint, but that what Dr. Cone has written is not theology, it's sociology. It is an analysis of the omission of white theologians in their theology. This is not theology. Theology is when you write what God has revealed to you, not an analysis of somebody else's omissions." Well, I was almost murdered. But ten years later, these clergy realized I was right. I went to Jim, whom I respect, love, and adore, and who has developed in his own theology through the years, and told him the same thing. I said, "The people who are writing theology are Howard Thurman who writes on God, Jesus Christ and the disinherited; Martin Luther King, Jr., who talks about redemptive suffering. This is theology. Men who are saying how God uses the processes of life to give them new insights.' Well, Jim and a half a dozen other people have written through the years. We now have a significant body of theological insights. The need now is to take black theology and translate it into the educational implications for use in the educational program of the black church. Recently I talked with Dr. Robert Lynn of the Lilly Foundation and told him there were three books I desired to write before I died and I needed a grant to do it, and that this was the time in my life to do it. One was the educational mission of the black church, which has not been written, and needs desperately to be done. The second one dealt with the role of black women in the black church, and the role of black women in the ecumenical and ecclesiastical structures of the black church. The third one deals with the educational implications of black theology. SW: And who will you address these books to? Will it be books that lay individuals will be able to read? OPS: I would hope to write all three for laity, but let me just think for a moment. The first one on the educational mission of the black church would be for the official educational staff of the church—the pastor, the teachers, and the laity. In the Protestant churches, we believe in the priesthood of all believers. Everybody basically should be trained to be a minister, and most of the congregation should be trained to be educators. Parents are really the first Christian teachers. So every member could really be a Christian teacher at whatever level, and certainly a model and an example. The second book, dealing with the black woman, would be to pick up for the clergy and the women themselves the role that we play, the contribution. It would also inform the white church of what the black woman has done. She has sustained her family, been a volunteer in her community, and been the mainstay of her church. And then the third aspect of that would be, what is the﻿58 OPS: (cont.) future role of black women in the church, which is ordination and ministerial leadership at that level which has been denied them. They have been discriminated against by the black male. He has felt insecure. The church was his job, and he stayed there. And now, you know, out of the clear blue, women are being considered. I spoke in a church in Brooklyn which was historically a wealthy, white, downtown church that's now in transition. And the architecture of that church is Gothic, it was modeled after a cathedral in France. It's as large in size as the Abyssinian Baptist Church. At one time, the wealthy whites worshipped there. Now there is a small segment of whites who remain in that church, who remember fifty or sixty years of history of that church, and who are in the financial control of the church. There have come to that community predominantly blacks from the West Indies, out of a British culture, and out of the Episcopal or the Anglican church. Theywant that kind of quiet, "white service," very formal. And then there have come the blacks from the South who are Baptists and Methodists who want the more evangelical kind of service. And then you're beginning to attract people who haven't been in the church for a while, whose roots stem from their grandparents and parents in the church. Because this particular church has more than a $30,000 yearly outreach to community through its theater, art, and day care center, and Head Start and youth programs, it's beginning to attract the young black back into the congregation. The church had its first black minister only for about six years, all the other ministers had been white. He left recently and they looked at a lot of other young men as interim because they wanted to work on the intercultural, interracial problems in the church before they finally called another minister. They interviewed a lot of men and boiled them down to three persons, two men and myself, and the search committee for an interim pastor invited me one day out of the clear blue to become their interim pastor for six months to a year, until they called a pastor. Who knows, they might even decide to change from interim to something else. So I just left it in the hands of God. I will go in and help them identify their problems, serve as their pulpit supply pastor, help with the counseling. For the period that I'm there I will assume the total role of pastor with their blessings and their desires, and God's help. SW: Are you at liberty to name the church? OPS: Oh yes, it's the Emmanuel Baptist Church at Lafayette and Saint James Place in downtown Brooklyn. So that this will be a real challenge, and they're beautiful people there, and the opportunity to help them look at the past, look at the present, look at the community, and plan for the future. SW: It's an interesting community. OPS: It is fascinating. SW: It's a community in change and flux.﻿59 OPS: The church leaders failed to tell me something that I discovered very recently which I found very interesting. Down the street, on Saint James, is a woman preacher who started her own congregation. She's into evangelical healing and preaching, right in Brooklyn. SW: Yes, on the same street. OPS: Yes, right in Brooklyn. SW: Yes, and that has a very large following. OPS: And her church has a tremendous following. She represents many black women who started their own churches. And she has quite a congregation. Her following is larger than those of Emmanuel. And why they never told me about this, I don't know, but I just happened to pick up a paper somewhere and discovered it. And I thought, well, now this is very interesting. What she's doing is trying to be relevant to their needs, and she's serving in a tremendous way to many. SW: And she's dealing with a large number of young people. OPS: Yes, and the community just teems with young people. SW: The teenage element... OPS: You see, actually our churches today do not know how to use videotapes, media, and music, to get the message across. Then move from there to the written word and printed word and analysis, and discuss and engage in problem identification. Churches too frequently are poor folks' country clubs, or in some cases, the church may even be the wealthy folks' private club. They are having to resist the incoming community. But anyway, I think at Emmanuel we need to move it from a private club to a community of faith. This is a problem that's fairly extensive. Black folks don't go to psychiatrists in large numbers, so they go to church and let it all out. This might be a better way to do it, I don't know. It will be an interesting experience, and it's been encouraging,the support that I've gotten from my home congregation at the Abyssinia who've said, "You can do it. You're capable." Everybody said this every time. Delta Sigma Theta said, "Go, you know you have what it takes." I worshipped yesterday at Riverside Church and was sharing this with some people, and they said, "Oh, that's great, you have it." So I go with the blessings of many of my friends and their interest in the fact that at this moment in history the doors are beginning to crack for women in ministerial leadership. SW: ...in the church. OPS: But I think it came as a shock to my pastor of my own congregation that this opportunity in this significant church was open to me, 'cause the doors had been closed at Abyssinia for me as an associate﻿60 OPS: (cont.) minister. SW: How long had that, how long had that decision been made, or was it not a conscious decision on the part of the leadership... OPS: Oh, it was a very conscious decision. But God has a mysterious way of working and a wonderful way. God is greater than any of those black men or white men or whatnot. God is greater than men—he made 'em. Pastors have discriminated against women as clergy. SW: And women? OPS: SW: One of the things that I wanted to ask, as you talked, you've been discussing role models and mentors that you've had throughout your life. At this time, could you single one or two individuals who've played the role of mentor to you? OPS: How are you defining mentor? SW: A person who helps you see a direction, and enables you to, helps you to get opportunities to go in that direction. I'm talking about individuals, black individuals, as opposed to... OPS: You know, like Martin Luther King, I don't know that it was black individuals that helped me as much as just persons. I think there've been as many white individuals who've helped me as there have been black. I've always had the feeling that preparation, prayer and faith just opened the door. Amy Green, who was with the Protestant Council of the city of New York, when I was a youth, as head educator for youth, a white woman, believed in me and opened many doors. Dr. Powell, Sr., valued me as a person with gifts, and opened doors. As I grew older, Dr. Benjamin Mays encouraged me as I walked in the direction that he thought was good. As I grew into the twenties, I met Dr. George M. Johnson, dean of the law school at Howard University in a meeting of the National Council of Churches, and he became enamored with me. I ignored him for quite a while, and then I discovered he was God's gift to me. He encouraged me, and said, "Olivia Stokes, if you start your doctorate, you've got to finish it." My mother was always sayimg that God had put a gift in her that was transferred to me and to some of the other children, and that she was always there to support whatever I wanted to do. I remember somebody saying to her, "You must be proud of your daughter." And my mother very quietly said, "She doesn't do anything in the house; she has to make the contribution somewhere." So she never got overly excited—she was always proud, but she felt that I had the talent, and therefore I had the responsibility to use it. I came out of a family of leaders. They were preachers and teachers and community leaders and doctors and dentists and, you name it, they were farmers of distinction and whatnot.﻿61 SW: You' ve mentioned leadership on several occasions. How do you teach leadership, or can you? OPS: Well, there are certain skills that one has to acquire. I think leadership is the result of certain positions and structures, for instance, if you look at the opportunities a person has, that helps you grow. You take Truman when he became president, it was the job that gave the man the stature. He had to grow to it. So that where you are located in position helps you lead by osmosis, if you have innate ability, opportunities, and your participation in systems... For instance, I think I was mentioning today, there are few black people who have been in the systems of society and therefore, you learn how to grow and work within systems. There have been many blacks who've been denied the opportunity to be on boards, and experience the way boards operate, boards of corporations, and boards of councils of churches. One of the weakest things in the black community is the absence of the understanding of structures. Structures support and systems determine behavior. I've been fortunate; I've been in the midst of significant systems, political, educational, and religious, all my life. And so, I've observed and learned just almost by osmosis. I think the kind of leadership that Dr. Roswell Barnes of the World Council of Churches and National Council, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and some of those men have given, have been a combination of training, support from others, and almost the way God works at a time in history. It appears that God has designated certain people to do certain things. You can enable, by training, people to develop the maximum of their hidden talents, and bring those talents out to maximize the human potential. I think of every group, probably only 2 percent are top leadership, 10 percent are supportive leadership, and the others are followship. I think the 2 percent of leadership is almost the way God needs to have a certain cabinet in history at the moment. And the 10 percent are the support people who follow the ideologies of the 2 percent. And the rest are support systems. So that leadership for me is who has been developed by the systems, by training, by all the relationships of life, and who can meet the situation that needs somebody to direct it at the time. There is designated leadership, and I think most people get hung up on that, and there is spontaneous leadership that may not be designated, but may be the real leadership at the moment. You need both kinds. SW: If you were, if you had as your goal to develop leadership, a leadership training program for youth in the black community, what would this program consist of? OPS: Well, when Martin Luther King was assassinated, I developed a program and I called it the King-Chisholm, for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and took it to Andrew and Coretta, because I wanted it to be a national program... SW: Right after his death?﻿62 OPS: Right after his death. The day that I marched, in memorial, to him in Memphis before he was buried, and then from there to Atlanta, I was stopped to talk to about ten groups of black young males, and asked them what Martin's death meant. And the night that he was assassinated, a group of young people I had been working with in Amityville [Long Island, New York] came to my house in Harlem on Riverside Drive. They reported they were going to join the youth on 125th Street and burn the city down. So I said to them, "Sit down. We don't need any city burned down. We need leadership. We just lost a man. What kind of a leader are you going to be? And you stay right here, and we'll do some thinking about what you can do to pick up where Martin Luther King left off." But the program that I developed was called the King-Chisholm Club, because I wanted young men and young women in youth groups that would pick up the values and the dynamism of a Shirley Chisholm who is a Methodist, an outstanding Methodist member, Christian, and Martin Luther King, the kind of innovative, fearless, courageous, Christian philosophy that would cry out like Amos, the ancient prophet, against the evils of our society. One being the prophet to decry the condition, the other being the strategist to help bring about legislation to change it. I flew to Atlanta twice to see Mrs. King at her invitation, and each time she had been called to some other activity, to support a movement somewhere. We never were able to get together. Her sister, Mrs. Bradley, who teaches at Morgan, thought it was the finest program that had come. We never did get the program off the ground, but that was the kind of concern that I had for youth development. I have been distressed that both in the white Christian community and the black Christian community, we have not had the kind of united Christian youth movement that could save the world that I experienced, which was interracial, intercultural, and interreligious. That was a part of my growing up. I used to sit down with Jews, and dialogue with them when I was in the United Christian Youth Movement, and their conferences and their temples, and I grew up eating at seder or Passover tables, and taking black Christian women and men to seder services at Passover and the Jewish holy days. I was so deeply involved in the Jewish community, that when Israel celebrated its tenth anniversary, I was a guest of the state of Israel, its foreign relations department, for ten days. With the minister of the foreign relations department escorting me in a private limousine, all over the country of Israel, for ten beautiful days. So that we have not had this kind of interreligious and intercultural activity since the late, well, mid-sixties anyway, and late fifties really. It's been a great loss to our young people, black and white, because it had such impact on the development of the kind of youth leader that was necessary for the future. And we've got to restore this. The world that we're living in, and the world that young people are going to be living in, is going to be multi-cultured, multi-ethnic, and multi-ideological. We've got to have all these ideologies understood,﻿63 OPS: (cont.) appreciated, respected—pluralism is the word. I'm fascinated to see black men, one black woman in the Southern Christian leadership role that went to Lebanon, getting into interracial, and intercultural, and international affairs. Whitney Young of the Urban League was like a brother. We interacted in Boston together before he came to New York. And we became very close. I said to Whitney, "We've got to get on to being international. I've been international since I was fifteen." And he said, "Olivia, I don't have time; I got to concentrate on America's problems." And I said that to Randy Neugent who's now head of the international division of the United Methodist Church. In 1975 he recognized this when he was a delegate to the World Council of Churches Assembly in Kenya. But black people have now begun to mature, and there are enough of us who aren't struggling just to eat and sleep. We're beginning to view events from a larger, world, global perspective. So that as of today you can see Jesse Jackson sitting down with the president of the Republic of Jordan, tomorrow with President Sadat of Egypt, and then going over to Lebanon, and the mayor of Jerusalem. Well, I've been on the international scene since 1941, but I've been without the kind of place that the black pastor has. If I had been a black man, I would have been catapulted into all of this some time ago, particularly if I had been a black Baptist pastor. SW: Why do you say that, black Baptist? OPS: Because the Baptist pastors have had the largest and freest opportunities through their congregations. They have the freedom to design an idea and to promote it and to get a following, to implement action. They don't have to go to bishops. They don't have to be hamstrung by correctional systems. For example, take an Adam Powell, who got all the support he needed from New York City, or Jesse Jackson, who's a Baptist from Chicago, who can design what he wants, and take off. You can see a Dr. J. H. Jackson, head of the National Baptists for twenty-eight years, pull together the Baptist pastors and do what he wants with the presidents of this nation. You take, you analyze your top religious leadership, the ones that have most often been in the forefront have been Baptists, and that's because of the freedom and the free church—the black Baptist church doesn't owe any allegiance to the white church for its support. They get it from their women, who are factory workers, domestics, white-collar workers and professionals, and labor people. The Baptists have been freer. They don't have any constraints that some of the others have, though we've had some top fine church leadership in other denominations, civil rights people basically come out of the Baptists. You take King and his father, and Dr. Otis Moss, and Walter Fauntroy, and Leon Sullivan, they're all Baptists. Now what is there in the Baptists? As a matter of fact... No, I guess I'd better not say. But it's unique; the Baptist church, the black Baptist church is the freest institution in the black community. SW: And yet within that institution... OPS: ...there is discrimination against women.﻿64 SW: Right. OPS: And particularly at the clergy level... SW: We've certainly had our difficulties. OPS: But even that too shall pass. SW: Dr. Stokes, earlier you said you'd like to reflect on some of your ideas regarding the institution of marriage and... OPS: Well, one of the questions so frequently asked me is, Why haven't I married? And I've always been thrilled by the invitations for personal relations that have come. I'm one of those persons who, by design, chose to remain single, in order to do what I wanted to do, or felt called to do. I've had thirty-two opportunities to get married, and this always thrills me, because it says that despite your opportunities in education and training, you remain attractive to males, and I think that's really very important. I haven't married because I didn't want to have anybody frustrate my life and I didn't want to frustrate anybody else's life. And in the black community, if I married and a lot of children were born, some of the men didn't have the money to educate me and the children, or give me an opportunity to be free to educate the children, and have household help and that kind of thing, and I would not jeopardize the development of the child or children. A second reason I haven't married is because intellectually I think I have not wanted to be subjugated to somebody whose gifts and talents were different or less than, and so I haven't wanted to destroy anybody in that way or be destroyed by anyone. I guess the largest reason for not marrying is one that I felt that I had a mission; I was called to do certain things by God, and given the kind of mandate to be what I have tried to be. So I have felt that I needed to be free to do that. While I have not married and had children, I've certainly nurtured, and reared, and helped, and educated a lot of other women and men's children. I haven't really ever worried about not being married—I desired not to marry because I wanted to do what I felt called to do.. Sometimes people say to me, "I don't know how you resist. You're so attractive," and you're so this and that. And I say, "It's not difficult for me, I just feel that I'm doing the right thing, and therefore I go ahead and respond to what I feel," It was fascinating when working with the psychiatrists. They listed four things that marriage entailed, and said that in my lifestyle I had three of them, and that most married people didn't have three out of four in their lifestyles, so they could understand why I didn't move into marriage. So it was no problem for them. SW: Could you, could you mention them for us? OPS: Hmm, I'm not sure that... Let's see, that was in the sixties, I'm not sure that I can remember all of them. There was companionship which you have, which I have all the time without being married» There is﻿65 OPS: (cont.) procreation of children, which is the one thing that they felt, outside of marriage, I would not, by ethical or moral standards, do. They were right, and that's the one thing that I didn't do. I've forgotten the other two. OPS: ...a citizen to have social relations at a certain level in the community, and to be a volunteer leader and have the support of your family, in other words to be an active person in group and leadership roles. And I had that anyway. So that, as far as the psychiatrists were concerned, they were talking about regular sexual relationships, and I indicated that while that was not really a pattern for me, I was not a saint by any means, and the nicest thing about Christ was that He could forgive you if you ask Him forgiveness when you had broken standards or the social customs of either your religion or society. So that I didn't have to be in the framework of marriage, I just had to be within the framework of asking God's forgiveness for sex outside marriage. So that I was getting out of life more than most married people, and the only thing that I was not getting was the development—no, the birth of children— because I was engaged in the development of children, and had a very high sensitivity to the development of other people's children. SW: I think earlier in our discussion you mentioned an incident that you had in Africa with an individual who looked at you in a certain way because you were not married. And has that hampered you in terms of your travel, the fact that you have been a single person? OPS: No, only in Africa, where the attitude toward sex is taken much more maturely than here. For the African male, the African female, sex is so much a part of daily life. The structure of tribal life is such that no man goes without sex when he wants it, and the women are taught, as in the Indian culture, to gratify men's needs. I suppose, in the process, hers are gratified too, but the main focus is on gratifying the male's. So that the Africans would say, "How could you go for any sustained period without being gratified, or without gratifying them?" That didn't bother me at all, because I think that I find myself attracted to any person first mentally, rather than physically, and my physical radiation or attraction for a person comes second, after I have discovered where one is going and what he's about, because I don't have time to waste. I have that sense of urgency about helping to build a better world. Therefore, I recognize personal needs after I have recognized societal needs. In our culture, there is not this stigma that there is in Africa when a woman is a professional. I've been liberated since I was born, so far as I know. I've never known any resistances; I've always known how to fight them. I was brought up that anything that blocked you had to be moved, and I've always had the psychological and spiritual support for fighting anything that blocked my direction. If one was determined to﻿66 OPS: (cont.) go somewhere, you just had to find a way to get there, and move whatever blocks were in the way. So that I've never had any fears or problems with working out removal of resistances. The only problem I've had as a single woman in this culture working at the levels I have with men, and being what people considered an attractive woman in physical form and facial expression, is that women have been extremely jealous. They feel they can't compete. They can't compete educationally, they can't compete in terms of your attractiveness, your opportunities and all, so that I've had to deal with the jealousy of other women who operate on the concept that few have high ethical standards. And if they knew my high ethical standards, they would know that one of my life principles has been never to destroy a family, or a marriage. That's been one of the values I have held very high. Thus my relationship with all of the men that I have worked with has been, you know, "It's great to know you, but I'm not about to allow you to destroy your family, nor will I allow you to get so involved that you will hurt me or you." And that's just been a very high ethical standard. But now, because of the period which I've lived when moral standards are dropping lower and lower, many women assume that everybody is out to get for themselves, and many have advised me, "If that's the man you want, you go get him." And I've said, "No, that's not the way I live. God knows my needs, and I know my God, and whatever He has designed for my life, that I will do." And I have had outstanding white men in the outstanding high church positions and in the field of higher education wanting to marry, and this was back in the forties and the fifties, and they've been at the top of this nation, and if we had married, both of us would have lost our positions in the church or in education. My work has thrown me with these people, and I believe that people marry the folks one associates with. If you don't look interracial problems in the face, you pay the penalty. And I wasn't willing to have them lose their top positions, because if they had lost them, and I had been the cause of it, neither of us would have gone to where we could go, and that was just the nature of racism in society. Both men would have been really beautiful husbands, but I turned down four very distinguished white males. We've looked at the racism, now that I think of it, all of whom had very significant...one of them was a top executive man in a major insurance company in the position of personnel training. Another one was a top executive in a New York State chemical services, for the New York State government. I think that man is still crying till this day that I didn't marry him. He couldn't understand why. And then one was head of one of the major denominations, white, and another one was a top headmaster of Westchester County Day School, very exclusive higher education school. So that I've had all kinds of happy and tragic experiences, you know, in life, but I've met some very fine men. SW: One of the things that I'd like you to reflect on is, there is a phenomenon that's growing in our society among black females—and I include some of my friends in this—the choice that you ve made not to marry not to have a relationship, an extended relationship because of﻿67 SW: (cont.) some of the things that you've mentioned, and yet to have children because they feel that they need to fulfill themselves in that level. And you have a whole class or a whole group of children that are coming up, and the women, they feel that they're in a dilemma, because it's a growing significant number of women that are making this choice, but also choosing to have children, making a choice similar to the one that you did, for some of the reasons that you gave, not all of them, because they didn't have the same gifts that you have. What is this going to do to our society, and what do you tell people who are at the point of making this decision, okay? OPS: Yes, it is an historical phenomenon of the seventies that momentary passions give expression to desires to develop that part of a woman which is strictly maternal, the birth and nurture of a child. I tend to feel that I'm not as much interested in what's going to happen to the society as I am in what's going to happen to the child. I believe that a child belongs to two people, not to one. When people say to me, "That child doesn't have a father," I look at 'em and say, "Every child has a father. You mean that child doesn't have a responsible father." "That child doesn't have a mother." "That child doesn't have a loving mother; that child has a biological mother." Fatherhood or motherhood is necessary for a child's healthy development. The strongest people in our society are those who come out, and the ones who've made the greatest contribution to the society, are those who come out of a two-parent family that has stability. Now, I'd like to do a lot of research to document that on black Americans, but that's a reality, with few exceptions. SW: I don't know... OPS: Now, that does not say that a child in a one-parent family where there is goal-oriented guidance on the part of either parent, mother or father, cannot be a contributing citizen, and develop and maximize its potential. But I think it's unfortunate that we, as adults in this society, cannot iron out the kinds of problems that cause people to want to behave in the way in which we are behaving, and develop in such a way that a child can be fathered and mothered. I don't think that we live now in a time where black men and black women can't get together. I think it's the greed for materialism. It's the failure to fully understand compromise and not just satisfy ego gratification. There was a time in our culture, way back when, if a woman were a teacher at a college level, and a man were a teacher, they'd have to teach in two different colleges, in different cities and commute. They still were married and had the children, but it was hard, and we've had a lot of professional problems in that type of arrangement. Today they just go and gratify their biological urges, and defy the values, structures and ethical standards that are necessary for the total nurture of a child. I don't think it's good. I don't think it develops the kind of respect for human beings that God intended us to have as copartners together. That's why I have chosen to be a single woman, a single professional, and not to bring a﻿68 OPS: (cont.) child into the world that doesn't know its father, or if it knows it, doesn't have the father's care and relationship with the child. I don't think that this is mentally or spiritually healthy. SW: Why is it...you said that it is because of materialism that this phenomenon was happening? OPS: I said ego gratification and materialism, copious consumption, the love of money over the love of values, spiritual values. I think it's partly what the woman's expectation is, the stereotype that the man ought to earn more money than the woman. SW: I don't know if it goes that far. It might be, earn some money. I mean, you have a phenomenon where so many black men do not work, for various reasons, economic, social, you know, personal, and I mean, I think that this is a contributing factor to the woman's choice. It's a curious... OPS: It would be interesting research to find out how many black men who are not working are relating to women of our race on the basis of they could not get a job because many of them haven't been, by will power, willing to go and study. They haven't been willing to train, because the culture says you can make more money gambling than you can working at unskilled jobs. The culture also says that if you have children, the woman can get welfare to support the children, and you don't have to be responsible, so the society creates irresponsibility or accountability for parenthood. I'm not sure that what the answer is for the woman of your peer group, who is a professional woman, who does not really dip down into that group for her sex life. But there must be other options. SW: Because of availability, she does. After Vietnam, and after the prison, and after so many things have happened during the sixties, there is a serious shortage of men for a large number of young black women. OPS: Then I think there is the opportunity for the institutions in the black community, and the total society, to train those persons who are discriminated against, oppressed and hurt. I think a woman who wants that kind of sex gratification ought to be willing to struggle to help her man become her partner. SW: What if she can't find that man of her intellectual — OPS: It isn't a question of finding him—there are plenty of women who were schoolteachers who married men who were working as Pullman porters and other labor jobs. It wasn't that intellect was different; it was that opportunities were different. And I know a friend who has a gorgeous home in Houston, Texas, her husband was a Pullman porter. She bought the home of the vice-president of Esso, the two of them. She was a college professor. It wasn't that he had less intellect than she did— the opportunities were open for her that were not open for him—racism. But the two of them built a beautiful life together with their children, and she understood his contribution to her development, and never did she﻿69 OPS: (cont.) do anything but say to him, "Work is dignity." He went on and did available work based on the structures of society. SW: Well, I think that's changed. Because I remember growing up and that was the case. There were many black women who were professionals, and their husbands were laborers or...and their family was strong and whatnot. Somehow, that is changed. OPS: Well, I think that in the Christian context—I guess that I go back to what I think builds the strongest society—whatever problems exist that cause anybody, black or white, to dip and have their sex relationship on a biological basis, which is a sacred need of human beings, and to deny a child the relationship to one-half of those that brought her here, or him here, is to bring up a child not to its fullest potential. And that child may make a contribution, but somewhere along the line... Let me illustrate it. The other day, one of the leading American black women who has a doctorate in anthropology, is outstanding in African Harw-?, called me. Her husband died, had a heart attack at the theater, and died in the dressing room. He was from the islands—well, he was also a college professor, and they had this dance group. He had two or three children out of wedlock... SW: ...which was cultural... OPS: ...which was cultural, I guess, or at least traditional, you know, Afro-American, in the islands. He had one child by her, in their marriage, and somebody questioned whether they were married or not—I have no way of knowing. But at the funeral, one child out of wedlock was recognized, a girl; the son of their marriage was recognized; and the third child, who may have been the very first one in his life, was there with her mother, but was not recognized. But everybody mostly in that room knew that she belonged to him when she passed and viewed his body. Now, I think that's tragic. SW: It is. OPS: I think that's criminal; I think that's irresponsible. Now, I don't know what the man did for the child while he was alive, but it says that he was embarrassed even though it was cultural, to the point that he couldn't be the man that he needed to be, and have straightened out the problem and adopt the girl. SW: Acknowledged... OPS: Acknowledged his own gift to society, and his own problems in the society. So that girl left that funeral. I was called by another distinguished woman in the field of dance, who's divorced, and is rearing her four children with a close relationship to their father and a good, friendly relationship. She divorced her husband because he wouldn't allow her to develop professionally. But she has her gorgeous children, and they see both their father and their mother, and there's a good relationship between the father and the mother, but the father is just so jealous that he didn't want his wife to work, and she had I﻿70 OPS: (cont.) talents and wanted to work. So she called me to explain the tragedy of this situation, knowing that I knew both families. I think this is very, very typical of the kinds of problems that the child faces. What does it do to the child? Now that the third child may never get the strength in the society that she should have, and that the son of this couple has, no matter what she experiences the rest of the way. She may be a good citizen, but she may never be a leader, because she's been crushed, denied, and rejected by her father. And I think we've got so many children out there who're feeling rejection, alienation, and those are two very damaging personality developments. Personally, I say to young women who live together with men—I don't care how many of them there are in the culture—that they are just playing into the hands of tragedy. And I don't know...and I know my friends' children are doing this. One friend called me the other day in tears because her daughter was living with a second man. She has two daughters who have tried it. And I don't know a single young woman with a master's degree or a bachelor's degree that has found long-term happiness. I have first cousins, all gifted, one of them has a house partner who was studying law, she moved in on him, and after a little while, he moved out on her. And she was as pretty as a picture, and you know what's the problem? SW: But you don't know a single young woman... OPS: I don't know a single young woman who has had what I call love and respect out of this living together business. It starts out as pleasure and ends up as tragedy, and I know many of them. SW: But why is the phenomenon happening? And when people, okay, you as a religious educator, and a person whom people come to for guidance, for advice, because if they don't get something from the church, they won't go there for advice... OPS: I don't know that the church is the only resource or counseling setting. I did more counseling at Lehman College, of white and black young women in this area than in the church. SW: But the church should be a place... OPS: The church is a good place, but I think that first of all there is a stereotype. It runs like this, "My style is not going to be accepted by the church, and so I won't go." They don't even know whether the church is judgmental. They're just stereotypic about the church. And I think that often the church is ahead of the young people, but they don't know this, because I've had men say when they said on blind dates, you know, "Invite Olivia, she's lots of fun." "Oh, no man, she's in the church. I'm not going to be bothered with a Christian woman." I had a distinguished man in Boston who made such a judgment, after three years come to me and say, "You know, I turned down a date with you because you were in religious education. I thought you were stereotypic﻿71 OPS: (cont.) and all that. Now, you know, I'm sorry I married the woman I did, I wished I'd have met you." I said, "But you turned it down." I've had three distinguished black men say, "Uh, uh, she works for the church," and then all their images of the church are just wrong. They didn't know me. And they didn't even want to get to know me, because of their images of Christians, which often is totally wrong. I was teaching a class at Lehman College of City University one day, when a young white student came in and said, "Dr. Stokes"—I think I may have told this story before—"I'm sorry I've been absent three weeks. I messed up a young lady." And I looked at him and said as he announced this in class in the midst of twenty-eight other students, "Wasn't your relationship a mutual one?" And he said, "Yes." And I replied, "Well, how do you mess up anyone when the relationship is mutual? Are you telling me that according to the Roman Catholic church, you have violated the ethical and spiritual teaching of the church?" "Yes," he said. ^ "Well," I responded, "didn't she mess you up?" And that turned the whole session—and most of m-j students were white—into a discussion of, What is love? And what is physical abuse? And what is pleasure, and what is happiness? After two hours, I had twenty-eight young people leaving class, having discussed more frankly than they ever had sexual abuse and use, when they thought it was love. I started a pastoral counseling session in my office from then on for the rest of the semester. One young lady was ready to run away from home at eighteen to live with her cab driver friend. When she came in to talk about it, she wasn't really going to the cab driver as much as she was leaving the authoritarian conditions at home. SW: She was running away from them. OPS: What she was running away from was better than what she was running to, it seemed to me. And both of them were difficult. And when she saw that, then we talked about other options—she didn't have to take either condition. At eighteen, she was legally free. The question gets to be, "How do you support yourself and go on to school?" It was only after she looked at that and found that there were scholarship funds and ways to borrow money, and that other people had gone on, that she viewed her decision differently. I shared my educational strength. I had graduated with a doctorate owing $6000 practically, and I was now teaching in a university. But she chose not to live with her friend. That young lady, when she sees me, grabs me by the neck and hugs me to death, because what she was going into was worse than what she was leaving. Often counseling helps people. Really what I am saying is that adults have felt that this youth culture was something they couldn't deal with. Therefore, young people have had few people to turn to as they search for answers to their problems, and to discuss openly and study alternative ways, or open up to them options, and let them make their decisions based on values and analyses of the options. I believe there is no one Christian style of life. You can ask God's forgiveness for your sins, and as my mother always said, "Try not to﻿72 OPS: (cont.) repeat as many as you had before." But the black church has had so many hurt people with poor marriages, that frequently there's just no faith in the counsel there. But I have started recommending that we have what I call "godpartners," not godparents—"godpartners," because most godparents were looked upon as someone who would take over and help with the financial support of the child in the absence of the mother or father. But "godpartners" are people who are interested in other people, because God created them, and you are in "the community of believers," or you as a believer in the community want to help somebody to come in the faith community and live a fuller and a more beautiful life. Therefore, they dialogue with you. They share options, they get help, they're led into resources, and you help a person empty himself out, and fill himself up, and grow. And I just think that we're not using the wisdom that older people share out of their rich life experience. This past Saturday, I attended a conference of black evangelical Christian women, who were discussing the male midlife crises that their husbands or partners were going through. I turned to my neighbor and said, "You know, I'd like a survey of this audience, because I bet you half of these women are relating to men that they're not married to." But the stereotype that they will admit, on a public floor among other Christian women, is their husbands. A lot of black women are single. They're related to men that are not their husbands, who may meet their need for companionship, for love, support, or for whatever. And it was fascinating to me that they kept talking about their husbands. One woman finally got up and said that she wanted to react to the conference evaluation sheet which said, "Shall we hold a similar conference for, men?" This was a conscience-raising session focused on black Christian women. There should be a conference for men and women on conscience raising, because if you have one for women and one for men, then you perpetuate concepts that need discussion with your partner and peers. You're not talking together about the problems. And there's been an absence of dialogue, a tremendous absence of dialogue among black men and black women. One is a dictator and tells the other... SW: Has that been tradition? OPS: I think it's been all the way through. We have reflected what we've come from. We were told by the white folks what to do, and they were the authority figures, and their society says the man is the authority figure. The black woman says, "To heck with that." She thinks, "I'm not going to put up with that." And whether the man is achieving what you want, or working in the way you want, he feels that the society gives him support to be the leader. You don't need that. What is needed is dialogue, equality at home, as well as in the society, and so you work it out. And black folks have always voted by leaving problem situations. They leave the church, they leave their homes, that's the way they vote. I was fascinated___ One woman stood up and said, "Well, I called three men. I wanted them to come with me to this meeting." All of a sudden, we looked up and she was asked, "Three!" And she said, "Not one of them wanted to come to this meeting." And we began to wonder, you know, what her relationship, of an intimate nature was to three of﻿73 OPS: (cont.) these men. And we never did know, and that was none of our business, I guess, but at least she was indicating that the time had arrived when the midlife problems that person had needed to be jointly discussed. Males and females need to look at their desired relationships and not hurt each other, support each other during these physiological, psychological, and emotional changes as one moves up the agenda of life and chronological age lengthens. It was fascinating. SW: Dr. Stokes, your living room and your kitchen, your entire house looks like an art gallery. And what's interesting about it is that most of the art seems like it should be here. It just feels very natural and very comfortable. I know you said that you were going to have an art exhibit shortly where some of your pieces were going to be sold. Can you tell me something about the collection you've made throughout the years, and what art has meant to you? I see you have pieces from various countries throughout the world, but I think the African art predominates. DPS: I'd be pleased to. I gueoii when you don't have a husband, there are very many fascinating compensations, or when you don't have children and a family, and your energies go in other ways. My mother was a very artistic person, and collected beautiful art from estates of wealthy families, that was found in secondhand stores on Third Avenue in New York. So I inherited from her a very artistic taste. I have three art collections, really. One is an international doll collection I started in 1945 when I first went around the world—I've been around the world about three times. I went on that trip in 1958 to Japan and China, having always been interested in China. I thought I would have one room that would be Oriental. Acually what's happened was that I have a lot of Oriental art here, and then after several trips to Europe, I've picked up European art from France, the sculptures of Rodin, and many French mirrors, and some German pieces. But after nineteen trips, 1958 to 1980, to Africa, I have acquired a large collection of African art, paintings and sculptures. So first I have an international doll collection with exquisite Japanese dolls and dolls from all over the world. I never played with dolls as a child, and I began to use them as a teaching tool to help persons understand other cultures. And my mother used our doll collection to talk with people at the church. Annually she exhibited them in "Bessie's plants and Bessie's garden." And she had both the dolls and the plants there. My second collection is a collection of African paintings, fabrics and sculptures. That collection started in 1958 when I first went to Africa. Now that I have visited more than forty-eight of the fifty-seven independent countries, I have quite an interesting and highly valued African art collection. My third hobby is travel. I love to see the other parts of the world. I love to meet people, but I attribute this to the opportunities I've had in the church- I've traveled all over the world. You name any country, I seem to have some connection. Someone called me today from Boston who's a friend in her last years of retirement, saying she was going to the Tonga Islands as a Peace Corps person. In her seventy-second year, and she was off for two years to the Tonga Islands. I said to her, "I'm sorry you've waited so late to﻿74 OPS: (cont.) go to Tonga. The Queen of Tonga Islands was a friend of mine. She died a couple of years ago. But I will give you the names of some outstanding leaders in the Tonga church..." SW: Where is Tonga? OPS: It's a SouthPacific island, and it's really very interesting. The men wear kilts and skirts, like they do in Scotland. It's a beautiful, small island, a very lovely Christian people. So that she was going there. People ask me, in terms of my hobby of travel, which of the African nations I prefer. I guess Ethiopia, and I've been to Ethiopia seven times, and I admire the goals of the new revolution and the struggle for a new economic and political structure of society that will provide a more equitable economic base of living, educational and health opportunities for all the citizens. I have a great admiration for and many intimate contacts with Emperor Haile Selassie during the years through a friend of ours there, Dr. David Talbert, who for years headed the Ethiopian-American institute. x admired Emperor Haile Selassie, but not all his policies. He was a really benevolent monarch, but he didn't know how to build social systems and political structures that enabled his people to move out of abject poverty into an industrial nation. International affairs, international contacts and people of many nations have always been my deep interest. Some people travel to see lands and the seven wonders of the world. I like to see these, but I travel because of the people I meet. I've met these people in the context of the Christian church. I have greatly benefitted by being an official representative to two or three of the international meetings of the World Council of Churches, first in 1954 to the World Council of Churches meeting, and again in 1975. In 1967, I taught in a World Christian Education Conference at the University of Nairobi, in Kenya, for six weeks during the summer. So I've lived often with people for two to six weeks, who have come from all over the world. This is why the psychiatrists say that you don't really need a husband because you've had all these contacts with these outstanding and interesting people, that are very fulfilling. And so while you miss something, you have a substitute, a set of complementary experiences that fill you, thus one does not grieve over what you've missed. So that my hobbies form an interesting part of my life. My apartment reflects my travels, and thus a great deal of art. I have an addiction to international jewelry—I have gorgeous jewelry, either silver or gold that I really love,from maybe eighty different nations. My collection of jewelry is equal to my art collection. SW: You know, it's interesting because just like art in Africa is a way of life, or is a part of the culture... Although this is a very fine and large collection of international art, it just feels very comfortable in your home. OPS: Well, my theory about a home is that it's your castle, and that it's not for exhibition—it's a place to be enjoyed. So I live with everything. Any friend can come in and pick up a crystal glass made in Germany with etched animals of Africa on it. Or you can pick up a crystal vase and﻿75 OPS: (cont.) enjoy it and put roses in it. Or you can pick up a Wedgewood teapot and use it for a cup of tea with anybody who's sitting down with me. I use all of the fine, lovely things in my home for everyday use, at any time. I have some beautiful wine cups there with gold edges, and when I have a glass of wine, I just take one and use it. Nothing is so valuable that it can't be used, for future use. It's all for my daily enjoyment with my friends. SW: Do you have any pieces of art that you bought as investment? OPS: No. Every piece of art in this house has a fascinating story. In my bedroom I have a beautiful lamp, on the side table, that was given to me by one of the ambassadors from my sister's country, Sierra Leone, when we were in Nigeria together—and we've kept contact through the years, I had dinner with him this past summer in Sierra Leone with my sister and the six people who were traveling with me—and that has a certain set of lovely memories. I have beautiful pieces of jewelry from Spain and Air lea that all have deep sentiments to them. 1 have some pieces of art, that I inherited from my mother. That lamp over there, which has four grapes, one blue, one green, one yellow, and one deep red, was made in France, and was hand blown, and I said to my mother one day, "Of all the art pieces in your house, the only thing I really want you to leave me is that hand-blown grape lamp, because they look just like pounds of grapes hanging." She had the lamp rewired, and told me that somewhere in the world there was another, and we didn't know where it was. One day, when my sister and her husband were on the island of Palma, off of Africa, they went into a Catholic church and saw another one exactly like it. And the priest said to them, "There is another one in the world and we don't know where it is." My sister said, "I know where it is." And I asked her to request the priest to sell me that one. He asked her to have me sell mine to his church. So that's where the other one is, and that was like a mini-miracle. So that there is a story that goes with each piece. I have two art paintings of African women that were done in Nigeria. They are made out of butterfly wings, and I think they are absolutely exquisite. There's a Guatemalan little brown-skinned boy there in original oil—that was painted in oil by one of my neighbors who gave it to me as a gift, for my love of black children—and it's my little man in the house. He's absolutely a beautiful child. Two or three of the pieces in here are gifts from my mother. These two gorgeous Chinese pieces, the umbrella stand, and those large vases of Chinese dragons were gifts from my mother. And until that top one got broken, it was valued at $10,000. I was away on a trip and the wind broke it. There are some pieces there from Germany and fron France and from Japan and so forth. This black marble clock, about two feet long and six feet wide, has gold numbers on the face and two brass figures six inches tall. That's a real antique, and a very lovely piece from my mother. SW: What country is that from, do you know? OPS: It's English. These two crystal vases, each eighteen inches tall, are﻿76 OPS: (cont.) lovely. My accountant who does my annual income tax wanted those. I had them appraised, and so I am not paying him for three years of work with those two vases, so they now belong to him. This piece from France, this fruit dish, which is Limoges, is about ninety years old, and was a gift to my father's brother at his wedding, and when his children were grown, they didn't want it, so my aunt's daughter gave it to me. I want to give it back to her daughter, which is a cousin, a second cousin of mine, but that piece is one that has been admired by many art people. That set of wine glasses come from Vienna. It's gold, painted on crystal, Viennese crystal, and is interesting. This set of Chinese mugs, for beer, are hand molded in old China and are signed, as you can see by the stamp there, by the Chinese artists. Each one has a handmade ceramic figure that's six inches tall and about six inches wide. That's an invaluable antique set. That was from my mother and is very, very elegant. These two Italian large wine jars, in ceramic, with the gorgeous painting on them attract people all the time. They are eighteen inches or twenty inches tall, and about twelve inches wide with beautiiui black enamel handles on each side. These are provincial Italian wine jars that I've been threatening to make into lamps but I don't know where I'd put them, so I've just left them as wine jars, but someday I'll make lamps out of them. SW: Would you like to discuss this piece of sculpture? OPS: That statue comes from the Makondes from Tanzania, and represents the kind of carvings that are done in East Africa. I went to Tanzania two or three times before I could find a Makonde that I liked. I have two Makonde carvings over here of very rare value, but this one is—there are six, eight figures there—is my favorite. SW: Is that out of one bark or... OPS: It is made out of one piece of wood. The carver took a block of wood that's about three feet tall and carved three sets of figures. That's a rare piece. I just loaned that one on exhibition to Berea College, and when it was returned to me, it had been broken, and that means I lost over $1,000 on that one. These two brass candleholders are over two hundred years of age. They come from Tripoli, North Africa, and were given to me by a white missionary thirty years ago, I guess. They are antiques, and I don't know what to do with them, but I do enjoy them. [Sound of bells] These are altar bells from Stratford-on-Avon, in Shakespeare country, and I picked them up when I was in Stratford-on-Avon, I think in 1945, when I went to England for a world conference. I use those in teaching— when I want to change classes I [sound of bells] ring the bells; so I enjoy that set. Recently, I just brought back from Africa this lovely, large musical instrument. It's called a koba, from Guinea, and I will probably eventually find a musician in this country who can't live without it, and sell it for half of what it's worth. SW: Is this the Rodin sculpture you were talking about?﻿77 OPS: Yes. There is in Paris a Rodin museum. And Rodin is one of the rare sculptors. This piece is call the "Hand of God." And here you see the firmament, a great big hunk of ceramic clay, out of which comes the strong, firm hand of God, large, and in his hand is Adam, and Adam is holding Eve, and out of them come the unborn children of all generations... their children, your children, humanity. That is a magnificent piece. It's about twenty-four inches tall and about eighteen inches wide. It sits on a revolving ebony stand. And over here, we have Rodin's "The Kiss," the famous male and female human sacred relationship. I was teased once by the black psychiatrist saying that a Christian person had that, in her home on the mantle. I replied, "There's nothing more natural than a man loving a woman. That's the way God made us." But he was exhibiting the kinds of stereotypes which I talked about in relation to a Christian woman's lifestyle. SW: Oh, this lamp is fascinating. Is that...from the Mideast? OPS: This lamp is from India. It is thirty-six inches tall at the base, and about eighteen inches wide; the spout on it is two feet and a foot leaning over in a curve. It's a wine jar in India for a huge party, and maybe you'd serve fifty people. I had it made into a lamp. There's a technical name for it, and I've forgotten it at the moment. But it's a piece that attracts a lot of attention and is a rather interesting lamp in my house. SW: Is this from India? OPS: No, this large antelope carving comes from West Africa. You see it in Senegal mainly. I have three here. One is very large and is worth probably $1,200, and that one there is in ebony and is probably worth $800, and then the smaller one, I brought this one back for an art teacher two years ago who hasn't collected it yet. I don't know when he thinks he has to pay for it, but he keeps calling to ask me to hold it. This copper map of Africa was created by a friend of mine, a white artist, and he has raised figures on there. The structure made in wire of the face of a Nigerian man and a Nigerian woman. It has an interesting story.. A black secretary went to him and said, "Ralph, I want you to make me a map of Africa out of copper, but I want you to spray it in acid so it turns green like the earth, with the rivers." And he made her that one and sprayed it, and created the green effect, which happens when you spray copper with acid. And then he came and showed it to me, and said, "Olivia, I want to make one for you, but I don't want to spray it in green. I want it copper." Of course, now copper is so expensive that that piece that I payed three or four hundred dollars for when I bought it is now well into a couple of thousand dollars. I guess we need to take those three masks as two of the valuable African pieces. You may need to take that one with the raffia down so you can get the view of the whole mask. Why don't you just lay that raffia thing down on the floor, and then take the other two zebra masks, 'cause those are rare. They come from Zambia, and I don't, I guess there are others﻿78 OPS: (cont.) in the country; I've not seen them that size. Zebra masks. I'm sure somebody has brought others by now. I brought smaller ones back, but people wanted them so badly that I just kept those two for myself. SW: I was trying to get all three of them. I couldn't do that. OPS: Oh no, I don't think so. How many pictures do you have left? SW: Two of 'em. OPS: Are you getting them both? Funny, one day I didn't know what to do with those things, and they were in my way, and I just flung 'em up there against the wall. SW: Mmm hmm, looks great. OPS: You know, it's like having my doctoral diploma in the bathroom, [laughter] I didn't have anywhere else to put it, so I just put it in the bathroom, and all my friends howl and fuss. And I said, "Well, what a better place. I go in there everyday, and it reminds me of my responsibilities and my discipline." SW: Was this up against a wall? OPS: It was sitting on the elephant, so lean it toward the left, yes, that way. You can bring it over here, and I'll hold it and you can take a picture of me holding it. That may be an easier way for you to handle it. SW: Okay. OPS: This comes from the Sierra Leone, and is the Mende tribe. It's a contemporary piece. It's very contemporary. I think it's beautifully done. SW: It is beautiful. OPS: And there's another one that I bought over there last year. That one hangs on the door. And hand me that one, and I'll put this one back. SW: I think I'm having a little difficulty. OPS: Just lay it here on the couch, and I'll put it back later, and just hand me this one, and I'll hold that open for you. SW: You say, a door piece... OPS: You see, this one stands on the floor, and you know, is really like a door stop. You can put it against a wall, or up on a stand by itself. That piece down there is ancient and very rare. SW: Which one?﻿79 OPS: The one with the beads. SW: Yes, yes, I saw those. OPS: Hmm, that's the Dan tribe. And there's another one that's very rare— bring it here—there's another one over there that's very rare. That's right in front of that man's head there, that one. These two pieces are ancient, very fine art, and I found them. They're from the Dan tribe. These are very, very rare pieces that I picked up this summer, really very outstanding pieces. SW: And where did you say they're from again? OPS: They're from Upper Volta, the Dan tribe. And they're very exquisite pieces of copper carvings. You can see that they're both antiques. They're not... I really must have these appraised, because I haven't been up to Hi*. Dan people, T don't think I'd sell either one of 'em under a lot of money. The most exquisite piece I have is a little ebony figure. I don't know whether I ever showed it to you—it is a very little piece here, and I'm not sure that you can even get the fine carving, but if you look at this, it is one of the finest pieces of carving that you can put your hands on. It's an antique and comes from Upper Volta, and is exquisite. Let me see if I can put it on the form for the picture. It's absolutely one of the most exquisite pieces of African art I own. It's small, and I've often said that when I died, I either want roses in my hands or that little piece of African art to symbolize my touch with sty roots in Africa. It is classic, and I'm so thrilled to have found it. I found it in Liberia, but it comes from Upper Volta. SW: It is beautiful... OPS: Now, that lamp that you just took is a tusk from Sierra Leone given to my mother, and at her death it came to me. It is eighteen inches tall, and is one of the lovely pieces of ivory that I have inherited from my family. SW: ...the ivory? OPS: Yes. My sister... SW: You want me to take a picture of it? OPS: You just did when you took the picture of the little piece. You had that as a background, but you can take another one if you wish. SW: No, that's at the angle. That's okay. OPS: Actually, the ivory pieces over here are exquisite. The man who carved these ivory pieces, these two, now carves for the queen of England. All of the ivory that she uses as gifts, were carved by this carver, and he is in McKinney, Sierra Leone, where my sister and her husband lived. He's﻿80 OPS: (cont.) carved all of these pieces for me. They are absolutely-priceless . SW: Ooh, what's in the back there? OPS: That's a bridge, oh, that's from China. That's a half-tusk from China, and is exquisite ivory carving. As you look at it, all life that goes on in a village is carved in that tusk. I have a cousin who's a dentist, and when he saw that, he was ready to forego everything else in my house, because he just didn't see how anybody could do the fine work that the Chinese have done on that ivory carving. It's a gorgeous piece. My ivory collection is actually a very large rare collection of ivory. SW: Is this ivory again? OPS: Yes, this is ivory. SW: Okay, I think we'll »top now. Oh, Father will be in ecstasy taking pictures of these works> He will be so thrilled. OPS: These two pieces come from Zulu territory in South Africa. SW: I'm going to take a picture of them. OPS: That ivory is from Liberia. The head below down there is an exquisite head from the Congo. It's a Muslim man's head. People have urged me to have a model made of that and sell the reproductions, but I have enjoyed just having the head. The two other heads come from South Africa, from the Zulu tribe. That one is from the Congo people. The two elephants come from Ceylon and are hundreds of years old. They're antiques and represent an interesting thing that I was telling you about before. I told you women were jealous. A man who is a mortician, in Boston, saw my art interest and asked me to buy him elephants because his hobby was collecting elephants. And I bought those and his wife refused to allow him to have them because she's just jealous that he had asked another woman to do art shopping for him. SW: Could you talk about these heads? OPS: Yes. This collection—there are twenty-seven in number—are heads of ethnic people of the world imade by the Bosson, B-O-S-S-O-N, Company of England. It is a gift from a friend of mine. And when I left Boston, in appreciation for my interest 3au international affairs, she gave me twenty-seven of these ethnic heads, and they are exquisite. I had them on my wall in my office, and when I came in one morning, somebody had taken five of them, the largest set. They're worth about three or four hundred dollars. So then I brought them home, and didn't know where to put them, and just strung them on that wall, and there they are. But I love them. They represent all the different ethnic cultures of the world's people, and someday when I get five or six hundred dollars, I'll replace the five—they've gone up so in value now. SW: Hmm, let me just see...﻿81 OPS: What? SW: What is this here? OPS: That's an antique from Tanzania. That carving of a woman with a baby- on her back comes from Tanzania and is an antique piece. She's holding a bunch of bananas in her hand. Hold on, and I'll turn it so you can maybe get a better photo of it. SW: Okay, could you move the tape recorder... Where's it from again? OPS: Tanzania, East Africa. And here's a Pieta from Rome, Italy. This is a rare African piece down there from Upper Volta. Let me hold this in my hand, because this is a brass piece that I waited a long time for. It's an antique, and it's ancient, and it's a medicine cabinet or bowl, you can lift the top off, and it has the king and queen playing the Awari game. And that's probably a piece that's valued at, I don't know, fourteen, fifteen hundred dollars. SW: [The interviewer dropped a piece.] Oh, I'm so disturbed. OPS: [laughs] Don't be. SW: How could I...I can't stand it. Well, I just have to remember to call, before I leave, to call Daddy, and see that he comes up, because he will just be in ecstasy to take pictures of these. OPS: Well, it'll be welcomed. This piece, for instance, is that piece I was telling you about where each of the tusks was valued at $25. There are two of those. The king is ebony. Just one half of the bookend is worth $50, so that's $100 for that set of bookends. SW: ...want to talk about some... Because when he comes back, you know, he'll take the pictures, and we'll still, you know, continue the interview. OPS: These two figures were seen by my mother in Boston one day in an antique shop. They are Bali heads. They're very lovely. It's the man and the woman from the South Pacific, made of wood, but there's a sorghum, or a natural product that comes out of the wood that is poured over them. They're really very elegant. People keep asking me where they're from, and how intricate the work is. They're antiques, and are very valuable. I really am going to have them appraised some day, but I haven't done it, but they're a couple of thousand dollars at least. SW: Then the two figures behind... OPS: These two? These are Yoruba, Nigerian Yoruba gods. I secured those in Nigeria. They're ancient pieces too. But they represent part of the Yoruba culture. These two calabashes also come from Oyo, 0-Y-0, Nigeria. Oyo is a village in which they do nothing but carve large calabashes, which are made out of gourds. Many are eighteen inches across and eight, ten inches up and down. They're of different designs. This wall hanging in red and green and all kinds of designs is from Ethiopia, and﻿82 OPS: (cont.) is a lovely wall hanging. This is a fascinating Liberian wood sculpture piece. It represents the rings used in the marriage ceremony. The groom during the marriage rites holds the figure of the carved woman's head, while the bride holds the male figure's head. In between are three interlocking wooden links (rings) signifying the future desire of the newlyweds to have three children. This is all carved out of one piece of wood and is used in the marriage ceremony in Liberia. It's really a meaningful symbol. I went to a wedding, of a niece of a friend of mine, and the bride was quite black and the groom was white. As a Peace Corps worker in Africa, he had seen this symbolic piece and used it as his wedding rings in their wedding ceremony. But the bride had never actually seen one. I hadn't carried a gift to the wedding, and I was going that week to Montego Bay, Jamaica, for a rest, and they were going to be there honeymooning. I asked if I could bring them the symbolic wood carving that had been included in her wedding ceremony. The bride was so thrilled—nothing co'.ild have meant more to her than that, and the groom was also thrilled. So it was a joy to share that carving. Then when I went back to Liberia, I bought myself another one. This photo of Fujiyama from Japan was made by Kagawa. It's a photograph of the Fujiyama mountains in Japan with snow-capped tops done by the great Christian Kagawa, who always taught people it was better to give seed rather than to give fruit, because people could grow seeds. It was better to give fish and let them build their own ponds than it was to feed them fish. He was a great Christian leader. This painting comes from Mexico and it is typical of the art in Mexico. SW: What of this painting? OPS: My Jewish friends are fascinated by this olive wood carving that comes from the Holy Land, from Bethlehem. It is about two feet by a foot and a half, and represents the Wailing Wall of Jerusalem. It was part of the west wall of the temple in Solomon's time, and it's carved in olive wood. My Jewish friends would give anything to secure it. I've urged my Arab friends, who run a shop in which this is carved, to go back into business and make more of those, because I could have sold that one dozens and dozens of times. In the bedroom, I have the zebra skin from Kenya. I have what they call a chocolate zebra—that simply means that from the back tail up the main back of the zebra, there is a thin chocolate-colored stipe. It is the finest skin that you can find. I couldn't afford this wall zebra skin until after seven trips to Africa. Finally I decided in 1975 I couldn't come away without one, so I was able to secure this exquisite one. When I was younger I wanted a zebra coat. But I felt it was such a shock in the American culture to wear a zebra coat. The bedspread is from Ghana, and is made of kente cloth and tie dyed in green and blue. This other one is the adinkra cloth spread. SW: Adinkra.﻿83 OPS: Adinkra cloth that I also bought, and this is another bedspread of the adinkra with the strips of kente cloth. SW: And each one of those symbols represents something. I have a chart that explains what they mean... OPS: Yes, that's right, I need to share that with Marie Brooks with her children's research dance theatre. They came in the other day and wanted to buy this, because when they had been in Ghana, they bought some material, but not enough for all their children's costumes in the dance troupe, and now they want to buy that piece. So I decided I'd go pull this piece out and put it on the bed, and see if I could possibly part with that piece. I sent a yard of this—or two yards, I guess—down to Berea College in Berea, Kentucky, where I am a trustee. They have 130 foreign students, and most of them are from Africa, and they needed to have samples of the fabrics of Africa. SW: I remember oefore you told me about the antelopes. Is that it? OPS: Yes, those two antelopes come from Zambia. Every now and then I say I'm not going to buy any more art when I go to Africa, and then I'll run across a piece that is just so exquisite I can't do without it. And when I saw these that was such a piece... SW: Ooh, look at the, look at all the antlers. OPS: They are absolutely gorgeous. I just couldn't walk away without those. These two ladies are gorgeous ebony. When I loaned the art exhibit to Berea College, in the moving, this one was broken, and this summer when I went back to Senegal, I tried to find it, but like all art work, you can't duplicate it. So that this pair of exquisite women with bowls on their head, or carriers of water, can't be duplicated. The wood leg has been beautifully repaired. SW: Now, I notice in this picture of you, a very lovely picture, you have a material on that looks like gold pharaohs. OPS: The material is black satin with gold threads. SW: ...looks like it's from India? OPS- No it's Egypt, and it has the pharaohs woven in gold thread into black satin. It's all hand woven. SW: From Egypt? OPS- Yes, from Egypt, and when I bought it in Egypt, it was twenty-two dollars a yard, and when I came home, my sister and my mother, both of whom are in dressmaking business professionally, but my sister particularly, was so excited about it, she took it downtown to the big stores. That was in 1959, and it was selling for seventy-five dollars a yard then.﻿84 OPS: (cont.) I still have that dress, and I wear it occasionally to very elegant receptions. SW: This painting that you have up here, is this from Togo or Benin? OPS: No, that comes from French Africa, from the Congo, Leopoldville, you will see it now all over Africa, which is interesting, because the French paintings are seen in all West Africa. Now the traders move from one country to another. When I first saw this, it was only seen in the Congo and Zaire. Now you can see it in any of the West African nations because the traders moved from one place to another. You will even see it in New York City. I have eight of those on a wall hanging. I had one in red, and one in black. I still have the black one and someday I'll get 'em framed. But I don't have any more wall space for all this art. This wall hanging here is from Jerusalem. That one has S's all woven in it. See the S/s, and it's this gorgeous. SW: Hromm, oh my gosh, it's lovely! OPS: A beautiful piece, bought in 1958. It's never been hung, because I don't have any more wall space. I don't know where you hang anything. Someday I'll take something off the door maybe and hang it there, but I can't find the right wall to put this exquisite hanging on. I enjoy it. I know it's in the drawer, and it has _S all over it, and that's the reason it was purchased in the first place. The exquisite handwork is done by the Palestinian women. It was purchased in Damascus from the Palestinians in 1958. These are shawls from Guatemala, and a dress from India. SW: Are these fish or are they birds? OPS: This? That is a huge jade figure from Hong Kong, China. It is about a foot high and eight inches wide in green jade. I keep it there on my dresser just to enjoy. That copper lamp on the right side of my bed is an example of the fine art work in copper from Zambia. Again, I had gone to Zambia twice before—I could not afford it, because even in Zambia that lamp was about $125 for the base, and you know what it would cost us in this country in these days (1970s). The one on this side is from Zambia, and that one over there is king ebony wood from Nigeria, which was brought back in 1963. SW: You had lamps made out of them? OPS: Well, the Africans made them into lamps, and all I had to do was have it wired. The two up top are all ready for wiring. You see the little tip on the top of the head, that means they're ready for wiring, and you just take it and have it wired, and buy a shade. This gorgeous copper pot I had made into a lamp. But I love the delicacy and the beauty of it.﻿85 SW: In here I think we have some...two beautiful pieces... OPS: The wail hanging on the door is an unborn calf skin with a painted mask on it from Chad, West Africa. The wall hanging on this wall is a kente toga, woven in Ghana, a very fine weave, and represents what a wealthy man would wear. It happened to have been made by the weaver who did all the weaving for Ghana's President Nkrumah. He was his weaver. Today at the United Nations, one strip is worth $75, and I think this toga has twenty-three strips, so it has value. SW: This is very interesting. OPS: That is from Ghana and is a three-dimensional wall hanging made of painted tin. It's about two feet by a foot. It represents a tribal war dance; you see the people in the background and the dancers in the front; notice they're carrying their instruments of battle with them; and people like that, particularly the men. SW: You have an interesting hanging here. This—oh, my goodness... OPS: This wall hanging here comes from South Africa and is made by students of the Marjorie Pope Ellis School of Weaving in Sobant village in Pietermaritzburg, South Africa. Oh, I guess, it's four feet long and three feet wide. It pictures an African woman making food for her family with a baby on the back, which is so typical of African women. I love the colors—the background is brown, and her hat is deep brown, with her jewelry in different colors. Her baby is wrapped in white,, tied on her back. She wears a red dress and a black skirt, really very pretty, and a multicolored apron. I cherish that. This wall hanging in here is from Peru and is an unborn calf done by the Peruvians, and is a piece that I thoroughly enjoy and love. SW: Oh, these lamps are exquisite. OPS: These lamps are brass from Japan purchased there in '58. This is a twin pair, and I had the shades made in Boston. SW: Could you describe the shades? OPS: The shade is fiberglass with natural leaves. There are bamboo threads in the shade. It's custom made. Here I have three interesting paintings on the wall. One is by a Latin, and is the Holy Family, the Mother and Child, and it's the only painting where the feast of lights in Jewish culture is shown. SW: It's a menorah, that's right. OPS: The eight candles are in the background, which says that Jesus Christ was a Jew. It's a very meaningful Mother and Child, and I love it. The middle painting comes from Ramasus, in Egypt. It's an oil, three feet wide and three feet long; it represents the flight of the First Family from Jerusalem, Bethlehem, into Egypt, eight days after the birth of Christ. It was done by an Egyptian artist. This third wall rubbing﻿86 OPS: (cont.) comes from Thailand and represents the ancient art of stone rubbing in Thailand. I understand that in modern days they've stopped that because people abuse it, the privilege, so much. This painting up here is an original oil painted by a New England painter of Fujiyama mountains in Japan. After I came back from Japan in 1958, he decided that he had to paint that for me. He says I commissioned it; I don't remember it, but anyway, he painted it and wanted me to purchase it, and I did it because I was in love with Japan. SW: Could you talk about this vase and the tree? OPS: Yes, this tree in copper is the Tree of Life from Sweden and has six, nine, twelve candles on it, representing the twelve disciples. It has both the cross and the star of David representing the risen Christ and the Jewishness of Christ. It has symbols of light which represents, "I am the Light and the Way," and is used at holiday time, both the Jewish Passover and at Christmastime in our culture, the Christian culture. This vase is European, it was a gift of my mother, and has a gorgeous daffodil painted on it. The vase itself is deep brown with a yellow original painting on it, and when I had my first cousin's daughter living with me, going to school at NYU, she dropped my Rodin's "Iron Thinkers" on it and broke the top, and I've had it repaired but it wasn't the same after that. OPS: In this office which I maintain at home, a regular educational consultant's office, there are a couple of interesting things. Here we have a twentieth century wall mat of Americans of Negro lineage done by Louise Jefferson for The Friendship Press. It has on it distinguished Americans, many of them, but somewhere down here, under the name of W. C. Handy and Augusta Savage's sculpture, Fred R. Moore, the newspaper man, Miss Olivia Pearl Stokes is next to Todd Duncan and Deborah Partridge Wolfe, Benjamin Davis and James Dumpson. I think it's interesting that you see a little bit of history in your lifetime. Over here on the wall are citations that people have been gracious enough to give me, the National Council of Negro Women. There are half a dozen that aren't up there, but among those that are cherished most is this one from the Massachusetts Council of Churches which was given to me after fourteen years of service as a tribute for the contribution that they felt I made there. That was illuminated and framed in gold leaf at Harvard University as their gift to me. I appreciate it. This one from the Ministers Interfaith Association was given for my ecumenical, interracial, and cultural work. And down there I have one for the seven years I served as chairman of the Vocational Guidance and Workshop Center in Harlem, and several for my leadership with the National Council of Negro Women. There are one or two from the International Women's Year, the Committee on Social Justice of the National Association for Public and Continuing Adult Education. That organization has a commission on social justice, and﻿87 OPS: (cont.) I have a huge one that they gave me which isn't even up. I can't keep up with all... My ordination to the ministry papers are on that wall. I have several paintings in here by the outstanding black artist Lockwood. He did the original of the black Christ which hangs in my living room; this one is the black Mother and Child. Over here are two beautiful photographs done by my nineteen-year-old brother who was killed in the United States Army service. I value those really very much. And one of my hobbies is handcraft, and over there I have a lovely, intricate piece done in copper which I did myself...the Tree of Life. The rugs in the house I find I enjoy because the one in my bedroom is a yez from Persia. In the guest room is a Tree of Life from Ethoipia, and the one in the living room is a Chinese Oriental from China. They remind me of my travels. SW: Am I seeing in the bathroom your doctoral diploma? OPS: Yes, I didn't have anywhere in the house to put my doctoral diploma, so I just flung it on the wall in the bathroom. There also are two lovely Cushman paintings of babies, and people ask me if these are my children. Those are the Cushman paintings. SW: Dr. Stokes, in concluding the interview, I'd like you to share with us some of the aspirations that you have in terms of your future activities or some of the accomplishments you'd like to make. You've had a very rich and varied life, and being the vital type of person you are, I'm sure you have plans for the future. OPS: Well, only recently I've designed three books that I really would like to write and leave as a legacy. One of them deals with the educational role of the black church in the period from 1980s to 2000. The church has been historically very evangelical and I think has an opportunity and a challenge and an obligation to move into a more structured educational program to take the issues of life and the problems of life and relate the faith to them. The second book deals with the black woman in the church. We need to look at that in terms of the real force behind the whole religious and spiritual life of the black community. If it were not for the black woman, there would not be any black church. They have supported the hope that maintained our family lives, they have supported the institution of the church, they have launched our talented artists, and they have been the spiritual strength of our communities. So I'd like to do a historical and contemporary book on black women and the black church, and their support of their total survival struggle and their fight for freedom and justice and liberation in the American scene. The third book would deal with the educational implications of black theology, the whole liberation theology. We now have a number of able, distinguished theologians writing from the black perspective, and it would be very interesting to translate their theological concepts and their educational materials for use in churches that are predominantly black, and for churches that have other ethnic groups, white, or whatever, Chinese, to understand the black American. So that is one of my dreams.﻿88 OPS: (cont.) After completing those books, I'd like to just grow roses, and enjoy people, places, and nature. On a social note, I'd like to get myself down to Hawaii and five of its satellite islands, just for a month's rest. And a real trip one of these days into the South Pacific islands, Tahiti, Fiji, Tonga, just to live and enjoy the lifestyle and see those kinds of peoples. And it's strange, but only this week one of my friends who's just retired and is now seventy-two volunteered again for the Peace Corps, and said she was assigned to Tonga. And while she's there, I expect to go to Tonga in the South Pacific. But to sum it all up, I think I'd like to consummate my life by putting down my writings and my experiences and reflect and share this with those who care to read it. SW: Thank you very much. OPS: Thank you.﻿OLIVIA STOKES..