 CARA SCHUMAN: Today is July 30th, 2014. This is Cara Schuman with the Southern Oral History Program interviewing Lynn Shoemaker for the Moxie Proj ect’s Women, Activism and Leadership project. So Lynn, tell me a little bit about where you grew up and your family just to start off. LYNN SHOEMAKER: I would say mostly I lived in Raleigh or the Raleigh area. My father was transferred quite a few times in his position, which was selling heavy construction equipment and lasers, the kind that scan groceries when you go through. And so we did have to live [in] Greensboro for a short period of time and Randleman, North Carolina, but we were always in North Carolina. I was born in Cary, and we lived in Raleigh and for a brief period in high school, I lived in Knightdale and Wendell. CS: So having, so what was your family like? What was your dad and your mom like? LS: Both my parents had been married before; so we were a huge family. When Dad met Mom, he met her in a cafe. It was one of I think three jobs that she had at the time. She had six children from her previous marriage, and Dad had one daughter. Then when the two of them got married, they had me and then my sister Debbie and my brother Randy. So there were a lot of us. I have brothers and sisters old enough to be parents for me, my parents. Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 6 CS: Oh wow. So how was the dynamic of your family then? How did that work in your household with all of those kids? LS: Well, we were never half. We were all sisters and brothers. So that’s because of Mom and Dad. And that’s, that was their attitude; so that’s the one that we assumed. And we all still are together although we’ve not all ever been in the same place at the same time. We joke that the world will cease to end when we’re all together at once. Randy didn’t live but one day. So he is buried in a cemetery in Raleigh, and he’s at the foot of Mom. We lost Mom this past Christmas. CS: I’m sorry to hear that. So what did your Mom and Dad do as occupations? You said they both worked multiple jobs. Or your mom worked multiple jobs. LS: Well, Dad went to North Carolina State University for four years for engineering. But he wanted to be a pilot or a doctor or both. But when you marry a woman who has siX little people or let’s see, George, Carol, Becky, John, Tim and Ken, six. When you marry a woman with siX children, you have to work. And he chose that, and he never regretted doing that. So he did heavy construction. He owned his own business for a while. He worked independently, freelanced as a consultant in this area, down here at the beach. Coastal area is hard to break into for sales. And so a lot of the companies out of Raleigh would call him to go in with young guys to sort of break the ice because it had taken Daddy years and years and years to break into the southeastern North Carolina area. And he did that, freelanced, for a while. Mom as a single mother, she worked mostly waitressing, some cooking. That’s what Daddy, how he met her. He would go in to have her vegetable beef soup at a cafe where she was working. Every time she had it, he was in there. And then after she married Daddy she went to work for the North Carolina General Assembly as the hostess. So she helped Mr. Finch open the Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 7 cafeteria that’s in the Legislative Building right now. She helped design that, and they had the kitchen downstairs, and the dining room was upstairs. That has changed. I just recently went back in there and boy was it different, only because I am. I remember it being a huge, a fancy and it’s just a little tiny diner now. But that’s all she did for twenty-one years was working as a hostess for the General Assembly, which entailed a lot more than just taking care of the dining room and managing the staff there. It was, Mom was aware of the votes that were going on in the chambers, and if someone didn’t show up on the ﬂoor, she would go and get them and hustle them back down there. “You have to go vote.” They weren’t feeling well, she might send them chicken soup. Or if they played too hard the night before, she might send them over a Bloody Mary, I don’t know if it had alcohol in it or not. It might have just been fauX. But [she would] tell them, “You have to go and vote on Senate bill blah, blah, blah, and then you can go home.” But that’s what she did. And she had the opportunity to eavesdrop on conversations in the dining room too. So if there was something pertinent going on, she could share that with whomever needed to know what that was. She worked on a lot of women’s campaigns, and I’ll say for myself when I graduated from high school, from East Wake, which is in Knightdale before I could go to the Hayes-Barton swimming pool party for graduation—the drinking age was eighteen then--. And I was so excited because I could legally have, we had champagne, Dom Perignon on ice. One of the student’s fathers had bought it and it was legal. I had to go to the North Carolina Association of Educators building, the NCAE office and put together Equal Rights Amendment signs before I could go to my graduation party. CS: So was your mother active before she became part of the Assembly or was it after that? Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 8 LS: Oh she’s always been political. Both of her parents died before she was sixteen. She’s from Haw River. She grew up with the Scotts, Governor Bob Scott, and actually Meg Phipps lives in Mom’s old homestead. So she catapulted into politics with the Scott family, and my brother John who is fourth down, he was the executive director of the North Carolina Association of Educators. And when he was hired for the National Education Association as their executive director, they had a reception for him at NCAE, and he was standing in the front of the room talking about his politics, and his first experience was with the campaign for Kennedy, for John F. Kennedy, and he was talking about [how] he remembers very ViVidly nailing John F. Kennedy signs to the light poles near Finch’s Restaurant off of Peace Street, and my mother who at the time was eighty, seventy-nine or eighty, stood up in the back of the room and yelled, “John, don’t tell them that. It’s against the law to do that. You were not hanging them on phone poles.” The whole room erupted in laughter because it absolutely was. CS: So when did you really get political do you think? Had you always just been raised that way or--? LS: The [ﬁrst] poll I worked was in utero. And for as long as I can remember my mother took us to work the polls, and if school was in session on the day of a general election, we were out that day. And we stood at a poll from opening to close with little buckets—you had little tiny buckets—and we would hand out lit at the polls as the voters would go in, and usually it was pertaining school teachers and public education. Mom said that it was a lesson we would not learn in school, and it was a very important one. And she would deal with whatever the administration had to say about that. But we were going to go, and also people tend to accept materials from little people where they might reject it or ignore an adult, it’s really difﬁcult to ignore a little person standing there saying, “Will you please support public schools?” And so I Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 9 actually do that to my own daughter or I did. Now she is a voter and I’m having a hard time. She’s a teenager, making her do this because, maybe because I made her do it for so many years as a little person. And I’ve been trying to think, “Did I have a slack period?” and I did. I did. It was when I went to college. CS: So when did you go to college and that slack period began? LS: I started at Peace College in Raleigh in [19]82. It was a two-year school at that time. And it was really my ﬁrst time away from home, and I know I’ve lived in Raleigh, and I knew all that my friends, a lot of them were still there. And I was familiar with the area. My parents actually moved. They left Raleigh and came down here to Wilmington in 1982. So yay, there were no parents, and I just went hog wild. I did everything I had never been allowed to do at home, which has sort of shaped the way I parent, a little safer experience area, growth room. Let’s make our mistakes before college. But I was too busy, too too busy dating and the frat parties and sororities. And I actually took a business law class at Peace College on a Thursday night, which was difficult because that was what was referred to as ladies’ lock in at the bars in downtown Raleigh on Thursday nights or over by, on Hillsborough by State, and I couldn’t go to that because I was sitting in Colon Willoughby’s business law class looking out the window longingly listening to consumer law. And then he became the district attorney in Wake County. And I can’t remember when anyone else was district attorney until now. CS: So when did you think you became, like reentered the political arena? LS: Re-entry. CS: Because you graduated Peace when? LS: Re-entry happened when I started teaching. And teachers are not encouraged to be politically active, and I think that just irked me. I realized people were making decisions that Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 10 affected my classroom, my students, my curriculum and my profession, and I wasn’t involved in the process, and I can blame New Hanover County schools for part of that because they implemented—or maybe it was Jim Hunt. Jim Hunt implemented Total Quality Education, which was a take on the total quality management program, and it’s those who are most closely affected by decisions should be involved in decision making process, and I really, really liked that philosophy. And I started practicing it in my school. “Are you making a decision that’s affecting other people, and if so, did you involve those people in the process and implementing that in my classroom?” And then I thought our elected officials are not involving the classroom teachers. They’re still not involving teachers in curriculum and matters that affect their careers. In fact, it’s the only white collar profession that I know of where the people who are the most qualified are not involved in the decisions that are implemented into their professional arena. CS: So I just want to back up really quick. How did you get involved in teaching? How did you decide to become a teacher? LS: My brother John was a teacher. My brother Ken is a teacher. My mother taught art, substitute art. She was an artist. And so she was the substitute for the art teacher in elementary school for us and was very involved in our schools, and it was a noble profession. My mother just beamed when she talked about her children who are teachers. My sister, my younger sister, Deb, became a teacher. My paternal grandfather was a policeman and a fireman in High Point. So I would have to say the inﬂuence from both of my parents and their families were service, a service to our community. And my mother constantly said, “People can take away your dignity. They can strip you of your reputation. They can take away everything you own. But they can never take away what you’ve learned. And education is the most important thing in your life Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker ll besides your family. And if you live in my house and you eat at my table and sleep in my roof, you will be enrolled in school.” So it was not an option. It was a mandate. CS: So where do you could to get your teaching license after you graduated from Peace? LS: Well, Peace was only a two-year school. And from there I ran away to Florida with a boy. Now, huge mistake, and I make my mistakes really big. I didn’t just run away with him. We went to the courthouse and got married. I was twenty years old. My daughter is twenty years old now. I carmot--, she can’t pick clothes up off the ﬂoor. CS: I’m almost twenty so I can’t imagine. LS: And here I am in Florida and here I am married, legally, but I’m not. And I went to work in a restaurant. I had no idea how to wait tables or miX drinks or anything, but I bluffed my way through an interview, and it was, what was the name of it? Sante Fe. It was Mexican restaurant in Jacksonville, Florida. And we would go to the beach and drink Bahama Blues and sunbathe. I saw the B-52s there. They were nobody. They were just a little dive band. And then I would go wait tables and it was hard work. And from there we went to [whispers]—- we went to Boone and opened a vegetarian restaurant before its time. And that was an experience in Boone, which was, you couldn’t own a restaurant and not serve meat. I did have a restaurant, and I didn’t serve meat but the locals constantly complained, and the old guys would come in and want to know where their country ham was at breakfast. I couldn’t stand being in that environment, and I was already realizing I shouldn’t have gotten married and run off. And ( ) I think it’s because my mother got married so young, seventeen. Both her parents were dead by sixteen. She married the first guy that asked her to get married, which was a huge mistake. So here I am recapitulating Mom’s mistake. And I went to work for a radio station, WATA in Boone, where I learned a lot from a woman who owned it. It was a woman who owned the radio station, very Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 12 powerful in that community and very opinionated, and I think what I got from her was the ability to just say what I was thinking and not be afraid to speak up. And so I left Jim and came home. CS: Wow. LS: And, he and I are friends, and we still talk to each other, and his current wife is actually going to attend a political event for Clay Aiken that I am helping to host in Raleigh in August. But as far as he and I ever being married, I have sort of erased that from my past. It was a stepping stone, a learning lesson, or what is it they call the first marriage now, a starter marriage. It was my training marriage. And then when I got home, I settled down, and I can’t even remember what the question was that you asked. CS: I was just wondering, where you did your teacher education? LS: Oh, settled down, yes. I came back here and lived with my parents and had an out of body experience and realized, after you’ve been away from your parents, you really can’t move back home. I can’t do this. I’ve got to get out of this house. So I got a little apartment downtown, and I started working at a radio station, WBBS 100 doing trafﬁc, scheduling commercial times and making sure they didn’t conﬂict and very tedious, and I worked for a terrible man there, terrible. I had a resignation letter pretyped that I handed in once a month. I just changed the date. And he would never accept it. So I worked there for about a year, and at night I waited tables at Roy’s Riverboat Landing. And Roy Clifton was wonderful. He recently transcended from cancer. And Roy introduced me to Clay, and so he said he was a good boy, came from a good family. And I had this habit by then if a guy asked me out I would ﬂirt a little bit and say I’ll meet you somewhere, and then I never would go. I’d go home. I had a ritual, get home, wash my wait clothes, eat a little bit, tidy up, plan for the next day. I mean my life was just rote and it was Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 13 safe. And so I did the same thing to Clay. I told him I’ll come back. I’ve got to go home and shower and change. I’ve been waiting tables all night. And so I went home and switched into comfortable clothes and fixing my dinner, and I hear a knock, knock, knock on the door and there he is. He said, “My sister told me that this was your mode of operandum. So I thought I would come Visit you here.” And he was great. He fixed things. He fixed the shower for me. He did handy work. And his father and he co-owned Happy Wheels Carwash. And they were an awesome family. Frog, his father, has since transcended from cancer too. And his stepmother, Irene, lives in New York; so we never get to see her. But I worked at the carwash a little bit, cashiering and vacuuming out cars at Christmas. And went back to school and got my certificate at UNC-Wilmington in secondary education, English, and tutored at Roland Grice Middle School and then took a job as a--. Well, I did my student teaching at Lakeside Alternative, and no one was allowed to do that. And I had watched this incredible movie in a psychology class, the education psychology. And I thought that’s what I want to do, the kids who have fallen through the crack that people have given up on. Those are the ones I want to work with. And so I got permission to go to Lakeside. I had to get it from the chancellor at UNCW, the dean in Watson School of Education and the superintendent of New Hanover County Schools. And I had my first class there was a night class and I was the only woman in my classroom--I’m the teacher--the only woman in my classroom who has never been pregnant, never given birth. I just, I don’t have any children, and I’m the only one who has graduated high school. And these are all grown women. And I remember I had the giant cell phone. You’ve probably seen them in retro films, you’re so young. But it was huge. And my dad had told me, “Make sure you take your cell phone because you’re going on the that side of town and you want to be safe.” And naively I remember Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker l4 calling him and saying, “Dad there’s a police station. They have a satellite police station right here at the alternative high school.” And then I found out when they sounded the PA system, that was not a satellite. The police were waiting for a rumble between two gangs, and they, that’s when I first learned about gangs and that we had to shut the school down and send everybody home early because they would come in to get their gang members and gang members would go out. And this was a side of Wilmington I never knew existed. And meanwhile these women are going through my stuff. There was no personal space. They were going through my bags of materials for this writing workshop, and that was the night my teacher voice was born, because I had stepped out of my own body for a minute, and it boomed and I was going, “Who is that?” and it was me going, “Everyone sit down now!” And I took control of a group of women who were all older than I was. And they would come up to me and say, “Ms. Shoemaker, my daughter, her cheeks are really red and spotty and she has a fever, she’s hot, I can’t afford to take her to the doctor,” and I would call my mother because I had no idea how to take care of a baby or what was wrong with that baby. I would say Mom this is the— and she would say, “Hand the phone over to the mother.” So I’d hand my giant cell phone over to my student, and they would talk to mom for a while and then as I got further into teaching that class they would just come up and say, “Ms. Shoemaker, I need to speak to Ms. Polly, can I have your phone please?” So they would just call Mom and she would tell them what to do with their babies. That was, that was tough, tough, tough, toughjob. But I figured if I could do that, I could do anything. I mean those girls would come in with notes. They were adults; I’m calling them girls; they were women. They’d write their own excuse notes, because they’re still in high school. They’re required to have a note from home about an absence, and they would, their notes would Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 15 read I had an abortion yesterday, and it would be horribly misspelled. Or Norplant was very popular, late [19]80s, Norplant in their arms. All the girls were really proud, and I was a little embarrassed for them that they were bragging about it, but after a while and I got to know them I realized it was good that they were proud that they had birth control and that they all wanted it, because I had a girl in my class who was the first person in her family ever to graduate from high school and she had three children, three. And she was twenty, your age, and she had three children already. So I finished up there, and the principal Mary Anne Nunnelly, wonderful female school leader, and she asked me, would I go downstairs to the exceptional children’s program and teach a class for a teacher who had had a nervous breakdown and was institutionalized. CS: Encouraging. LS: Yes. I didn’t realize that that was probably a common occurrence in public school. I said, “Sure.” I was eager. I really wanted to start my profession. This would mean a steady paycheck too. No one explained to me that this classroom was all male and that they were all behaviorally and/or emotionally disabled or it was called handicapped back then. Now it’s IBS, soon to be BAD, which is probably something I wouldn’t want to go into the archives. But saying that they’re just bad, but I did studies on all those kids after I realized who they were and I got more involved in teaching, exceptional children that they had all been, they had all suffered in-utero trauma. It wasn’t just that they were poor or their parents were undereducated. They, it wasn’t socio-economic so much, well, I mean it is socio-economics. It was “boyfriend pushed the mother down a ﬂight of stairs when she was seven months pregnant and she gave birth in a coma.” Or the woman was beaten to near death and they removed her child by Caesarean. All of Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 16 these children that were in this classroom were traumatized before they were ever born, by men. They were traumatized by men. And I went to that classroom and I taught English all day long. It was writing. We had a writing group. We did journals. We read stories. We had discussions because that was all I knew how to teach. And I never had behavior problems with them until Mary Anne asked me to transfer to the first middle school program with students that I knew so they would be comfortable. And the system got in an argument, and this was the kick start into politics. The exceptional children’s program felt like the middle school should pay for all of the supplies, the desks and chairs, the materials, basic general materials that every child is entitled to have in North Carolina, and the school system said, “This is a new program. We don’t have the funding for it. And exceptional children’s programs should be paying for these kids.” So for one entire month, my first classroom, my classroom, I sat on the ﬂoor with my students because we didn’t have tables and chairs while the system administrators argued about whose budget should fund these materials. So I went, Ivolunteered to go to the polls. That was my first trip back to the polls without Mom. And I worked at Pine Valley Elementary School, and I remember an elderly teacher woman walking by me and she whacked me across the ankles and it hurt. Today somebody probably would file a lawsuit against her. And she said, “What are you doing out here?” And I said, “Well, I’m working for new school board members.” She said, “Teachers do not belong in politics. Your job is to teach the children, period.” And that was when I said, “Thank you for sharing your opinion, but I figure I can sit in the back seat while someone who doesn’t understand public education drives me to wherever they want to take me. Or I can climb over the seat and get behind the steering wheel and I take it where it’s supposed to go and that’s what I’m Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 17 doing. Would you like to see the slate I’m supporting?” She didn’t. She didn’t take it. But Judge, oh what was his name? I can see him. He said, “When I get ready to run for reelection I want you to work on my campaign.” And I did. CS: So you did political campaigns for a while after this. LS: I actually went to work for, Ibecame associate representative for the North Carolina Association of Educators with the local unit, the New Hanover County Association of Educators. And two elderly women teachers at Myrtle Grove Elementary School walked up to me in the hallway and said, “We have talked about it, and we have discussed who we want to be our representative and we’ve decided that we would like for you to be the association representative, Lynn”. And I was so honored. It was just huge. I was beaming and yes, of course. I didn’t realize that it was like pawning off the worst job. “Phew, yes the stupid new teacher just took the job and we’re yay. We’re out of it”. And I didn’t, no one told me that you just have to stuff stuff in the mailbox for the members and make sure that they, and really that’s not how it should be but that’s what it had become. So I started going to board meetings, and I started writing letters to the editor. And I initiated with Carolyn Williams who went on to become the chair or director of the North Carolina Professionals Teaching Standard. She and I were, we were a team. Her husband said I was going to get her fire, pushing her out there on the edge and shoving her off all the time. But we rebel roused. We had pickets outside the school board, and we filled up board rooms and meeting rooms with so many people the fire department was called. And I really liked doing that. It scared Carolyn, but I loved it, and if I couldn’t get teachers to show up because they were scared, I would get my family, my mother and dad would come and our neighbors, and the school board didn’t know if they taught or not. Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 18 Even the mayor made signs for me one time. They were professionally made too. We were not used to that. We usually had the hand painted poster board and he had this great waterproof boards made that said “Hear Both Sides.” It was when the school board didn’t want to hear the dismissal cases of probationary and initially licensed teachers. So if a teacher is recommended for dismissal or nonrenewal, it was over with. The board didn’t have to hear it. They just approved the recommendation of the superintendent who usually was just pushing on the recommendation from a principal. That’s why due process is so important, and it’s still under attack. And so we took these teachers, these probationary and a teacher assistant, and we had all these people out there and the media with these signs, “Hear Both Sides.” And wow, the school board actually did, and they reinstated all of them because they had been wrongly dismissed. And that was huge, because it actually shaped North Carolina statute, the public school law. It was rewritten to include evidentiary hearings and due process. CS: Wow. LS: And Carolyn and Iboth wrote the grievance policy for New Hanover County public schools too, and it became a model for the entire state, a way for teachers who were wrongfully dismissed to argue their cases or to grieve on multiple steps. CS: So is this when you first learned that you could have a statewide impact per se? LS: Yes. I knew that Al Boyd was the Uniserve director for NCAE, which is a field organizer, that he was down here and that he was getting ready to retire. And so I started reading books on how to interview because I’d been a teacher for seven years. And I was teacher of the year at my school, and I made it to the district. And I had attended so many summits, national and state, I was completely on a professional level compared to some of my colleagues. And I’m not demeaning them; it’s just that they were trapped in a classroom and didn’t push beyond that, Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 19 and it’s really easy to happen because they worked such long hours. But I had developed a system in the classroom over a few years that actually allowed me to have a little more time. It took a lot of time to develop the program, but then I had extra time once it was in place. And I spent it going to board meetings and education summits and national conventions, and I feel like I was catapulted into a position of leadership and that by helping teachers, that I could help students. And so I started reading all these books about interviewing and preparing for the call. I remember I had a conference interview with some of the staff members who were out in the field, and I had made these index cards, and I categorized them of all the potential questions according to these books that they might ask, and I had them taped on the front of my kitchen cabinets, and Marley had a ballet recital that night. She was four. So I had her daddy Clay take her out for my interview, during my interview, so I could be in a quiet place, following all the tips from these books that I had been plowing through. Not one question that I had prepared for was asked, not one. Totally off the wall questions. And I didn’t realize that actually was in preparation of the job because that’s what being a Uniserve is, turning on a dime. You pick up the phone and this person needs to talk to you about how to write a grievance. You put it down; the phone rings again. This person is being escorted off campus by a police officer for whatever reason. The whole day, you never know when the phone rings what it’s going to be. But I did get the job. I had to go through multiple interview processes to get it. And I was actually placed here in New Hanover County. So I served Sampson, Duplin, Fender and New Hanover County school systems. And I also worked for NCAE, and I also worked for NBA during that same time. And part of that was teaching teachers how to organize politically. We formed a political action committee, and I collected more money than even the state president Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 20 from my local. From my little area, I collected more political action funds than the state president did from hers. I think people paid me to go away. CS: That’s what they say. Yeah, to make them pay you to shut up. LS: Are you going to slip me money now? CS: So after, so how long did you continue in this position and where did you go on after this? LS: I only worked in the job for three years. And it’s a hardjob. It’s a really hard job. It was a hundred hours a week. It was constant. The number of atrocities, abuses against teachers and teacher assistants and support personnel, people wouldn’t believe. They would not believe the stories. And if you feel passionate about it, and you realize these people are scared to death they’re going to lose their livelihood and in areas like Fender and Duplin and Sampson, some of these women and it is mostly women, they are the primary breadwinner in their family. They can’t afford to lose their job. So a hundred hours a week and that level of stress, three years, Marley is going into second grade, and I realized that I’m never with her and parenting was really important. So Iput in my resignation exactly on the date three years after I started. CS: Where did you go onto after that? LS: I was a stay at home mommy, but I volunteered a lot. I’m still doing that. Ivolunteer sixty hours a week. And I also did a little bit of substitute teaching, and I really liked that part, getting back into the classroom because I loved working with my young people. I worked with middle school students. And they are a different animal, and then I was offered a job in South Carolina, and I took that, but it was, there were a lot of nasty politics involved in that position, and South Carolina didn’t have payroll deduction, so it was mayhem. Every year you start over, sort of like Jacksonville, North Carolina. But in Jacksonville it’s because everyone is deployed or Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 21 reassigned or restationed and you get a whole new crop of teachers in and you have to go in and solicit memberships. So payroll deduction doesn’t really work there. But in South, the whole state of South Carolina, you had to collect monthly payments. So it was almost like being in a collection agency. And so I came, it was a long drive too, a really long drive because every day I got up and drove into the Myrtle Beach area from Wilmington. And I just sort of resigned from that position and continued with volunteering and being actively involved in the schools and the community. And I got a call from the principal, the secretary actually. It was the secretary at Myrtle Grove Middle School, my old school, and she said, “I have a class. It’s the last quarter.” It was when they were on quarter sessions. “The kids have chewed up and eaten alive at least a dozen substitute teachers including a seasoned veteran retired teacher. They leave in tears. They haven’t done any of their writing portfolio. We need you.” That was bittersweet, mixed feelings about it, especially given that rave review. CS: Sounds like a battle. LS: So I show up and she walks me down to the classroom; Peggy was her name. Peggy opens the door, Peggy Teague and I look in and I’m taking it in the scope of the room. The teacher’s desk is pushed up as close as it can get to the door near the telephone where you call for emergencies to the office. And there’s a podium in the front of the classroom with a stool where the teacher sits and rows of desks as far apart from one another as humanly possible to still fit in that classroom. And Peggy shows me a stack three feet high of worksheets that they’ve been doing. And they haven’t been graded. I said, “You know what?” I said, “You know what I will. I’ll take this job.” And I signed all the paperwork and I start the next day. Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 22 So I came back that evening and I rearranged the classroom in two groups of four or five so so they could see the front of the room. I got rid of the podium. And I moved the teacher’s desk as far away from the door as I could get it in the back of the room so it wasn’t the focal point. And the next day I met my students outside of the door, and they walked in grimIing, ready to enjoy rumIing off another substitute teacher. And they were confused. “We can sit anywhere we want to.” I said, “Yeah. Why not? We’re going to work in groups.” “We’re going to get to talk to each other?” “Of course we’re going to get to talk to each other. How else are we going to discuss what we’re reading and we’re writing.” So now they’re all excited. And I had this one group of ﬁve in the back of the room where I knew that my worst students would congregate and it was five boys. And they lived up to my expectations. They skipped school. They went up to Wal-Mart at Monkey Junction, and I was constantly chasing those boys down. But I was glad to know who they were and who I was going to have to watch. We raced in nine weeks through four genres of writing doing self-editing, peer editing, teacher editing. And completed their portfolios so they could go on to high school, and every student did that and I was really proud of them. But what they learned is that writing is fun. So on the last week of school when they were doing field day outside, my students wanted to know if they could come into my class to work on their papers or a story they were writing, which makes an English teacher’s heart swell ten times bigger than normal because they wanted to finish their stories before they went home for the summer. And they were using these third world country processor, portable processors. That was high tech back then. And so they loved the technology and I left. I went to the office, and by then they knew who I was. The principal said there was no need for me to hand in a resume, I would not be getting a job. And it was because as a Uniserve Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 23 director a lot of my cases were here at home because people knew me and because I knew them and I lived here, I really fought hard for them. So out of 300 cases in three years I only lost two. I was, as the administrators would say, “Oh did you get an epistle from Lynn today about blah, blah, blah.” I just threw that in the trashcan. I wasn’t going to bother, I don’t have time to read three pages. And the superintendent here was not agreeable. He didn’t negotiate. He said to me one time, “If I was God for a day. . and that was before he was superintendent and had I known that was a forewaming because when he became superintendent he was god. And so I had to communicate a lot with the elected board of education, and that’s probably where I really began to realize the inﬂuence of electing, training and continually having conversations with elected officials. CS: So I’m wondering, what volunteer work were you talking about that you did? LS: Besides working in the schools and the regular things, assisting in a classroom and working on senior projects, I also worked with the domestic Violence shelter and services. I helped with their largest annual fundraiser, which is a fashion show slash auction, dinner and I pulled in the unions. I actually got the communication workers, the Wilmington police department’s police officers association and the Wilmington Firefighters Association involved with the New Hanover County Association of Educators in the domestic Violence shelter program. So the police and the firemen serve, they actually would serve the dinner and collect the plates. The teachers association did an outreach education program in the schools, right before the holidays we would do it, Christmas when children were going home and some of them might be in domestic situations. We had them design logos, and so there was a big logo contest and whoever won, their logo would be on all of the spring invitations for the fundraisers that went out and the media ads, and it was a child’s piece of work. I don’t think they do that piece Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 24 anymore. And the police and the firemen no longer serve. They do a really wonderful piece in the fashion show. It’s sort of our Chippendale. And then I worked with the literacy council for a little while. What do I not volunteer for? I was on the board of directors for the dance cooperative, which the only dance studio that we have in town that provides scholarships for students who are at risk or lower socioeconomic and space for dancers who otherwise couldn’t afford to perform. And we now actually participate in Dance-A-Lorus, and so the dance coop has the largest attended Cucalorus event every year. It’s where the film makers coordinate with choreographers and dancers to create pieces around the same theme. And then of course, in 2004 I took on the Kerry-Edwards race, which turned out to be a satellite for southeastem North Carolina for a national campaign, had 700 active volunteers. And the real satellite was in Fayetteville, but they wouldn’t have people show up. They couldn’t generate the volunteers that we had and I’m not even sure. Some of us who worked on that campaign to gether still think about and wonder, what were the dynamics that came to gether that year that made that such a success. Seven hundred volunteers is awesome. So Fayetteville started sending us their call sheets. So we were making a thousand calls a night, and we were hitting 2000 doors a weekend. We had kids on skateboards going down Water Street with voter registration forms. And our goal was 100 new registrations a day. We had happy hour registrations at the bars downtown. It was just incredible. We think part of it was the building. We were in Jacoby Warehouse, which is an old building with exposed bricks and pipes. And the other part I think was leadership was allowed to, here I am I’m applying that Total Quality Education that I was trained in and involving those who were most closely affected and effective leadership teams. So people were allowed to Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 25 become involved at as they wanted to and to drop out as they needed to. So it was constantly ﬂowing. And we had fun. Whoever the leader was in each connnittee. They would emerge. It was just a matter of identifying them and then getting out of their way. So I felt like my job was whatever you needed, you had a great idea you could come to me and say, “This is what I want to do . . and I would say, “Well, what do I need to give you? What do I need to do to make that happen for you?” and they would tell me, and then I would figure out how we could make that happen. I had a cookie jar that said on the desk in Jacoby Warehouse—everyone who came in saw it. “Give green to make North Carolina blue” and people did. It was completely grassroots. Kerry-Edwards didn’t handpick us and say, “We’re going to hire you to do this.” We just did it. And then they came and realized what we had done, and that’s when they started asking us will you do this, will you do that for us. And the party actually became interested in making that their headquarters. But the party in some ways impeded what we could do because they had regulations and protocol and it tied our hands. So we said no, which caused a little bit of friction. CS: So when did you get involved with women’s issues specifically since you got, you’ve been involved in a lot of boards? LS: Seventh grade. Seventh grade. My brother John brought me a 1976 Susan B. Anthony coin in a medallion necklace, which he had bought from a vendor at a National Education Association convention. And in seventh grade I interested in clothes, and not too long before I could date and grades mostly. And would I ever be able to sleep in because my mother made us get up, early bird catches the worm. And I wondered who Susan B. Anthony was, and as I got into that she sort of--I still have that necklace--realizing that women didn’t have the same rights as representation that men did, and so it’s creeping into the back of my head. And I think Mom protected us from that. At the same time she was railing against the lack of parity, she was Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 26 telling us we could be and do whatever we wanted to. So it didn’t occur to us that we really couldn’t. I mean we had lots of barriers we would have to break through to where we wanted to go and be and do, but she left that part out. We learned that part on our own. So teaching of course, naturally, it’s mostly women because for a long time, you became a nurse or a teacher. And those were your choices or a homemaker. So I worked with a lot of women, and it was often principals that we had to deal with were men. So that was part of my becoming involved with helping women and realizing that women didn’t necessarily have the— well, not necessarily. We just did not have the same rights. Then I’m going to say when social media kicked in and I was allowed to speak to a larger venue at one time about my feelings about women and women’s rights. I didn’t realize that some women who were already doing things were paying attention. Michelle Hoke had, it was North Carolina Women’s Caucus. And she called and asked if I could meet her at Indochine up the street here, and we met here in the little garden area, and she told me about her little organization and asked would Ibe on her board and I was of course ﬂattered. I didn’t realize it was bipartisan, which was difficult for me. I had to learn how to not be partisan and after forty years of being really partisan in my household, my family, my rearing; it was difficult. But I wanted to do more, to be more involved, and I decided NOW, the National Organization for Women, that would be what I would do because we weren’t very active here. So I reached out to Raleigh online to ask who was the president here, the chapter, how could I get involved, and I didn’t hear from anybody for a long, long time. And in the meanwhile, oh and I say when I was in Boone with the restaurant they boycotted, they boycotted Dominoes Pizza, and to this day I have not eaten a Dominoes Pizza. And that was in [19]83. CS: Why did they boycott Dominoes? Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 27 LS: Because Dominoes provided phone banks during the day to anti-choice organizations to call for candidates, but when women organizations or organizations that supported legal and safe abortions asked for the same accommodations, they were denied. And they asked Dominoes to speak out, speak you’re taking a position here. You’re taking an anti- choice position. They refused to take a position. They yellow-bellied no. We just don’t have enough space, and we’ve already made this commitment and so NOW said, “That’s it. We will not, women will not buy your pizza,” and they never lifted it. But while I’m waiting for NOW to get in touch with me down here, BeV Perdue’s office- she was governor and I had worked on her race, Women for BeV Perdue. Her assistant admin called and said BeV wanted to appoint me to the North Carolina Council for women. Am I saying that right? CS: Yeah. LS: It’s the state council. CS: Council, yeah. LS: And of course I was ﬂattered, and I went to that first meeting, and it was a great, great group of women. They were really smart women and no board room shenanigans. There would be no behind the scenes lobbying or gossiping. It was all out there on the table. And Marley was about to turn sixteen, and I was I taking her to France. I was in graduate school and something else to fill my time. And I was doing the book. I was writing a book on women writers in Paris, American women writers in Paris. And I needed to go and see these places where they had lived and sort of tracked their lives and I was taking Marley and the Council—I remember they gave me a huge share of grant applications for displaced homemakers and domestic Violence shelters across the state, and before I could leave for France I had to go Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 28 through every one of these applications and look at what they were requesting, what services they offered, any questions or suggestions and tab them. I’m shipping this huge box to BeV’s office the night before I left for France with all these sticky notes out of them. That was really heart wrenching, reading about the services. When I left the Council it was only because I found my peeps or they found me. I got a call asking me, from Carol Till the executive director of Lillian’s List, [asking] would I be on their board, their political action board. And at the time it was pro-choice Democratic women, and it was like, “Yes. I don’t have to guard my position. I can just speak freely, wide open.” Little did I know that these really were my sisters. This is the best group of women I’ve ever worked with, not to diminish the Council. The Council was very formal though and Lillian’s List is “roll up your sleeves and jump right smack in the middle of it, get the job done”. You don’t have to worry about the politics part of it, that the governor may be attached to something that you say to the media that is not her position. You just don’t have to be guarded. And so NOW called me right after I went on the board for Lillian’s List and it was like “I’m sorry. I have something to do now.” And I’m starting my fourth year now on the board. And I had a trailblazer event down here. I didn’t realize I was auditioning for Lillian’s List. I didn’t find out that that’s how they pick you. You have to raise some money and show commitment, which is understandable. And now I am co-chairing the candidates committee for half of Raleigh down east with Dr. Anne Newman who does the other side of Raleigh, west. Anne of the west and Lynn of the east, like the witches coven. And I love it. The idea, I just told Carol this. What we do at Lillian’s List is the only thing that we can do that will change North Carolina for women and that’s going into these communities, talking, networking with the women who are there, identifying who they perceive or see as their leaders, talking to these Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 29 women, identifying which one is the one, the best one, recruiting her and training her and helping her win that office. And when the action fund started, see I get goose bumps talking about it -- Action Fund --- because I realized anything can happen. When Deb Ross took on this position as counsel for the transportation, she left a huge void and it dawned on me, “We’ve got to have women waiting in the wings who are already trained, ready to step up.” And this game of shifting to, or it’s not really a game. It’s strategic. If someone leaves the Senate, then we take that House seat and move her up because it’s easier at this point for women in North Carolina to elect a House of Representative than a senator. Look at the disparity in the Senate, but we’re doing it. And if all of our women win this time and this time we only put our eggs in the tier one baskets. We have completely zoned in and focused on the races we know we can take. And if all of our women win, then we diminish the super majority, veto majority. CS: Sorry, I work there so it, I’m like also ( ) like, “Oh my god, Lillian’s List.” LS: It’s great, isn’t it? CS: It really is. I don’t think I’ve ever worked for any—I’m not even supposed, this isn’t even my interview. So I can’t— LS: No, I love the young women who are starting to get involved in Lillian’s List. So the intemships are incredible. Elizabeth Reddenbaugh, who is rumIing for Senate 9 seat, Erin Kennedy Rogers is her campaign manager. And she was an intern at Lillian’s List and I met—I was actually recruiting a young woman, Carter Jewel, who had been an officer in the New Hanover County Democratic Party, to be an intern. She was just graduating. She said, “No, I’ve got a job at Carter and Carter, in their law offices, and I really want that experience.” She was kind of tired. She’d been doing a lot for a long time, and just to be able to stay at home and work a nine to fiver was kind of appealing. And she said, “Well, let me introduce you to my friend Interview number U-1060 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Shoemaker 30 Erin.” So I started yakking it up with Erin and Erin went up there and she was a fabulous intern. But to have her come back home and be the campaign manager for one of our women who’s rumIing for Senate is, that’s an awesome set up for Lillian’s List. It’s very, very strategic, and I don’t think anyone else in the entire state is doing what we’re doing. And, now we are. We are providing campaign managers. We are a full service salon. We train campaign managers. We make sure they’re ready to be hired. We pick the right one out for you as a candidate. We train you. We write you a big fat check or a couple of them. CS: Well, I’ve asked pretty much all of my questions and we have been talking for over an hour, so do you have anything else that I didn’t ask you that you’d like to talk about for your history? LS: The only thing I’ll say and maybe I was this way with my mother, Marley is twenty, my daughter, and I would really like to pass the baton to her sometime soon, and I’m really concerned about her age group, which is your age group. I realize you all are issue people and not partisan so much as my generation is. And I get that. And I’m actually starting to lean in that direction. So I’m glad that Lillian’s List is now not Democratic but progressive women. Progressive women, your party doesn’t really matter if you’re supporting the same issues that support all women. But I just really would like to see more young women getting involved and you all are starting to and some of you are probably like the rest of us at Lillian’s List. We say we’re not normal. There’s something wrong with us. We have to remind ourselves. We are not normal. We’re not the average voice out there. We’re political junkies. But I wish we had more young women who are political junkies. CS: Okay. Thank you so much for sharing your history with us. It was wonderful. LS: Thank you...