 Tyler Moﬁeld: This is Tyler Moﬁeld interviewing Tonya Jisa at the Pacifica Common House in Carrboro, North Carolina on June 4th, 2012. We will be discussing Tonya's life story, her work as a social worker and her current project Benevolence Farms. So you grew up in Ohio right? Tonya Iisa: I did. TM: Can you tell me a little bit about your childhood? T]: Yes. I was born in 1967 in Mansfield, Ohio, which is right in the middle of the state about an hour north of Columbus, which is the capital. I was the last of three children, grew up in a middle-class family, and my town was pretty typical of a Midwestern medium sized town in Ohio. I went to this--I lived in the same house for the first eighteen years of my life until I left for college. I went to school with the same people, you know; a lot of my friends and neighbors did the same thing. It was a very, you know, it felt like a very stable place to be. Tonya Iisa My mom did several things growing up. She was a substitute teacher for many years early on and then she carried mail for a few years. And then once my dad started his own business of real estate appraisal she started to work for him so they both were around the house a lot. My dad worked from home, had a home ofﬁce and so was there all the time [laughs]. And in fact, you know, we as a kids had to be real quiet because dad was always on the phone or, you know, whatever. But we had a really nice, great big side yard and always had really more than what we needed growing up. My dad always got us the latest greatest thing. We were the house with the trampoline, the first VCR, and the first Atari game, which was, you know, one of the ﬁrst Video games way back when. And we had a pinball machine, you know, all, you know. Each year for Christmas he'd get us something really amazing and so we had all these great sort of gadgets and things. So you know I grew up very fortunate. And it was always expected that we were going to college. It wasn't even a question that that was the plan. It was just a matter of where. And I guess I'll just also talk a little bit about Mansfield, Ohio in that it was--. So we had two public high schools and a couple ofprivate high schools. There was a Catholic high school and a Christian high school as well, and I went to one of the public high schools. It was probably ﬁfty-fifty black and white, not very many other cultures represented. A few Latino families, but really it was mostly black people and white people. And so, and we had had, when I was growing up, my parents my mom signed us up for they called it--oh what did they call that program? [Pause] I can't remember but there was a program where we would have a child that would come from a quote-on-quote "inner-city” and stay with us for, I don't know, maybe a couple of weeks in the summer time. And I don't even know how Tonya Iisa many times we did this but I remember speciﬁcally, and maybe because we talked about him the most, is a kid that we had. I think that he was from like Cleveland, Ohio which is up by Lake Erie. He was a black kid. And he came and stayed with us and we thought he was amazing and wonderful and we just had a great time. And, you know, we didn't think a whole lot of it. So I, you know, grew up and got into high school and nothing was, dating was never really talked about in our house, you know, nothing really like that. But we just didn't talk anything really personal with, you know, growing up. My parents, we were, we did our own thing. But when I got to high school and started to date and chose to date some black boys, my father blew up, you know. Like he [5:00], that was not cool with him [laughs]. And I, you know, I don't know if I was surprised but it just, you know, I was just like, "Really?" Like really? Because you know they were such great parents and really open-minded in a lot of respects. So anyway that was just sort of a piece ofgrowing up in Mansfield. And I think I mentioned this to you before but, you know, I wasn't the only person who was dating a person of another race in my high school. And it really stirred up a lot of trouble. The principal got involved and the teachers would try and, you know, interfere, you know, "What are you doing?" And, "This isn't such a good idea." And we were all like, "Are you kidding?" Like, you know, "What's wrong with this?" And so, I, you know, I guess you could call it rebellious in some way. But I really, you know, I just, it didn't seem like there was anything wrong with it at that time. I, you know, of course I still feel that same way and I'm kind of happy that I sort of went that route and challenged those beliefs of my family growing up and my neighbors and, you know, whoever else didn't agree with it and so. Tonya Iisa So yeah, like I said I grew up in the same house and until I went to college. Left Mansﬁeld, Ohio for Athens, Ohio and went to college at Ohio University in Athens, Ohio. TM: Was it a big difference when you went to college? Like did you get super homesick? T]: Oh no [both laugh]! No. I did not get homesick. I mean I was nervous, I certainly was nervous to leave home, you know, just because I didn't know what to expect. And my mom jokes still that when they were driving me to college, you know, I was sighing in the back seat. I just kept going [sharp intake and long outtake of breath, TM laughs], you know? Like what the hell am I doing, you know? But once I got there and got settled in and started to meet people and got to go to the bar, you know, I started to do what you do, well, what I did in college [TM laughs]. You know it got real easy and real fun real fast. I really loved college. And part of the reason why I chose Ohio University was that my dad had gone there and gotten kicked out and so I thought, you know [both laugh], "Maybe I'll have some leeway here if I mess up." I mean what can they say? The other, I mean, there was zero academic thought behind it. As it turns out it was a great school and I got a good education but, you know, I had very little guidance. My parents didn't care very much about grades or anything like that. And they sort of cared that we went to school but they knew that we were skipping school all the time too. And as long as I was passing I guess it was fine. And you know had the grades good enough to get into college. But to be honest the other reason I chose that school was that there was a cute guy that I had gone to high school with [both laugh] who, you know, had went there the year before. And I'm like, "Alright! I get to see Mark and my dad got kicked out. So, you Tonya Iisa know, I'm in good shape." So that was about the extent of my decision-making at that point about college, so. TM: What did you study there? T]: I, I wasn't sure what to study and it took me a while. I don't know that I started out in social work but I started to take a lot of social work classes and some sociology. But I didn't know that I wanted to commit to social work. It wasn't, I really just wasn't sure. I didn't want to be a counselor or a therapist or anything like that and that's what it seemed like a lot of the social workers, you know, that was the path that they were thinking they were going to take. So I ended up getting a general, a bachelor in general studies which was essentially that I made up my own degree. I talked to an advisor and I said, "Here are my interests." And so we added some education and some psychology and social work and sociology and political science and we called it a concentration in behavioral studies I think, or behavioral sciences. But I just got a general studies degree, which I'm really happy that I went that route because, you know, I didn't know what I was doing or what I wanted to do for the rest of my life. So I felt like I got a really great and well-rounded education with a lot of different perspectives and things like that. And I got to take a lot of really awesome interesting courses, so. TM: What made you decide to go back and get your social work degree? T]: So after college I moved to Columbus, Ohio, which is the capital of Ohio and [10:00] started to apply for jobs, primarily social-worky kinds ofjobs; like group homes and probably applied to be a probation ofﬁcer, different things like that. And I got a job at the Franklin County Juvenile Detention Center in downtown Columbus. And on the third shift, which wasn't very appealing, but I thought, you know, it seemed like a pretty good job Tonya Iisa and had a pretty good salary attached to it. The work itself seemed very interesting, to get to work with these kids who are coming into juvenile detention. So I worked as the, they called us the 'receiving and release coordinators.’ So when kids were brought in by the police, I was one of the first people that they saw and I would find out, sort of you know, who their parents or their guardians were and call their parents up and let them know that they were in juvenile detention. And if they were going to be staying, we would shower them through and orient them to the facility and all that kind of stuff. And so I learned a lot, I saw a lot at the juvenile detention center and decided that, you know, this was an interesting population and that maybe it would be helpful to catch these kids before they got to juvenile detention somehow. You know, starting to think about why they were ending up in juvenile detention. So I thought, you know, maybe I would go back to school and that's what I would do, get a master's in social work and do school social work and try and work with some ofthese kids on the front end before they made it to juvenile detention. So I was there for, I worked there for about three years and went back to school at Washington University in St. Louis to get my master's to do school social work. TM: So how did you end up in North Carolina? T]: Um, that's a great question [TM chuckles]. So after, so I went to school in St. Louis and when I got there and started to take classes and took a practicum in a high school--one of my social work practicums was high school--and realized how my hands were going to be tied as far as the kind of work and the kind of interventions that you can do with kids while they're still in high school. You know, we wanted to talk about condoms and birth control and safer sex and, you know, all these kinds of things and there were just a lot of Tonya Iisa obstacles to doing that. We got some of that through but it was just really challenging and I just didn't feel like I was going to be effective enough. So another job I had while I was in graduate school, I ended up getting a part time job, and ended up doing a practicum too, was in reproductive health services and it was an abortion clinic in St. Louis. That really got me into women's issues and women's health issues and feminism and things like that. So I started to take classes more along the lines of women's studies and women's issues rather than sort of children and adolescents. So finished graduate school and went to Atlanta, Georgia from there, partially because I went to--well just before I left for graduate school I came out of the closet. I had been sort of exploring my sexual identity and sexual orientation just previous to leaving Columbus, Ohio and when I got to St. Louis it was a good opportunity to say, you know, I'm gay, and, you know, just kind of start over there. And so when I was deciding about where to go next, Atlanta had a lot gay people and a lot of black people and I liked both of those things [both laugh]. I was like, you know, again, you know like the career didn't really like, I was not thinking very strategically. You know, I was thinking much more from emotionally or from the heart, I think. But I decided to go to Atlanta because of that and it was a great decision. I didn't know it at the time but—-. So I got to Atlanta and worked with addicted pregnant women. That was the ﬁrst job I got in Atlanta through a federal [15:00] grant that they were doing at Grady Hospital, which is the public hospital in Atlanta, downtown Atlanta. And I worked with addicted pregnant women and their families primarily. And the goal of that program was healthy babies, essentially. The focus was on the mother not abandoning the baby in the hospital because she was addicted and, you know, kind of deliver and disappeared. And so we were 10 Tonya Iisa trying to work with her to get some stability, get some housing, you know, think about recovery from addiction, those kinds of things. And also provide other services to her and her family. And it was a great job; I just, I learned a whole lot from these women and these families. And we did a lot ofthe work in the homes and so it was the first time I had really seen and experienced public housing and things like that, the projects. And it was really eye-opening and just helpful for me to broaden my View of the world. And so worked there for about ﬁve years and then took another job working with-- again, kind of, you know, this was great. It was a good job I learned a lot, but what can I do, you know, I kept thinking about prevention. So, you know, what if I worked in family planning clinics rather than, you know, or with family planning in some form or fashion, rather than you know, when the--because a lot of these women didn't want to be pregnant, you know. It was not their intention to have gotten pregnant. But they couldn't stay, either they couldn't access birth control or they didn't, you know, adhere to their birth control because of their disease of addiction and all that kind of stuff. So anyway, I got this other job working for a title-ten training center in Atlanta. And so we provided continuing education and information to, primarily to nurses, nurse practitioners and family planning health clinics across the southeast. I really enjoyed that job, learned a lot. And during that time I met my partner, Rhonda. And once we got together I started thinking about leaving Atlanta, you know. It's just such a huge city and the public transportation wasn't great and I was really committed to using public transportation. And sort of, you know, I started to get a lot into sustainability and thinking about the bigger environment, you know again from the feminist point of View that I had learned, you know everything is connected and all that kind of stuff. And so I started to think about the 11 Tonya Iisa environment a lot more and personal is political and all this kind of stuff. And so I just kind of started to think about, you know, what is next and leaving Atlanta. And in 2005, well [something drops] oops! Well I started to research where we could go or where I wanted to go and started to look at co-housing communities across the country and where they were and sort of what they were about and what they offered. And then also just sort of thinking about what size of a place we wanted to live, and again, you know, nothing about a career move, but more about quality of life and what our interests were. So we were really thinking a lot about, you know, sort of college towns, or towns that have access to universities because there is a lot of cultural opportunities and art and all that kind of stuff usually, you know, when there's a college. And realized that there was a co-housing community starting up in Carrboro, North Carolina and that Duke University was here and UNC was here and the Center for Documentary Studies was here. And by that time we had also gotten interested in local food and farming. There was a co-housing community in Atlanta that started to do some urban farming kind of things and I loved to cook and work with fresh food and all that kind of stuff. So we saw that there was a very strong community around food and farming too. So we chose [2 0:00] to move to Carrboro, North Carolina, or actually we moved to Durham because the co-housing community, Pacifica, wasn't done yet. But we were ready to go. We had already made our decision. We said, "Let's just go on and get up there. We both got jobs with Duke and moved to Durham in 2 005, so. TM: I'm not familiar with what co-housing is. Could you speak a little bit about that? T]: Yes. So co-housing is, it's an intentional community usually based on some founding principals. So for Pacifica, our founding principals are community, diversity, 12 Tonya Iisa affordability, and sustainability. And so whoever sort of moves here, hopefully, we don't require anything. You don't have to sign your name on any of this but we are committed to those principles of living in community sustainably, affordably and valuing diversity kind of things. And most co-housing communities, you know, at the very least they are about, you know, living in community and sustain, you know, a lot of them are like green and sustainable. And so we helped to, we put in some sweat equity when the builders were building the property or the housing and things, you know [clears throat]. We would come and like install the playground and help install the gardens and help install some of the landscaping and help do some of the things that we could do to help build the program, or build the community ourselves. And then we, we're just more dependent upon each other. Kind of like old-timey neighbors. We actually borrow eggs from each other, you know. We know each other, we know each other's names. We borrow things. We share things. We have shared meals a couple times a month. And then we have a home-owner's association but the decision- making is consensus decision-making. So we talk and talk and talk and try and get everybody together to agree rather than, you know, well ﬁfty-one percent say it's ok so we're going to go with this route. So it's like, no we want as many people as possible to really agree with what we decide to do here before we move forward with decision which can be time-consuming and a little frustrating sometimes but I like it. I really like it and feel strongly about, you know, my commitment to this community and being a good neighbor and being a good steward of our land and our homes and those kinds of things. So yeah that's co-housing. From my perspective anyway. 13 Tonya Iisa TM: So how did Benevolence Farms start? I read that you attended the Carolina Farm Stewardship Association Conference in 2005. Was that the beginning? T]: Yeah pretty much. So when we got up here and we got connected with the farming community and started to go to the farmer's markets, I just really felt like these are my people. I love these folks and they're doing really awesome work. And I had taken this job at Duke, which was a great job but it was not social work, speciﬁcally. I kind of was able to meander through and get some social work into the job. But it essentially was not a social work job. So I was thinking, you know, where to go next and what do I want to do next in my career? And when I started to hang out with these farmers and learned more about preserving farmland and local food and all that stuff I really was thinking how can I, I want to do this as part of my career. You know, I want to work with women and doing social work but I also want to tie this in somehow. And this was about the time too that, you know, that the New York Times was saying, you know, the US is imprisoning one in 100 people. You know, that we're the highest, we imprison more people than anyone on the planet kind of thing. And so that combined with me trying to brainstorm what's next and thinking about food and farming and, you know, the women's population that I wanted to work with. I started to I guess [2 5:00] --I don't totally remember--but I probably started to do some searches on the internet about, you know, different programs that work with women and farming and, you know, those kinds of things, so. And I think at that time, you know, the community gardens were starting to pop up and some of the homeless gardens and things like that. So I was looking at those models and thinking, you know, maybe we could have a farm for women to come and live. And you know maybe it could be a transitional living program and they 14 Tonya Iisa could grow food and, you know, get healthy and see how fun it is and awesome it is to watch food grow. And get that immediate satisfaction of success, you know, here comes the [laughs] tomato plant that I put in the ground; that sort of thing. So yeah I just started to think about it and then I kind of wrote up a plan about it and then started to talk to people and they thought it was a good idea and they thought it would work. And so I put up a website and it just kind of slowly started to evolve onto paper and then beyond. And yeah [laughs]! TM: So the name Benevolence Farms, the name benevolence seems to suggest some sort of Catholic connotation. Could you speak about the name and what it means? T]: Yeah. So there is a café in Columbus, Ohio actually called Benevolence and 110$ it [laughs]. And they use local food and local farmers and it's just the food is really comforting and delicious and natural and organic and all that kind of stuff. So I just had a warm place in my heart for that place, for Benevolence in Ohio. And Rhonda and I would always go there when we went to Visit and I would take my nieces there and stuff like that. And so in thinking about this farm and what to name it, I, you know, and then just the definition of benevolence being an act of kindness, you know, I just it just feels good to me, you know. And I think the Earth deserves kindness and people deserve kindness and, you know, growing food is just kindness. And so it just seemed to fit. And there is, yeah I there is this sort of religious connotation. That's not intended. It's not a religious program; I'm not a religious person. I'm a very spiritual person but not religious. But this, it just kind of felt like the right name for it and so, and it stuck. TM: So can you tell me a little bit about the goals of Benevolence Farms? What are the women gonna get out of the program? 15 Tonya Iisa T]: Yes. So Benevolence Farm is a social enterprise-based nonproﬁt that will teach women to grow food and market food and take it to farmer's markets and farm stands and hopefully eventually also sell to institutions, restaurants and institutions and things like that. And so we're just going to use the farm enterprise as kind of the jumping offpoint for women to be able to work and gain some job skills. But also there are just so many components to it as a small business that will enable them to explore career options for themselves. We're not expecting that twelve women or any of the women are going to pursue farming as their career, although that would be great if they do. We would deﬁnitely support them in that. But just as far as consistency and, you know, showing up for a job each day and having responsibilities. But then also beyond that is deciding how to price things and deciding how to market their tomatoes at the farmer's market or to restaurant owners. And dealing with customer service, like, you know, dealing with people at the farmer's market. Some women may really enjoy that kind of work. Or, you know, the ﬁnance piece of it. You know, how many seeds do we have to purchase this year to, you know, get this quantity of green beans to sell, you know, these kinds of things. So just all the different aspects ofa small business will give them the opportunity to think about the different careers that they may enjoy doing. And also, [30:00] entrepreneurship because they will have criminal records, you know, entrepreneurial opportunities may be the best route for them so that they can be their own boss and found their own companies. Maybe do something value added as far as jams or jellies or something like that, woodworking--whatever it is that they connect with. So this will give them the opportunity to explore that career path as well, as being entrepreneurs. 16 Tonya Iisa And then in addition to the work on the farm and those kinds of career exploration opportunities, they'll have opportunities to, so the work, you know, twenty to twenty-five hours of the week. And then the other part of the week, quote-on-quote "work week," will be more therapeutic kinds of family reunification and parenting classes if they're going to choose to parent, you know, completing their education or learning how to read or whatever it is that will help them to be most successful based on their individual case plans is what we'll work with them on. Supporting their recovery from addiction, you know, a lot of women are imprisoned today because ofthe disease of addiction, either their own or somebody that they care about. So we'll be helping them access programming around that as well. And whatever else they may have going on. Our program will also be informed around, trauma-informed therapies because a lot of the women also will have-- sorry I'm stumbling. A lot of the women who are imprisoned have been abused physically or sexually or both and make decisions kind of based on that. And so helping them to take a look at that and address those issues and be more successful in the way they move forward from Benevolence Farms. TM: So in 2007, you participated in a PBS Now Project Enterprise. Could you tell me about that? T]: Yeah so, yes. I can't even remember. I'm sure it came up on a, I don't even know how I found out about the contest, but it seemed like we qualiﬁed, were well qualified. It was about, you know, innovative programs, new innovative programs that people could vote for and support and win this enterprise contest. And I think that the award was that PBS would follow that organization for a year and just kind of watch them evolve and those kinds of things. I don't think there was a ﬁnancial aspect to it; I can't really even remember. 17 Tonya Iisa But I thought it would be a cool opportunity to kind of put the idea out there and see what kind of feedback and support it got. So I ﬁlled out their nomination forms and was really elated to find out that we were chosen as one of the four finalists; there were hundreds of applications from across the world. So these four professionals who know about social entrepreneurship chose Benevolence Farms as one of the finalists, so we were really really excited about that. And of course, you know, we emailed and communicated with everyone we know to vote for us, vote for us, and all that kind of stuff. And we didn't end up winning which was actually a blessing in disguise [both laugh] because we were still very early on in our development. But it was wonderful recognition and another indicator that, yes we were on the right path, this is a good idea and something that we should definitely pursue, so. TM: What's the work that you're doing right now to make sure that Benevolence Farm actually, you know, happens? T]: Yeah, so we are looking for land. I actually have just been contacted again this weekend by two separate people that want to talk with us about some opportunities, some land that they have, that they're interested in perhaps sharing with us. And we're also in a couple of other conversations as well. So we're pursuing looking for land and talking to landowners and county managers and county agencies and things like that. Just letting people know what we're looking for and then we are building our board of directors. We've been working with a really strong [35:00] core of four, ﬁve, six directors up until this point but we're really ready to grow beyond that and we need more hearts and more hands to get the work done that's coming down the line. So we are growing our board of directors, inviting more people onto the board. And we are starting to talk to major potential, potential major donors about funding Benevolence Farm and letting them know what we 18 Tonya Iisa need and what our plans our. We completed a strategic plan late last year and so we're working through that and thinking through, you know, what the next steps are. So yeah we've got a lot of work underway but it's good and we're getting more and more help. It's an exciting, a really exciting time right now. TM: Earlier when you were talking you were mentioning a partnership with Elon University. Could you speak about that? T]: Yes! Thank you. So a couple years ago, we had been talking and talking and talking and networking a lot in Alamance County, which is where we're hoping that the farm will be. And we had heard about a home for young mothers that was going up in Greensboro, near downtown Greensboro. And it was being designed and built by a program at UNC-Greensboro called Urban Studio. And so (Yvonne, 36:35), who is our architect on our board, went to check out what they were doing because we were starting to think about our own building, what it might look like, and we wanted it to be as sustainable as possible and things like that. So she went over just to check it out and see what they're doing and if we might be able to get some information and ideas from the people who had done this this--it's called My Sister Susan's Place in Greensboro. And she met the architect Robert Charest with Urban Studio while she was there and told him a little bit about what we were doing and his eyes kind of lit up and he seemed kind of interested in what we were doing. And so we pursued that conversation further with him and shared with him our ideas and what our mission was and he thought that maybe this would be a good next project for them to take on, and we were thrilled about that. So we started to talk with him while he was still at UNC-Greensboro, and then Elon University recruited Robert to come to 19 Tonya Iisa Elon and start a similar program there, which was really awesome because Elon is in Alamance County. And so it was just sort of this perfect synchronicity. And so he has since moved to Elon as of last August and they are very excited about the partnership with benevolence farm. They have been very supportive. He's basically told Elon when they were having their initial discussions that he had kind of committed to this program with Benevolence Farm [TM laughs] and they were like, "Cool! That's good." That's totally ﬁne with them. And so we've expanded the conversation to include the folks from Elon and we're, yeah, moving forward with that partnership. And so they will design--he, Robert along with his students--will design the housing and build it once we got the design along with some additional volunteers from Benevolence Farms and some of our other partners from the community. So we're really excited about that. And once the building is up, that's one of the really wonderful things about this program. They don't just set down a building. They really want to ensure that whatever the program that goes into that building is also successful. So they will help us identify other partners within the Elon community and the Elon network to help, like social work interns and public health interns and resources and researchers that will be interested in what we're doing and help us make those connections and partnerships as well. So we're excited about that. TM: Earlier in this conversation you seemed to allude to the fact that you identified as a feminist. T]: Ido [laughs]. TM: Could you tell me what it means to you to be a feminist? 20 Tonya Iisa T]: Yes. So I'll out myself and say that I thought when I was in college that I was pro- life. That appalls me to say that right now [both laugh]. I just didn't get it, you know. And my roommate in college, [40:00] Katie--God bless her--was way ahead of me and would be like, "You've got to be kidding me! You're not pro-life [TM laughs]." You know and I'm like, "Yeah I am! The baby, the baby," you know. And I just didn't, you know, I just wasn't thinking. I don't know, whatever I was. But she really challenged me on those ideas and I little by little would, you know, started to come around. But then when I got to graduate school, I took a course on feminism and it really, you know, blew me away. And I had become a feminist I think much before that. And, you know, I think even in high school I was a feminist to a great degree, besides that pro-life thing. But yeah when I got to graduate school in my mid-twenties and really started to learn about feminism, and that I had, you know, that I had been practicing feminism, you know, a lot of my life. Not seeing that color divide in high school for instance, you know, like just seeing people as equals, and seeing men and women as equals, and being compassionate to animals, and taking care of the Earth, picking up litter. You know, all of these things that I had been doing were feminism, you know? And it really and when we talked and read about feminism at that time, I'm like, "Oh, I'm a feminist." [Both laugh] You know, this is the way I live my life. This is the way I want to live my life. I want to do more of this. I want to do it more intentionally. So you know, that's when I took it on as, "Yeah. I'm a feminist." And everything I do I want to be under that model or whatever. And you know that's the thing too about, you know, the life decisions that I've made. They've never been about the money, you know. They've never been about bigger, better kinds of things. They've always been about caring for the Earth or caring for people or caring for myself 21 Tonya Iisa and thinking of the bigger picture and how it's all interconnected and those kinds of things. And what's really important in all of that is about feminism for me, so. TM: Well as you know this conversation will probably go into the Southern Oral History Program's collection on "The Long Women's Movement." So do you think your work on Benevolence Farm could be in any way connected to the women's movement? T]: Absolutely. I hope so [both laugh]. Yes. I really, yes. This work feels really important to me in empowering women. And not just the women who come to the farm, although of course that's our primary goal is to help them. But my hope is that there will be a ripple effect in their families, in their communities, in people's minds about rethinking what a woman who has been to prison, who she is, what she's capable of, what kind of person she is. You know, we're such, our culture can be so punishing and so cruel and so unreasonable. And you know I could have landed in prison very easily myself. I mean I have not always made the wisest decisions. You know, I've driven a car drunk. I've carried drugs to schools. I've had a weapon. You know, I've done all these, you know, sort of not so smart things. But I also grew up in a privileged, white, middle-class home and simple--you know what I mean? So I had some opportunities that a lot of people--especially women--have not had. I have an education and it was really given to me very generously by my family, my parents. But, you know, any one of us could end up in prison. Any one of us Q end up in prison. You know, all kinds of people end up in prison and then end up paying the price, you know, for their whole lives, and there's just something really wrong about that. So there's a lot of things really wrong about that [laughs]. But, so I, you know, I'm hoping that 22 Tonya Iisa we'll change minds about women in prison and people in prison and open heart, and seeing these women at the farmer's markets, providing this awesome food that they've grown is going to help [45:00] sort of tear down some of those barriers for these women. And for us! You know and between people! And so that people will be able to establish relationships with somebody maybe they wouldn't have otherwise and see what gifts there are there for them. I think all of that will be powerful and help women and help women re-entrance and help communities and help the farmers and help the farms and all that kind of stuff. So, um, so yes I think it will make a difference and is making a difference. You know, we've got really awesome women on our board. We're working with awesome women volunteers such as yourself, and just making those connections is powerful and leaves an impact on our lives and on our communities. TM: Is there anything else you want to say on the record so that everyone will know? T]: Hehe. Um [pause], I can't really think of anything. TM: 0k! Well thank you so much. T]: Yeah! Thank you!..