 ERIN WEST: Today is July 14th, 2014. This is Erin West with the Southern Oral History Program interviewing Suzanne Buckley for the Moxie Project Women’s Activism and Leadership Project. So can we start out and can you tell me a little bit about where you were born and where you grew up? SUZANNE BUCKLEY: Sure. I was born in Durham, North Carolina at Durham Regional Hospital right down the road from here. And I lived in Florida from six months to a year and a half or two years. But I grew up after that in Durham. From here it was a very different version of Durham than there is now, but I lived up until college, I lived my whole life in Durham, North Carolina EW: Different how? SB: How’s Durham different? Durham has grown a lot. I was talking to some folks about Franklin Street the other day. Franklin Street was where you would go for any stores or as we got older, bars and night life and now I feel like everyone goes to Durham for all of those things. But downtown Durham, we went to downtown Durham to the library, and the Durham Arts Council were the main anchors of downtown Durham, but none of the restaurants, some of the business but very few of like, Self—Help and things like that were really-- most nonprofits weren’t in downtown Durham. American Tobacco didn’t exist. Brightleaf was certainly there, but all of the ( ) was pretty much it in that area. Interview number U-lOSl from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill So it’s really grown a lot, and there’s a lot more folks who are coming here from other areas. I mean certainly my parents came here for college and stayed. But I think just sort of the demographics. Some for the better in terms of development, and then there’s also a lot of other issues that come with folks coming in and taking over spaces. Living downtown is almost impossible now. Someone was saying it’s like sixteen hundred dollars a month for one of the condos. I don’t know if this is really relevant to any of this. Just that also in the same way that you see the gentrification. Community development, if it’s not done in an intentional way, all the people who had lived there for forty years are now being displaced so that people who have money who used to live in the suburbs can now live downtown. So it kind of creates a forcing out of the people who have lived there forever. My house I grew up in, my mom-- it’s 1920s or something. It’s the Watts Hospital area, and she sold it like $150,000 more than she paid for it, which is awesome. But we were looking, when we bought a house it was just like, there’s no way. Like, “Oh we carmot afford to live in the neighborhood I grew up in,” which is an interesting thing to kind of watch. EW: What was the culture like in the neighborhood you grew up in, the community in? SB: The community I grew up in was really progressive and very sort of like an old traditional neighborhood you probably would see on TV. We walked to school, to elementary school, and I went to a private middle school so that was a little bit different, but all the folks that I grew up with, it was very much a neighborhood school. My parents were really involved and engaged, and a lot of those folks are still in the area. I don’t think I realized obviously in elementary school how engaged and involved a lot of the parents were in the community and in social justice kind of movements that wen --. Because what seven year old pays any attention to that? But now being an adult working in that community it’s very interesting to run into like, “Oh that’s so and 50’s dad,” or, “So and 50’s dad’s friend is the solicitor general for the United States.” It’s like, oh, you had no idea kind of growing up. But I don’t really think I have a sense of the politics of the situation really then, but most of the folks were fairly liberal. A lot of different families, lot of different family construction so it wasn’t certainly not as progressive as most family situations are today. But there were a lot of--, some kids were from divorced families. There was certainly a lot of diversity in our neighborhood. So it was very, I learned, growing up my neighborhood was great. It deﬁnitely, I don’t know that that type of neighborhood in that way still exists anywhere where you can walk to your friends’ houses. And I don’t know. I don’t get the sense that there’s a lot of those neighborhoods left. EW: What was it like in your home? What was the relationship between—-? [Laughing] SB: So my parents got divorced when I was three and a half. So I lived with my mom on Tuesday, Thursday, Sunday and every other weekend. And my dad Monday, Wednesday and every other weekend. So I mean I had sort of two separate home lives. My mom wasn’t remarried, but my dad was. So that was interesting. And my step mom at the time had a son who eventually came to live with us, who was eight years older. So that was sort of like--, and I’m an only child. So I had a half-time sibling on occasion. It would be like if you woke up at ten years old and had an eighteen year old sibling who you’d never met before. It was very odd. But I think that, I mean my mom--, my dad is fairly--, I wouldn’t call him necessarily conservative. He’s fiscal, he’s that old school moderate Republican who’s very fiscally conservative but socially liberal so that was--, and we definitely probably don’t agree on a lot of things, but I definitely felt like there was an openness and opportunity to discuss those things. My mom is fairly, certainly fairly progressive for the time. I don’t know if I had like out radicalized her Viewpoints now, just because in the last twenty years there’s a lot of issues that were not as present for her when she was growing up. But my mom is definitely very sort of introduced me into politics and social activism. So that’s kind of where that came from. I spent a lot of time, both because my parents worked with we had a friend, one of my friends had just had a --everyone has a baby after you turn thirty-- it’s just, they’re everywhere. She just had a baby. She lives in Wilmington, but her mom did child care so a lot of the neighborhood kids spent time there. So I was definitely a latch key kid when I was old enough. But for until I was eight or nine maybe, nine, ten, I honestly don’t remember, I would definitely spend a lot of afternoons at friends’ houses and stuff like that. So I deﬁnitely had a deeper sense of community evenjust because I wasn’t--, I didn’t have the option of hanging out at home and watching TV. I was out with other kids. Yeah, I mean that’s about what I want to share about my home life. EW: What do you mean by a latch key kid? SB: Oh it’s a term that’s used for kids who would wear like keys around their neck. So the idea that you would have a key and let yourself in and come home in the afternoons by yourself, just sort of the idea that you were not necessarily a kid who had a mom baking cookies when you came home at three o’clock in the afternoon or whatever. That it was very much sort of a latch and key, the idea that you were the one kind of letting yourself in in the afternoon. My dad lived way out in northern Durham. It’s not that way out anymore, but it was at the time. So I was definitely home at my mom’s house. I don’t want to make, paint a picture like I was abandoned by any stretch of the imagination, but when you’re thirteen and twelve, you’re pretty much capable of staying home for two hours before your parents get home. So yeah, there was definitely some parts of that made me much more engaged by default with, because you were in with a bunch of other kids hanging out doing your homework. Then as I got older it was definitely more opportunities to kind of have independence on my own probably because of that than if I had had parents who didn’t work full-time. EW: So you said you went to a private middle school. What was that like? SB: I went to the Duke School for middle school. It was their first I want to say, I think I’m right that I was their first graduating class for their middle school. So it was great. I don’t know that I appreciated it at the time how amazing. It’s experiential based learning so that instead of teaching you about well, they did that too but teaching you about surface area and geometry, you would go to a lake and measure the lake and the different parts along the bottom of the lake and draw it out and be able to actually understand when people are talking about surface area, like physically what that looks like. We did a cross North Carolina tour. We had a section or whatever they’re called on North Carolina history so we went to old textile mills and old towns in North Carolina that it used to be textile towns have been basically decimated as textiles moved out and interviewed people, and it was very oral history driven. Their sports were not as competitive. I played on the basketball and volleyball team, which I probably would not have played on had it been a traditional school. But I definitely feel incredibly fortunate that I was able to go there, and I think that definitely, I don’t know how much it prepared me for book learning in high school, but it definitely taught me critical thinking skills that were really helpful in college and certainly in law school and just kind of in life. There was a small, it was a small class. I think there were maybe twenty-five, maybe probably not even twenty-five students in my graduating class. There was just one class and you were in that one class. And I think that, that was a little hard because a lot of those students had been going to school together since they were three and four, but it was also kind of nice because I was like new. So I think they didn’t get a lot of new kids so it was kind of cool to be the new kid for a little while and then it wore off. But it was definitely, I think it-- was more, I sort of, then I came back to public school for high school. So it was kind of weird, like all the folks you went to elementary school with you didn’t really interact with much with in middle school just because in middle school you’re like whoever is right in front of your face is your best friend ever. And then to go back to that same group of folks who I had went to elementary school with but like didn’t really know as people in the world was a little challenging, but it worked out okay. EW: Challenging how? SB: I think because you have your new friend group from middle school and then that gets dispersed across because some people-- they didn’t have high school. I should say that. So everybody went somewhere else. And then people that you haven’t seen since fifth grade are now in your classes, and you’re like well, we used to be friends four years ago, but you’re really different as a fourteen, fifteen year old than you were as a ten year old. So how you kind of renegotiate those relationships and all the things that have changed in between those times I think was--, it was like in that same way that some of those people had formed really strong bonds through middle school. And I definitely had friends that I kept in touch with but not in the same way. So it was kind of like your two worlds kind of merging together, and then you have to kind of ﬁgure out how those all work out and then there’s new people from new schools. But I think high school was complicated for everybody. So I don’t think it was any more complicated for me because of that, but it was just kind of a--, you have to kind of start over again after you had just finished starting over three years ago. So yeah. EW: What else was high school like besides the reintegration ( )? SB: I try to block out most of high school, which I feel like I can do because it was fine. It’s not like I was tortured or anything as a high school student. I think it was much more just something you got through than it was an experience that I valued, like I don’t really think of high school as like, “I really that value experience. It really taught me a lot about myself.” And it wasjust kind of like, one foot in front of the other until you get to the end of it. It definitely made me want to get out of North Carolina to go to college. I mean that was clear to me. It was like, “I don’t want to be here for the next four years, I would like to go somewhere else and see something else and meet other people and just be in a space that’s a little bit different.” So that was good. I had a long term relationship in high school and that took up most of my free time. And that was, he was two-- I’m not going there. I’m sorry. Shut it down. Because he still lives in Durham so there’s a small chance that this would get out there. But yeah, I mean it definitely, academically I’m not going to act like I got the highest grade, but I was definitely--, Ithink I graduated number six or something, which was just out of the top five. But I wasn’t like the smartest kid in school, but I was also in all the AP classes and honors classes, which I now realize just how segregated our school was. I don’t think I, I kind of obviously knew it at the time because it was like, “Huh, I only have classes with the same seventy people.” And ( ) like hell for PE. I was like, “Whoa, here’s the rest of the school.” But I don’t think I really appreciated until many years later, how stratified our education system is and how you are set up for either success or failure from a very young age and how that really limits your opportunities in the world. So that was definitely, I mean I definitely feel like I got exposed to a lot more people and a lot more different types of families and understanding what family dynamics are like for different people in high school than I did in middle school, just because middle school was like, it was a very expensive private school. So you didn’t have a lot of people whose moms worked two or three jobs and like just wasn’t—-, you were sort of class segregated in that way. Though I’m sure there were folks who were on financial assistance, and I think high school kind of really broadened me up to what life is like for a lot of different people and not just people who live like me or people whose parents have professional degrees and all that good stuff. EW: So part of what we talked about ( ) was sex ed. What was the sex ed. in your school? SB: I don’t have a huge memory of it, which means [it] probably wasn’t very extensive, but my health teacher who, luckily I can’t remember his name so I can’t defame him in any way. But he was an overweight baseball coach who was like, I don’t know. He was in your schedule, the creepy man. He just creeped me out. And he was clearly didn’t--, teaching was not his interest area. Let’s put it that way. So we would read the chapter in the book and answer the questions that written down and then we would all go around and say our answers. I definitely remember at one point in, I taught two or three of the classes because he was like, “You do this part.” And I was like, “Okay.” I don’t remember where he went, but he went somewhere. I don’t remember, I’m sure, I don’t remember watching the Video that everyone says they watched. I didn’t watch that Video or if I did I was traumatized enough to totally block that memory out. But there was a woman who, I guess a girl, I don’t know, who was probably seventeen who was pregnant in my health class. So I definitely remember, and I think I, I think you took health your freshman year. So I was fourteen or something. So that was far more interesting to me than any memory of health. It was like, “Oh wow.” Like, there are people my age who have babies in the world and I just feel like at this--, and I’m sure I mean it happens, but it was just a very--, I didn’t know that many people my age who were pregnant and going to school. In retrospect it’s pretty amazing that she was not shunned away into some back room or that she continued to go to school while she was pregnant, and there were, I’m assuming, some sort of systems to support that. I have no idea if that’s accurate or not. I also don’t remember if she came back to school after she had her baby. I have no recollection of that, and I don’t know if she was a graduate. I don’t know if it would’ve mattered. But we definitely did not have, to my knowledge, any comprehensive sex education, and I definitely remember-- I see why people don’t sign off on this for years to come. I definitely remember getting a “what’s happening to my body” style book or “Our Bodies Ourselves” or something. But I definitely remember my dad explaining to me what my period is and that kind of thing. But I didn’t have any kind of conversations of any depth with my parents about it, which is really surprising to me given how progressive--. My dad was a doctor, and my mom was a psychologist so you would’ve thought somebody would’ve come together to do it, have a conversation about that, but I definitely don’t remember really that being anything other than peer self-education, which I don’t know if that’s good or not. I don’t remember conversations with my friends about it either, that you read in a lot of stuff about sex education, or I have a friend who is a principal at a school. And some of the things she would tell me, like they did a survey of students who hadn’t had sex education and they just asked them a bunch of questions about what they thought about different things. It’s probably not super good for public consumption, but their concepts of what sex is, what the consequences of sex are, how one gets pregnant, how one can get STIs was so far off anything I would’ve even imagined. So clearly there are a lot of people out there who are kind of making it up on their own. So at least I got a book that was written by theoretically doctors or health educators. So that’s good. But yeah, it didn’t exist. But it also wasn’t like, “You’re going to die if you had sex,” either. So I guess that’s the good news. It wasn’t really much of anything. But that was well before the Healthy Youth Act. So yeah, it would’ve be interesting to see how--. I don’t know much about how that has changed in high schools. Ibet we had something in middle school. I bet we had, I think I do remember the boys going in one room and the girls going in another, and that talk. But that was not really so much about sex but about body changes and puberty and that kind of stuff. But that does ring a bell a little bit more for middle school. They probably soft shoed it for us. Anyway. EW: When you were in high school and middle school was the expectation always how you would go on to college? SB: Yes. EW: Yeah. SB: Yeah. EW: How was that made known( )? SB: Well, I don’t--, I always wonder about thinking about, because we don’t have kids, but thinking about that concept of parenting, like how does one instill these values or does it just sort of happen? I mean it was always talked about, like, “When you go to college,” and it was just an understood. I definitely talked to both my parents and did college Visits when I was a junior. So there was that immediate expectation. But it was just part of the conversation from the begimIing. There was no idea that you would take time off, or it was also less popular too. Now I think people take time off a lot. That was like, “No, no, no. You go from one to the other.” But my dad was the first person in of his family, well his immediately family at least to go to college. My mom’s parents both went to college and had a long family history of college education. So it was just, “That’s what you do when you graduate from high school.” And that was just communicated in non-eXplicit ways. And then they got a little more explicit as we moved clo ser to the graduation deadline. But yeah, also because I was at a private school there was a lot more talk about college preparation at the middle school level, which I thought was a little bit much but--. Because you’re twelve. You’re not really able to conceptualize going to college. But yeah. I mean that was definitely a huge part of the AP classes and all that kind of stuff. Because you don’t need Advanced Placement if you’re not going to college. So that was always part of the conversation. But I don’t remember anybody asking me if I wanted to go to college. It wasn’t really a question. It wasn’t up for a lot of discussion. But I also didn’t say I don’t want to go to college. So I don’t know what that would’ve looked like, but yeah, I just wanted to go somewhere else for a little while and see what that was like. So I was all for it. Iwas ready to go. EW: Were you politically minded as a high school student or did that develop later? SB: I was, though having worked with young people now I was not anywhere close to where you guys are and some of the high school students I have worked with in this role, petitioning for this and that and the other thing. I was just like, “Oh I don’t know.” I wasn’t--, I don’t think I realized that I had the capacity or autonomy to effect change on my own. I started working, my first political campaign was when Harvey Gantt ran for Senate. And I went to--, my first memory of activism was going to the 1992 March for Women’s Lives or March for Choice or whatever we called it then when Clinton was rumIing the first time, the first Clinton. There might be a second one by the time this gets to share to the world. But so Ikind of, it was much more individualized or in stmctured format. So I volunteered to sign, to register, I don’t know if I registered people to vote but handing out material and stufﬁng envelopes and being part of a political campaign. That’s how I saw activism as a kid. I worked for Bill Bradley’s primary campaign in college. I wasn’t really into the social justice social movement type of activism at all really. I was just sort of, and I certainly didn’t--, I don’t recall having a moment where I was like, “I could do something about this on my own without somebody else handling all the details and telling me what to do.” I don’t think that was, yeah, I just don’t think that that was something that had occurred to me. And now I see all kinds of things like this, it’s hard to tell sometimes in this climate if it’s the parents that are driving it or the students are driving it themselves or the parents are just empowering the students to know what about their options are. But I definitely see many more, like there’s a girl in my neighborhood who wrote this really fabulous op-ed. Her parents are a lesbian couple, and it was after the amendment, and talking about what it would’ve meant to her and what it means to her to not have her parents recogmzed in the same way as other people’s parents. Just that I don’t think it would’ve occurred to me to write an opinion, write a letter to the editor or whatever without somebody else kind of pushing me in that direction. So yeah, it definitely started young, but it’s all relative. EW: Did you continue doing that in college? SB: I did. I did an ( )--, I did student government. I did sort of like some intern also, so student government and work around. I went to Smith College, and they have their governance stmcture are these houses. So each house has a president, and then there’s a president of all the houses. So I was the president of all the houses. So that was as lot of like, how do you do more positive--, how do you promote more positive interactions with the community? How do we create conversation and social interactions within the houses so you don’t have this sorority-esque behavior? How do you deal with policies and how do you enforce them in the house without being the worst person ever? How do you be--, how do you pick your battles around that but also make sure that you have a safe and stmctured house environment for folks? It’s kind of--, it was a little bit more policy driven than the RA role that normally is. And but then I, my first on the road, I went to New Hampshire to campaign for Bill Bradley when he ran against Gore. That has to be right. It has to be against Gore, which is really an interesting. I got to be in Boston for the convention, which was really cool and do a lot of door knocking in the freezing snow in New Hampshire. That was an experience I will never forget because it was literally like icy cold tundra walking door to door. But that was when I first was in the heart of the campaign because the New Hampshire primary is a big deal. So there was a lot of infrastructure and a lot of media attention and a lot of intensity around that. So that’s when I kind of got a glimpse into what a presidential national campaign was like. We didn’t go back for more until Kerry-Edwards. But that was, that’s a whole 'nother story. Yeah so I definitely did, I did more community based, like my college community, but I also kind of dipped a toe into, I guess it was 2000. Right. It had to have been like [19]99 or 2000, right? Yeah, you don’t know. I think the Bush—Gore was in 2000. So yeah, that was my sophomore year, my sophomore, junior year. I really enjoyed that. That was really cool to dive head first into the meat of, the sausage making of politics, not the calling people but also going door to door and talking for your candidate and then working behind the scenes to create Visibility and make sure everybody has all the things that they need. And they were, Ithink like most campaigns in the early stage, volunteers could do almost anything. That was really cool to feel like you were actually doing something, not just stuffing envelopes, which is important but it’s about as far removed from the actual candidate work as you can get. EW: Did that change your ideas about politics? SB: It gave me a sense of how much work goes into--, you see all the things that happen on TV, but you don’t see all the work behind the scenes. And I think not that it was radically different, but I think a lot more of the game in politics fifteen years ago was voter contact and one on one communications and how we’re going to get our message out to you this is before all of the super PACs and all that stuff. So it was just a different brand of politics. It wasn’t--, we had email, but it wasn’t a--, there was no Facebook. There was no Twitter. It was just much more on the ground communications. So it gave me a good appreciation for what it takes to organize and turn out voters in even a precinct not let along all across the state. I didn’t really get into the data aspect of it until four years later for the Kerry-Edwards. Then it was understanding how you don’t necessarily--, it is not reasonable to knock on the doors of everyone who lives in the whole state. But you have to really target and how important targeting is and the whole stages of a campaign. So yeah, it definitely gave me a glimpse, and it was something that I wanted to do again. I didn’t really know that that was going to happen for me. It wasn’t something I sought out to do. It was just something that made good sense at the time. EW: What else affected you in college? SB: I mean one of the biggest things for me in terms of, I mean I always had a framework of one of the things that I came to the reproductive rights movement around was like, “Why should women be treated differently from men?” or, “Why should women have these special rules that only apply to them in terms of bodily autonomy and sovereignty and things like that. And I think I went to Smith because I wanted to get a deeper understanding about gender studies and women’s studies and what and learn from one of the best departments at the time at least in the country. So that was really important to me to learn in that vein. I think I learned a lot more than I had ever thought about, and I should say Iknew a lot about gender constructs and gender as sort of as performance, but I don’t think I really got it theoretically. And then to both be learning about that and then living it in a community where there’s a lot of different gender identities and expressions, and for me that was the first time I had really--, I’m sure I had met someone who was trans, but I didn’t get it. Or that wasn’t, like my roommate was trans. So that was a very different for me experience of like, “Okay. I didn’t even know that this was a thing and now I am in this community”, and in a way that I could kind of--it was interesting because I could very much pass and that other people would say things to me about my roommate or things not knowing how I felt. And so that was an interesting experience to hear and perceive how other people read him without necessarily asking for that or wanting to deal with that. But I definitely I learned a lot more and had a much better appreciation for all different types of relationships and understanding a little bit more. And I would say at the time it was mostly focused on lesbian identity because I think for us in the community, trans identity was still emerging, and there wasn’t as much scholarship. There wasn’t as much already out there. I’m repeating. It’s not Anne Sexton. Fausto-Sterling, like “The Five Sexes” and then that was sort like-- and Rickie Solinger very early works where I think things have really did a lot of scholarship has happened in the last ten plus years that I really had very little knowledge about. But I think to me that was the biggest thing to make my eyes sort of like a whole new world. Obviously Iknew lesbian couples growing up, like they were like parents’ friends. But I didn’t know a lot of people my age that were out. So that was a really, I don’t know if that was just a product of where I was from or I don’t know. But it was definitely a whole eye opening experience, and definitely I’m glad that I had that in college in a way that I could kind of process it and understand it and not--. I'd like to think I wouldn’t have reacted differently had I not had that context. But I think that that was really important for me to come out of college feeling like I have, not like I know, but I have a better understanding for why LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) rights are so important and what sort of identify struggles of life aren’t just the way feminist identity struggles. I got those figured out. Those were all secure for me. EW: Do you have a conscious memory of being like, “Yes, I am pro-choice”? SB: I don’t, and I know we spent a lot of time--, I’m sure Lesley talked with you about this about the story of us and the story of self. I don’t know if it was just whispered to me in the womb or something. But I definitely like I remember going with my mom and her friend Jean and an incarnation of NARAL(National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League) past to DC (District of Columbia) for this march and thinking about it more as women’s rights kind of generally, like I deserve to be equal and all that. And then seeing that at the time the anti-choice folks, I don’t know if they still do this or not, but they had a lot of incredibly graphic signs and they were mostly men and yelling and screaming. And then they also had this really creepy playground. It was an abandoned pop-up playground that they did, and on the, all the different--, they’re not rides—whatever they’re called—the slide and the seesaws they had—this is so horrible. They had tombstones for the children that would have been, and I just did not understand like, “That was just like, whoa.” It didn’t occur--, that’s the first time I realized there were masses out there who believed something totally different from what Ibelieved. That was more of the political consciousness moment there. It was like, “Wow, there are people who very strongly believe something totally opposite,” and two, I kind of realized how differently we have approached that issue where for me it was a-- I can’t imagine. I don’t see any situation in which someone should be able to make decisions about my body that’s not me. I’m just like, “What the--,” why would you even question? That doesn’t matter. And not that they’re like no limits to anything but just the fundamental idea of the government shouldn’t be able to force me to carry a pregnancy to term. That was very like Brave New World. And I didn’t know if that was sort of where I came from, and they’re like, if I’m going to be, I can’t fully be a citizen in this country if that’s a limitation that’s placed on me the day I’m born. But I don’t really know that, I don’t have a moment of like—I think it grew out of my being raised in the like, free to be you and me style, a girl can do anything a boy can do. That’s where I came from and this was to me a logical extension of that. The idea like, “Wait now what? You’re going to--, that doesn’t make any sense.” Or the idea that women shouldn’t be tmsted to make those decision for themselves, or that some women shouldn’t be or that some women should be forced to only have some options. I think it was much less nuanced than it is now, but definitely. And I don’t think I really saw it as a political issue. Obviously it is, but it’s also so much more polarized now than when I was growing up in terms of, I mean when I—I don’t remember Reagan very well. But it was, the laws that are in place now really happened mostly in the last I mean Hyde is obviously horrible. But the so- called late term abortion stuff was the ﬁrst time I was like, “Whoa,” this is getting like, they’re really getting, they’re on the attack and they’re going to not care about medicine or science or what women think. This is an agenda that’s being driven by in my opinion a very extreme ideology that is not very cognizant of real life experiences. So yeah, I don’t, I definitely, I wish-- I mean I don’t wish, but I haven’t had an abortion. I don’t have a friend who I had to go with to a clinic. I worked at a clinic in college, and that was certainly important to appreciate that experience, but my experience with abortion has been fairly emotionally distant in that sense. And I don’t know if that’s helped or hurt. I don’t have a personal story in that way, which I think everyone sort of assumes. It’s like, “Well, sorry.” I certainly can imagine that that experience would really compel you to be much more engaged, but I definitely knew people in college who had abortions and since then have had abortions. But it’s definitely not like, that wasn’t what, it wasn’t a personal story that propelled me into this. It was more just a lifelong philosophy kind of thing. EW: Yeah, that’s really interesting. SB: Sorry. You’re not going to get my abortion story. Yeah, Iknow it’s horribly crude and we’ll cut this part out, but I think people just expect it. And it’s just like, I can make one up, but I don’t think that that’s super helpful for me to just sort of--. I grew up with a lot of privilege and access to contraception at an early age, and it could’ve very easily happened, but it didn’t. So I’m the two out of three who have not had to go through that. But I def1nitelythinkit--, I don’t know. I think it would really depend on the circumstances whether that would make you more inclined to be an advocate or more inclined to take some distance from that. I mean I know from- -, I think well, I don’t know. It would be interesting. There’s an op ed somebody sent me that was totally off left field. But that was a woman who had an abortion. She’s very pro-choice and definitely wants to raise her kids in that way, but she was like, “It was an awful, the whole thing was an awful experience.” You had to--, she had a mandatory ultrasound and biased counseling stuff. So that was horrible, and there were clinic protestors so that was horrible. And it was more painful than she thought it was going to be. So that was bad. And it lasted, bleeding and stuff lasted. So it was like, I support access to abortion, but I would never want anyone to ever have to experience this. And I don’t know if you could keep that kind of emotional distance from it in real time and do this work. I don’t know. No idea. EW: Do you consider yourself a feminist? SB: I do. Yeah, I mean I guess I didn’t again until high school maybe. I never really, I’m not big on labels. No, I mean it was never, it was just sort of like, yeah. Like that’s just right— that’s like a feminist believes. It wasn’t, but I definitely did get, especially when I came home for the summers after college and you tell people, “I’m studying--.” It was women’s studies at the time. But then people, then you would kind of get the reaction from friends and or family friends who were just like, “Oh you’re one of those feminists.” And it was like, “Oh I didn’t realize that was something I wasn’t supposed to be,” and so I sound like I’m totally sheltered. But it just didn’t--, the people I surrounded myself with either didn’t talk about it or if they did talk about it for the most part it was just a value. It wasn’t a set of assumptions and derogatory terms and all these other things. It maybe if more people my age had associated themselves with feminists we would have less of this backlash problem. I’m not one hundred percent sure all the things. I’m sure you could probably tell me all the things that went into creating it. But I definitely think it’s been interesting to be part of that demographic but not had those feelings and same thing with all the millem1ial nonsense, just from talking about--. “Millenials do this” and “millenials do that” and some of it is like any generational and some of it’s accurate. But I don’t, Ikind of reject the generalization that all young people don’t care about politics. All young people are disaffected when it comes to thinking about these issues. No all people are any one thing. But I definitely think I've been surprised in my own, not so much my Smith circle, but other circles about how people are wanting to hold that label very far away from them. Or they’re like, “I’m not a feminist but--.” I find that sort of mindboggling. I don’t really care what you call it. I would prefer if you didn’t feel the need to distance yourself from that label, oneself from that label, but I think how you operate in the world is far more important from the label that you wear. EW: So what contributed to your decision to go into law school from there? SB: So I interned in my junior year I think. I lived in DC and interned for the policy director or the Vice president of policy, Pat Ruse. I don’t remember what her title was, but she was the National Organization for Women, and I worked for her on the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families reauthorization and basically welfare reform. And I, in that process, I learned a ton, but I also kind of started thinking about like who are the people in the world who are doing the types of work I wanted to do. And I kind of took that with me after college. And I worked at NARAL in that same--, like, who are the people in my neighborhood who are doing the things that I want to do? And it just kind of came down for me like the people who are the most, who I was exposed to who are the strongest advocates who are doing the type of advocacy that I wanted to do were all lawyers. They all had that common background. I’m sure there are people who fell outside of that, but that seemed like an analysis and a tool that would really help me get to where I wanted to go in terms of the type of advocacy that I wanted to do around social justice issues. I don’t think I fully, I don’t think I necessarily needed to go to law school, but whoops. And I don’t think--, I don’t regret going to law school by any stretch of the imagination, but I don’t think there are definitely people who do policy and advocacy and lobbying who are not lawyers and do a very good job at it. But it seemed like it would give me the opportunity to do a lot of that and provide me with the framework to do a lot of it. I didn’t really ever see myself litigating or like I wasn’t like To Kill a Mockingbird, I wasn’t like, “I want to do this when I grow up.” But I definitely, I’m glad I had that experience, and I know I can do it if I ever have to go back to it. That’s there. And I do think it prepares you. It’s just like college in some ways. It’s just like another set of skills and another set of experiences. It’s very teclmical in some ways, but a lot of what you learn is not technical. A lot of what you learn is how to approach a problem and how to think about things, how to think about both sides of an argument, which you can, I mean there are lawyers probably more so now it feels like than twenty years ago but doing all kinds of things that are not practicing law. So I wasn’t really, I sort of always, I took the LSAT (Law School Admissions Test) in college, and then took time off, but I knew it wasn’t something like my grandfather was a lawyer. It was just like I want to do this. And I wasn’t really sure when or where, but I knew that that was something I wanted to do eventually. EW: So you said you worked with NARAL before you went to law school? SB: I did. I worked my first, so I came back home sadly after I graduated. I was like don’t have a job and I didn’t--. In retrospect I should’ve just moved to DC, but I was like nobody wanted to fund that experiment. So I was just sort of like, well, unless you have a job before you graduate you have to come home because we’re not going to pay for you to live in an apartment in DC and follow your dreams, which is an incredibly privileged thing to do. But a lot of my friends were like, “We’re just going to go to New York and find a job.” Iwas like, how are you eating and paying rent? Like, “My mom.” Oh okay. I was just like I didn’t really earn any money in college. All of my money went out the door. It’s like Iwas able to save hundreds of thousands of dollars when I was in college and over the summers. But anyway, so I came back home. And I, it was like I applied to every job under the sun and mostly applied to volunteer places because there were no jobs in 2003, no jobs. So there just wasn’t a lot of opportunity. I think I worked at Duke for a little while just to make some money. Then I volunteered, I got a call from a woman Sarah Cargas who was the organizer with essentially for NARAL —Pro Choice America in North Carolina. And so I started volunteering with her two or three days a week, and then her volunteer coordinator left and I took over that job. And then two or three weeks later she left and then I took over. It wasn’t quite like that, but it was like, maybe I was there for three months and then she left. So I took over the campus program and then organizing for the March for Women’s Lives. There was three or four of us who were march organizers who were in strategic states in the South. So my job was to recmit people to attend the march and then go vote right after it. And then I worked with Mike Cmm who was the development director here to establish a board and then hire an executive director to formally establish the affiliate that exists now. So that was sort of--and I got through the march. And I was so tired. I just need a break. So I decided not to stay on here and took like a month off and then started back at working in Wake County for the Kerry-Edwards campaign in Orange County, the Wake County Democratic Party. So I kind of went from one organizing job to the next. This is before President Obama was a community organizer. So it wasn’t nearly as cool to be an organizer as it is now. But so yeah, that was, and I think for me I was asked to join the board of the current NARAL four years ago now. It has always been, it was like where I got my first political experience and has always been an organization that I was invested in in some way either as a donor or as a volunteer or as an employee. So it was really important to me that it stay functional and operational and move forward. And I don’t know if I would’ve had that same, I worked for Plarmed Parenthood in college, but it was really that formative experience of literally helping to build it brick by brick, and that really kind of stayed with me over time through all the different executive directors and incarnations that it has had. That was kind of why I came back. EW: So you said you worked with Flamed Parenthood in college. And you were building it? SB: Oh no. EW: What do you mean by that? SB: I don’t even know what I said there. I wasn’t building it. I was, I did community access work so I would go into schools and talk to their counselors and educators about tools and ways to get involved and then we went to a couple of community fairs where it was just like, I don’t know how we got there but we got there. And we’re handing condoms and dental dams to fourteen year olds, not that they shouldn’t be, but it was very awkward to be the only group who was dealing with anything related to sexual health and education. But that was more the direct services side of things. It’s important to have accurate information about sex and contraception and to know how, where you can get that information. So I think I did it for a semester. It wasn’t really my thing. So through Plarmed Parenthood of Western Massachusetts or something like that, yeah. EW: How’s it different being in the board versus being the executive director right now? SB: Yeah. It’s really different. I mean part of it is depends on the executive director, but you’re one is a thing that you do a couple of hours a quarter, and you’re there to provide your input and then respond when people ask something of you. And it’s a much more big picture responsibility. It was really important to me to bring some governance structure to the board, and I had worked on that. It’s harder to do that from the outside but making sure that we had policies and procedures and mles in place so that we can build out going forward. So I was able to focus on a lot of the things that I can’t focus on now. I don’t think I had a clue what the shape the organization was in and what the capacity was and what we were really asking. I mean I knew enough to know when people at board meetings would be like, “Can you draft a one-page summary about this thing for us?” that it was that’s not, like no. She can’t. Like her, it’s important for them to be informed. But the amount of time the executive director, theoretically in a much bigger organization could really focus much more on the board, but with such a small organization it’s hard to devote that amount of time to keeping the board members engaged and up to date on things that are arguably available to the general public. So I had an appreciation. I mean the people who were here before me immediately and the staff I thought they were really doing a great job. I don’t think I knew, you could see the numbers on paper. But I don’t think I really knew how much time and energy went into creating that in terms of how time intensive fundraising is and was. So I mean I just have a much deeper understanding of all the different things that they were juggling that I don’t know. Being in that seat now like it’s the only way for them to know is for me to tell them. Whether or not they could hear it, I don’t know if we could’ve, if they had done here’s what’s happening. We really need you to focus if they would’ve paid any attention or we’d be like, “Oh you’ll figure it out. Don’t worry.” But I definitely think the system, not just from this experience but other boards I've worked with, it’s just a very weird system in which people who don’t work full-time with an organization are making a lot of really high level decisions and are tasked with approving budgets and some program that just doesn’t--. It seems like it’s not really set up for success on either side. How can they possibly know all the things that they need to know to be able to set the Vision without a lot more input from staff? And how do you manage all those different roles effectively when that’s like a third of your time. I mean if I devoted a third of my time to the board, we wouldn’t do a whole lot. So yeah. EW: How would you change, just get rid of it completely or--? SB: Um hmm. Yeah. There has to be some accountability, but it seems like a nonprofit is much more like a small business than it is like a Fortune 500 company. I understand with a Fortune 500 company you need to have a board of directors that approves things, but Ibasically run a small business. And so for most people who run a bookstore they don’t have a group of fifteen people that they report to. I think the difference is a little bit on oversight and the financial piece. There isn’t, you can’t really embezzle your own money as a small business. It’s like it’s yours to a certain extent. So I get the need for the governance and oversight, but it seems like there would be, there would have to be a better way to cut out some of the bureaucracy that’s involved. I don’t know if it’s like an advisory council or I just think it’s almost impossible to get all lawyer-y, the fiduciary duties that board members have unless they are incredibly proactive in seeking out information and demanding a lot of time for that. I don’t think they can really do their duty without a lot of information that most of them don’t have. Either because they don’t ask or they don’t know to ask. So it’s very, it just seems like a set up to fail in some ways. But maybe if there was a much larger organization and you had 200 staff people who could produce all these reports and really keep them engaged, but for us it’s just kind of like, they get copies of all the financials and reports and whatever. But they don’t look at the books necessarily on a daily basis. So they wouldn’t necessarily have all the information that they need to do all of their different due diligences. We may end up cutting that out. EW: So to switch gears a little bit, I wanted to ask you about last summer. Just tell me the things. SB: Oh lord. So real, real truth talk. I don’t think I can tell you all that. We had a staff turnover that was unexpected the night that the first version of the motorcycle bill was introduced. So it was myself and this other person. The other person quit that night. So I was literally on the phone with the Washington Post and Huff Po and all these people trying to get in touch with this other person who was clearly not going to be gotten in touch with. I mean it was absolutely a sneak attack, but most of what was in the bill we had, we knew was coming, had either passed already or was part of our forecast for what we were expecting to see. I think the thing that didn’t really follow for me was why they did it the way they did it when they had the numbers. They didn’t need to do it; it was going to pass. So there’s, and having a hearing in the political sense usually gives people a sense of being heard. So we took into consideration all the public opinion and we did this. So it gives them much more to defend against. In retrospect it was a political pissing contest is the only thing I can come up with. But between the house and the senate and the governor. It was designed to put the governor in a bad position, which it did. So that was like inside baseball politics that we didn’t had nothing to do with abortion safety or women’s access to health care or any of the things we care about. So in the middle of all that and I was probably rum1ing on fumes, but the most powerful thing was I remember sitting in my office at my house because I was on vacation—that brilliant idea on my part and having my husband design the graphic to put on social media and then posting it while I’m texting with our lobbyist and doing all this other stuff and trying to figure out what we’re going to do. And then that, from that post essentially and a handful of calls and emails that we made, like 600 people showed up the next morning in the middle of the work day. They were just everywhere. A part of me was sad because it was like well, the bill’s going to pass. So we have to be aware of, we have to be framing for people why they showed up and why that was important, that wasn’t the ultimate policy result. But the idea that they thought they could sneak this through and that’s not happening. I didn’t know at the time, but Senator Nesbitt who is one of the most outspoken folks about the bill, he ended up passing away, three months ago now. He had always been very friendly and voted right on all our issues, but I had never heard him speak about abortion access and reproductive health care, and that was really an incredibly poignant moment to hear someone who has not been as outspoken about it really kind of just call everybody out. And I think he actually said in his speech like they’re going to show up here and you’re going to be, you’re not going to get away with this. So if felt good to be able to do that for him, but really being physically immersed in all that was really quite powerful. And seeing all the people, you couldn’t go anywhere; you couldn’t move. People were just everywhere. That was kind of before a lot of the, I mean the Moral Monday stuff had started. But there were definitely five or six of the plastic handcuffs under the seat I was in, and the guy kept yelling at me because I didn’t know what it was. And I reached down to see what was under my seat, and he was like, “If you move those I’m going to arrest you.” I’m like, “Okay.” People were definitely on edge. But it was really, it was a moment where I thought everybody came together and at least in our kind of coalition put a lot of the politics aside, which was really nice to really focus up on what are we going to do, and we made plans to do a lot of the behind the scenes work which actually ended up being incredibly helpful in watering down the bill a lot. And I think a lot of that gets lost in that story. But it protected medication abortion and the, we’re here a year later and they’re still working on the mles as opposed to October 1St all the clinics have shut down. And so that was huge, and I think there’s a lot of feeling right now because there is a super majority of anti-choice folks that there’s no, there are no gains to be won. There’s no ground; it’s just they’re going to do what they want. And that experience really kind of affirmed for me that it might be bad, but our job is really to work hard to make it less bad and to make it as palatable as possible and that there is a very vocal extreme majority, but they’re also a ton of people who do not agree with what they’re doing and are willing perhaps for their own political sakes to kind of help push back. And that I wasn’t really expecting that. I thought, “Well, what are we going to do? What are we going to do? Because there’s reall --, we don’t have the numbers. We can’t stop this.” So it taught me a lesson that don’t listen to all of the pundits sometimes. Even the really smart ones who know what they’re talking about because this is--, it’s a polarizing issue in some respects, but it’s also a very kind of common ground issue when it’s framed the right way. And that a lot of people, and the people of North Carolina don’t support this type of behavior from their General Assembly. They might agree with parts of it, but generally speaking they don’t think that this is how it should’ve been handled. They don’t think this is good for women. They don’t think this is good for health care. So that was really important. I was also not there for--, I was there for that but then the whole cookie thing. I was, I tried to take vacation again. That didn’t work out. Stop, you don’t see me doing that ever again. But I remember hearing about it. I was on the phone with our press person in DC a lot, and it just seemed so--, I’m glad I wasn’t there. Because I think I would’ve been really--, I don’t know how livid I would’ve been. But the whole cookie, I just, that doesn’t. It’s just like what are your--, your people must not be doing a very good job that they let you bring cookies to protesters in the middle of the street in the middle of the day as if that’s, like I don’t even really know. He never really explained it in any way. So I don’t really know what his, like what was going on in his mind around that or if it was just a big thumb in your eye. But that for me really-- I think this is my, sorry. Hear my car. [Side conversation] You’re going to have to let me know what were we talking about? EW: Motorcycle vagina. SB: Oh yeah. EW: And the cookie thing. SB: And the cookie thing. [Whispers] I think the big takeaway of the whole experience for me--, sorry that was my foot. The big takeaway for the whole experience for me was really the power and the passion of the people in North Carolina who believe what we believe and their willingness to demonstrate that both physically showing up for Moral Mondays and showing up at the senate on a very brief amount of notice and then the reach that our message can have in terms of the national media, in terms of it and people who I, on a personal level people who I haven’t really talked to a whole lot since law school or college or whatever sending me emails or Facebook messages about, “Oh my gosh I saw the thing,” which was really exciting to see that people--. You’re in so much of a bubble it’s really hard to know what people know and what people are paying attention to and whether your message especially in the dynamic, our coalition dynamic of whether the work that we’re doing is differentiated or Visible to folks. So I think it was incredibly stressful and exhausting and like the never ending series of whack a mole. They just kept coming back. But I think that the idea that we can make a difference and that even, and that people are really interested and engaged and wanting to mobilize around this, that they’re passionate about it. It’s not, while it sometimes feels really isolating. There’s a ton of people across the state who want to find a way to be supportive and that that was really invigorating at a time that personally it was a little debilitating. I was like, you’re by yourself, and everything bad that could’ve happened all happened in a twenty-four hour period. So that was really helpful for me to kind of have that both personally and political perspective on things, to really understand, “Wow we’re not like we may be in an office with a couple of people. But there’s hundreds of thousands of people across the state behind us who agree with wha --.” And I do appreciate the advocacy that we’re doing. EW: What did you do for self health care during this time? SB: That was a little bit of a low point for me probably. I didn’t, I mean I didn’t, and then I ended up, so that was most of July. And then August I was trying to hire and do all that and kind of pick up all the pieces. I had thought about it before but I actually applied and made, like it happened. The Rockwood Leadership Institute, which is based in Bay area in California does a, they have a weeklong leadership--to call it a training isn’t really--. It’s like a seminar or a series of workshops, mostly a cohort that you work with for people working in social justice and human rights work that was available only for women who were doing that kind of work. So I signed up and got that funded for myself knowing that, and it wasn’t until September. But I was like, “Okay. I can make it until September.” So at some point in the middle of August I was like, “This is got to, something’s got to give because this is not working.” Clearly it’s not working for any number of reasons, and I need that reinforcement and perspective. So it didn’t really help in the immediate term, but it really helped me find a lot of perspective for myself, and hopefully helped, which is why it was so poignant for you to make those remarks. Because that is literally what I've been working on since September. It was building of last year, kind of building that cultural shift and buildin --. We’re not perfect, and there are slides, and you have to--, there are days where work life balance doesn’t go so well. But that idea that we’re institutionally committed to people as leaders and a culture that feels supportive and not exploitative. And I had had our employee handbook, which had been revised in eight different incarnations, but none of them were really where I wanted them to be. We added ﬂexible, a ﬂex time policy. We added a paid family leave policy. We really, I really made a point of creating a space I would want to work in and too that other people might want to work in so that we have an institutional commitment to sustaining a movement, not just producing activity. And I think that that is easy, when you’re trying to figure out. When you have 10,000 things to do or you feel like you have 10,000 things to do and you only have four hours and every day goes by so fast. Mondays just be like a marathon because I have to do all these things right now and it’s like, “Well, wait a minute. Maybe you don’t have to do all these things right now.” But you have to do them at some point this week. So how do you kind of provide yourself a little bit of perspective of what you’re working on and then also let things go that have to go? I’m sure you guys, zone out, but they’re called big rocks, but the three things you want to do, your week will be successful if you accomplish these three things. It’s really designed to help you have a guidepost of how, okay, okay when all these other things come ﬂying at you, this is your commitment to yourself and others to do these three things. You can’t do seventeen things, but you’re going to do these three or sometimes four and really focus there and really try to provide some sense of balance to we’re not asking you to do everything but be committed in the things that you say you’re going to do because there’s a tendency to do the low hanging, the fun--. You could spend two hours making a graphic, and while that’s awesome, that doesn’t really rise to the level of priority most of the time. But sometimes it does. So trying to give other people the tools that they need to manage their time effectively. To make everybody feel a little bit more sane has been a huge accomplishment. And then we have to keep doing. Put one foot in front of the other. EW: Okay I have one last question, which is partially because of my perception of what you do. So tell me if this is just wrong. SB: Sure. EW: So I was wondering if you had any advice for people who want to turn what they believe in into a career? SB: Sure. I mean the biggest--, and this is that advice that you get when you’re like, “That’s not helpful.” So I understand, I’ll give practical advice and then my actual advice which is just do--, if you can figure out what you’re passionate about you will find a way to do that in your life. You’ll make it happen. You’ll create it, but just listening to that for yourself is the key because I think a lot of people do what they think they’re supposed to do or do what somebody told them they should do or do what they think is the financial right thing to do, and you pay for it in other ways. So I would say if you can figure out what it is that makes you excited then and you feel alive when you do it, it’s not going to be every day. I think that’s the other thing people think. Like, “Well, today was boring.” Well, lots of days are boring. But if you know that you’re in that position to do, I mean for me it’s the advocacy work, the strategy, the legislative piece that that--. I do all these other things so I can do that. But that’s the part where I feel like I know what I’m doing and I can do this well and I got this. Or most of the time when I’m doing media stuff I’m pretty good on my feet. So I know that about myself, and I know that that’s where I really shine. So trying to do all these other things so that I can be a spokesperson and be an advocate. Also just trying a whole bunch of stuff. I know that’s also one of those things. That helps you get there because you can do, and you can believe--, you can convince yourself you really like doing something, but you’re just like, other people will also tell. They’ll be like, “Oh you really don’t seem tha --.” Just listen to yourself and other people around that. I think if you know, I mean for me it was okay to take a step back because I knew what I would be. So I practiced law for five years, not that I wasn’t being--. I was building my advocacy skills. I was building my ability to argue on my feet in front of a group of people and be comfortable with public speaking, how to build personal relationships with clients, not like that. But how do you get someone to believe you and trust you? I mean that’s all that kind of goes to donor work and how do you sell what you do and instill confidence in other people and you? But at the time, [whispers] I was like, “Why am I doing this? This is awful.” I never really--, I enjoyed some of it. Most of it was like, “Oh this is like, people are angry. They’re angry at me, and they’re angry at each other and it’s just, it’s all very yucky.” But I think I knew, I knew in the back of my mind, and then I finally had to convince myself, I need to go do the thing that I want to do, not the thing that makes way better money and it’s much more stable, and much more socially acceptable. That was hard to do but I’m glad I never-- I never really think, “Ah, I wish I was in the middle of a day long mediation with two people who hate each other.” I’m never like, “Oh I miss that so much.” And I also think you’re already doing--, but all the intemship type things, it’s all about relationships. It really is. And I know it’s not supposed to be, but every job in the social justice field that I've gotten is because, except for that one internship, was because I had volunteered with someone or I knew someone who knew someone because Ivolunteered with someone. It’s not because I applied for a job out of the blue and I got it. I’m sure that happens to people all the time, but it’s never happened to me. So it was working with people and then using those connections and not in a, “Oh I would like to meet with you for coffee so we can talk about my future.” But really being engaged in some way even if it’s not paid work in the field that you’re interested in is really important because those are the types of things, I mean, we’ve had a ton of people here who’ve gone on to get other jobs and now people call me. So so and so’s, there aren’t a lot of opportunity in this field in North Carolina, which is something that’s also like, think about where you want to go with what you want to do because if you want to be an advocate for reproductive rights in North Carolina there’s like four of us who get to do that for a living. So if you go to New York or DC. or California, there’s a whole lot more opportunities, which doesn’t mean there aren’t benefits for being here, but geography is really big in a way that I was well aware of when I decided to stay here. That was like, “What doI do next?” Like, “Well, I don’t know [whispers] apparently you go to ( ). That’s what everybody else does.” There’s a sense of you’re limited in some ways by your environment or your’e pushed by your environment so being really aware of how many people are there that are doing the type of work that I want to do where I am. If the answer is less than five, it may the kind of thing where you start there and you move somewhere else or you start somewhere else and move here. But I don’t think, there’s no one path. Nobody has taken the same path from what I can tell. Everybody kind of comes to it from different places. So figuring out what you want to do can take a circuitous route and you’ll still be all right. That’s the thing they don’t tell you in college. You’ll get there. Hopefully you’ll know when you’re there. EW: Is there anything else you want to say that we haven’t covered? SB: I don’t think so. EW: All right. Awesome. SB: ( )..