 Tracy: This is Allison Tracy. It is February 12, 2013. I’m with Barbara Gelpi to interview her about her life and her time at Stanford University. This is for the Stanford Historical Society, and we’re conducting the interview in the Gelpis’ home. Barbara, to start out, can we talk a little bit about where you were born and where you grew up? Gelpi: [00:00:23] Yes, I’m happy to, because it’s one of the dramatic things about my life. I was born in an oil camp in Colombia, 29 kilometers from the Magdalena River in a place called El Centro. It’s interesting—my father was not an oilman. That’s to say he wasn’t out on the field. He wasn’t a petroleum engineer. He was an accountant, but with a Canadian oil company that finally, though, through a series of steps, went back to Exxon in New Jersey. I was born in 1933 in that oil camp. Though not discovered by Jimmy Wheeler, actually the setting up of that [camp] and the extraction of the oil was partly due to the Stanford petroleum engineer named Jimmy 12 Wheeler, who was there. [00:01:45] So there is a Stanford connection from the very beginning of my life, so to speak. So I grew up there in El Centro and then Cartagena, and back to El Centro. [We] had a one-room schoolroom but with an amazing teacher. When I was ten, though I was a little young for it… it was usual in a kind of colonial system that I was sent to a convent boarding school in Toronto at Loretto Abbey. Now, it was a convent boarding school because my parents were both Catholics. I did have family there. My mother’s parents lived in Toronto, so I wasn’t totally alone. But I was sent there in 1944, and the war was still on. I was at a great distance from home, because my parents and my sister by that time lived in Bogotá, where my father was then stationed. I got my fifth form, so I was there for five years. At that point there were five years in Canadian high school as preparation for university. So I took the exams to go to the University of Toronto, and I would have gone to St. Michael’s College, but in that year, 1951, my father was able to get a transfer to Coral Gables, Florida. So from Loretto Abbey, I went to the University of Miami, which was in some ways a more astonishing change than from the one-room school to the convent. [laughs] Tracy: Why do you say that? Gelpi: [00:03:44] Well, I had been in a convent for seven years, and the University of Miami was a kind of wide open, hard-drinking, crazy place in lots of ways. In some ways, socially, to me, I mean. To me. But I was a commuter; I lived at home and was very glad to do so. 13 It turned out the University of Miami, which had nearly collapsed during the Crash and the Depression, had just hung on through the 1930s, got a huge push in the war with army training people coming in. Then after the war, it was able to open up. It was in the process of opening up, and it was able to bring in male teachers, who’d been in the war and who were very good. [00:04:48] The English Department was a very good department, and I flourished there. I loved that. I loved the academics and did well. Because I was there, I started teaching in remedial English when I was a junior. Up to that time I’d always meant to be a teacher, but it was taken as.. I never thought of doing anything but teaching high school, but I’d heard education courses were very boring, so I kept putting them off. Then a professor, Mr. Shaw, I remember him coming back with me from a course. I worked sort of person-to-person, and then there was always a professor in charge who would give the class a reference of pronouns, [for example]. But [as we were] coming back, he asked had I ever thought of going on to a higher degree? This would have been in about 1954. It shows… it’s interesting, that, my goodness, I hadn’t thought of that. [00:06:02] But he gave me the idea, so I got my M.A. at Miami. Through a wonderful woman, Wilma Kirby-Miller, whose name I would like to record here… she was the dean of graduate studies at Radcliffe, and had herself been a farm girl who had made her way to the University of Chicago. She went around the country looking in unlikely places for possible Radcliffe graduate students. Through an alumna of Radcliffe who was in the English 14 Department, I was interviewed by her, and she put in a word for me. That was necessary in those days. There was a quota on women, which was 10 percent of the students who came in. [00:07:00] Now, at that point, of course, one was really getting into Harvard, but Harvard did not have any women students, so one entered Harvard by way of Radcliffe. Harvard at that point, as I remember… the class was as big as a hundred coming in for M.A.’s in English or maybe to go on for the Ph.D. The weeding was horrific, and only 10 percent of that hundred could be women. The year is 1957, and I got to be one of that 10 percent and was heartily congratulated with the other students who came in in other fields, by the male president of Radcliffe. So that’s the way it worked at that time. One felt not how angry… one was led to feel and I think one did feel not angry that there weren’t more women there, but very proud to be allowed in. [00:08:12] So then I did get my degree in 1962. I was the last of the Radcliffe Ph.D.’s. After that, the program for the Ph.D.’s and a little later on for undergraduates became [Harvard]. I mean, Radcliffe still existed as an alumna organization and for fundraising and various things like that. It was more administrative, but you got a Harvard degree. I don’t actually have literally a Harvard degree; I have a Radcliffe one. By now I’m proud of it, though at the time it was a difficulty. One did all the work and had to make the grades and so on, but in the world at large, Radcliffe was not… it didn’t sound the same to people as Harvard. Even in academe, they’d say, “Now, 15 that’s a women’s college somewhere in New England, is that right?” So that’s how it was. Tracy: Going back a little bit, can you tell me about your mother? Gelpi: [00:09:25] Yes. I actually have started a family memoir. Its inception was really thoughts about my mother’s father. My mother was a great raconteur and an amazing woman. You had to be amazing. Both my parents were very strong characters, because it was pioneering to go down [to South America?]. But my mother started life as, actually, a musician, trained in music. Her father was a very well-known Canadian musician. He created and conducted the Ottawa Symphony Orchestra, where my mother was born. He came from Hereford, England, in 1902. His name was Donald Heins. And my mother was born Frances Ardelle Heins. As I say, he became well known across Canada—it’s a small country, but he was also a teacher in the Conservatory and he gave exams across Canada in music. He came to Toronto in about 1927 or 1928, as the concertmaster of the Toronto Symphony Orchestra. [00:10:57] My mother at that point, though she’d been given French lessons, it shows that she was still… it was [asked] “What would Ardelle do? Well, maybe she’d better learn to be some sort of governess.” You had to brush up your French. When she came to Toronto, though, she told her parents that she was going to take a secretarial course, and so she did. She became a secretary with an insurance company. My father, meanwhile, though his sister had gone to the University of Toronto…. He was sixteen when he graduated very well from the Upper 16 Canada College School. He did very well, but he didn’t know what he wanted to do at sixteen. So they said, “Well, he seemed a quiet boy, solid.” So he was put in a bank. He was quiet, but he was very intelligent and really very ambitious. [00:12:10] He decided after a couple of years that he didn’t really like the bank, and somehow he applied for and got a job with Imperial Oil in Peru. So at nineteen, first he went to New York and then he took the ship, which is what you did, to Talara, an oil camp in Peru. He was there for a three-year contract. He came back when he was about twenty, maybe twentytwo, going on twenty-three. He and my mother… it was the music. His father was a very wellknown Canadian music critic and editor of the Saturday Night. My mother’s father was a friend—they were friends—and he was this very well-known Toronto musician. So the families had this musical thing. My Grandmother Charlesworth said to my mother, Ardelle Heins, “Oh, my son’s coming back from Peru.” She wanted to get him some friends. He’d been away. So that’s how they met. They were quite… they were engaged in six weeks. Though, of course, in the Victorian way, [because] it took something like two years while he got enough money to be able to support a wife. It was still a somewhat Victorian system. They married on July 9th, 1931. [00:13:48] But at that point he had been brought back to the Toronto office, and everything seemed lovely. They had this apartment close to her parents and close to his parents. Then he was asked to go to El Centro, and it clearly was going to make a big difference in his career to take on that. So 17 that’s what happened. That’s how they went down. So that’s my parents. But neither of them actually went to college, and so that’s something to remember in the family history. I was actually, in that particular branch of the family, the first to go to college. Then my sister came after me. Tracy: Tell me a little bit about your sister. Gelpi: [00:14:44] Well, my sister was only nineteen months younger than I was. My sister was younger than I was and was frailer. In El Centro she had a number… there were all kinds of things that one could get, including yellow fever, so we were given shots. I mean, it was jungle. However, it was cleared of mosquitoes. You didn’t get malaria in the camp. It was cleared of mosquitoes. And you think of it right now… you didn’t get malaria because they covered every bit of standing water. This is tropical forest. It’s the tropical Amazonian jungle, or it’s the Magdalena River, but it was all part of that huge Amazon Basin. They covered every particle of water, every scrap of standing water with oil. The camp absolutely reeked when you [arrived]. One came there by a little electric car, first by riverboat up the Magdalena. Gabriel Garcia Marquéz, in his memoir, has a description of those riverboats. Anyway, the company had its own riverboat, and you took a riverboat, then you took a little electric car into the camp to El Centro. So you took a riverboat to Barrancabermeja and then went to El Centro. In later years you would get a little puddle-jumping plane at the coast and fly over into Barrancabermeja and then take the little electric car. So when you flew in… I can remember that; I was old enough. You get off this little plane, and [demonstrates] it 18 would hit you, the smell of oil. But I’ve thought since, what was that like for our health? [laughs] Well, here I am at seventy-nine. So I don’t know. No one seemed to think of it then. Tracy: I was afraid you going to say everything was covered in pesticides. Gelpi: [00:17:10] Well, I guess the oil worked as a kind of pesticide too. Tracy: Sounds like it. Gelpi: [00:17:14] So, anyway, my sister was frailer than I, though sturdy and she, too, is still alive. So she stayed when I went up to boarding school at ten, but she couldn’t bear it. She wouldn’t have gone then anyway, but she didn’t finally come to boarding school until she was, I think, fourteen. Now, by that time, I was fifteen and a half, and there were a number of years when we were separated. I was really much more closely identified with the boarding school. It became my life in a way it never became Joanie’s really, anyway. [00:18:06] She, too, went to the University of Miami. She followed me. One of the things that I feel I should tell, and I say it in a confessional mode: I was a Delta Gamma at the University of Miami. And it shows. I actually joined the sorority. I’d come from a convent, and I thought that this meant I would find a sisterhood that I had been used to in the boarding school, and I found that it wasn’t that. I really knew nothing of the anthropology, and it was finally an anthropologist at Harvard who explained to me what sororities were for. Now, I did not date at the University of Miami. I tried a couple of times and found myself so horrified. Tracy: What did you find so horrifying about it? 19 Gelpi: [00:19:20] Well, the first date at the University of Miami was with a very nice man. Just before we went to Coral Gables, my sister and I, the last time we came down to South America—the company would bring down these children who were at the boarding school. The last trip was made in 1951 for me. My last trip was to Lima, Peru, which was a wonderful place to go in 1951. I spent the summer there, and there fell in love with my sister’s boyfriend. I would have been too shy to even think about it, but then she went back to the convent and I was there, and I was sort of put to take care of him. [laughs] So I fell in love with my sister’s boyfriend. He was a really darling and very dear young man. All right. Again—a sort of Victorian situation. The year is 1951, but there were hangovers of the earlier century and very much so with me. That’s why I studied the literature. [laughs] I’m very comfortable in the period, very. [00:20:44] So, this first boyfriend, Gerry, was in Cambridge by [the time I was at University of Miami], and so I felt that I should date. There was this young man in my world lit class who asked me to a party, and the party was at the beach. But there were these figures under gray blankets. I simply stared out at the sea. Now, he was very sweet young man, so he just took me home. I don’t know what he expected. [laughs] He took me home. Then he asked me again. Now, he asked me this time to a ball, a prom, and I loved to dance. Gerry was a wonderful dancer, and I had learned to dance. I loved it. And I’d learned at the convent to dance. That was part of being taught to be a lady. We were taught dancing. So we’re Victorian girls. It was part of 20 gracefulness and social acquirements, and accomplishments—a Victorian word. Anyhow, I went to this dance because I had a beautiful dress, an apple-blossom dress that I’d wanted to wear, and I liked the idea of dancing. But, again, the drinking was very, very heavy, and fraternities ruled the place. By that time, I think I was a Delta Gamma. What happened in the dance was that somebody was sick over the back of my dress. Well, again, I have a vomiting phobia. I’ve lived with it. I’ve been a mother. But, I have a vomiting phobia. I still have it. [laughs] So, again, he had to take me home, and he didn’t ask me to date anymore. [00:23:07] I had seen what parties at the University of Miami were like, and I didn’t want any part of it. I wouldn’t do it. I wouldn’t do it. So that was, again, bizarre. [Talk] about being a Delta Gamma, but not dating. That’s how little I understood what Delta Gamma was supposed to be about. [laughs] The thing that is a confessional about this is that finally because my father helped me, I was the treasurer. I never could have done it. But I was a very good treasurer because my father helped me, and so I was made president of Delta Gamma as a junior. [00:23:49] Then my sister came to the university, and she became a Delta Gamma. I think it was for her sake, really. It would have been a great trouble to her and would have created a great fuss if I had resigned from Delta Gamma, but I wish so I had. What made me really remove myself in my senior year from Delta Gamma was that there was a very brilliant, young 21 Jewish woman on campus whom I liked and who wanted to become a Delta Gamma, though there were Jewish sororities, and she was not allowed. Now, this was not because of the actives [in the sorority]. The chapter wanted her. The alumni would not allow it. Again, of course, it had everything to do with marrying well. I mean, you might find that your son was dating a Delta Gamma and that it would turn out she was Jewish. Well! So that’s still where things were in 1954 and 1955. Well, we know Gregory Peck in Gentleman’s Agreement, the movie dates from that period…. There was still horrible antiSemitism in this country. So that’s my confession about that. Meanwhile, I had not lived the usual social life when I went to Radcliffe, and my first year at Radcliffe I really disliked it. I loved the women I met. There were wonderful women. But we were a small band, and I found the atmosphere—the male atmosphere of Harvard—really bad. [00:25:50] But in my second year, in October of my second year, I was invited to a housewarming. Now, you can imagine that I was not somebody who went along. I liked things like this, but I’d actually been engaged to somebody who was not Harvard at all. That engagement, very fortunately for me, I broke off. So then I figured I should get in the swim, and to this housewarming, but, oh, god, it was going to be awful. There at the housewarming, I was greeted at the door by these three men—three really delightful faces. They were Joel Porte, Robert Kiely, and Albert Gelpi. Then there was a fourth man named Stephen, who was blind. This household of men was so delightful. They were so joyful in their appreciation of literature, and they were so open and welcoming. I found in 22 that house, as you never would do at Harvard… if someone started talking about Pamela, and if you hadn’t read Pamela, you certainly did not let that on. You knew enough about the plot of Pamela to just let it go. But there I dared. I said, “Oh, I’ve tried.” Pamela seemed to me awful. I’d tried, but I hadn’t read it. And Bob Kiely said, and this is not judgmental “Oh, listen, you should. No, try it again. It’s a hoot.” [laughs] [00:27:44] So, that was it. You didn’t have to fear. You could be yourself, and that way you could learn. So we taught each other. We studied for orals together, and then we helped each other through writing our dissertations. So we met every week just to give each other orals questions, and we continued those weekly meetings. [00:28:14] But by this time, by the last year, I was in a house. I was out of the Radcliffe Graduate Center, where I’d lived for the first four years, and was in a house. There were six women on Dana Street, but 27 rather than 67. One of the women was Jill Conway. These women were themselves dear friends and classmates. We all are still friends. By that time, Albert and I were really drawn to each other, but he was going to stay at Harvard. He wasn’t ready to be married, and no woman stayed at Harvard then. Tracy: What do you mean by no woman stayed at Harvard? Gelpi: [00:29:11] In the English department, if you had done well as a man, notably well, and were notably a good teacher and had done well on your orals, and your dissertation was commendable, then you were asked to stay on as an 23 assistant professor for usually about a sixth year. They had a curve, but it was taken that it would be almost impossible for you to get tenure at Harvard. However, you were given a good jumping-off place at Harvard. So that is what happened to all three—Joel, Al, and Bob. But no woman was ever asked, even at that point. A couple of years senior to me was then Helen Hennessy, now Helen Vendler, and she was a brilliant student. But Helen was not asked to stay. So if Helen Hennessy didn’t make it, you’d know that you wouldn’t make it. If you were a man at Harvard then, you lived in a Harvard house. If, again, you were a good tutor and professor, you were a tutor in a Harvard house. You were part of the senior common room, which included then professors from across the university. So you had mentors, and you had mentors in the English Department, which was all male. My mentor, Wilma Kirby Miller, did have a kind of half-time appointment, but I was never taught by a woman at Harvard. [00:31:11] I never had a real mentor at Harvard. I had professors. I would T.A. for people. I was a T.A. for I.A. Richards and for Walter Jackson Bate. I.A. Richards, particularly, was as close to a mentor as I got. He was really interested in my intellectual welfare. I think it was really taken at that point that though women were very good students, and it was worthwhile taking this 10 percent, they were going to marry. If you were a woman and married, at that point I still think as a married woman it was not taken that you would have a university position. Married women stayed home and were faculty wives. See, that’s really how it was. 24 So I didn’t have any mentoring. On the job market, I didn’t have any mentoring, and I felt fine, but I felt very bad leaving Harvard and leaving my friends behind. [I felt] angry at the fact that even though I was doing as well as they were, and they agreed. It wasn’t that I was angry at them, but I was angry at the system. Still you would not say I was a feminist. I never even thought of such a thing. I thought it was a nineteenth-century happening. [00:32:49] Anyway, one benefit I did have was I never went to the MLA to get a job as one does now. Chairs of English departments came to Harvard, and then professors in the English department would say, or the chair of the English department would say, “Well, I’d suggest you talk to this one and this one….” You would then be told that the chair of the University of Illinois was coming on Wednesday, and he’d like to have an interview with you at ten a.m. So that’s when one appeared and was interviewed for a job at Illinois. [00:33:44] It was Illinois, I remember, and the chair of the English Department was a pipe-smoking man, and he didn’t look at me much. He sat in profile, and we talked about my dissertation and such. Then he said, “But how does it feel to be a woman going to a man’s world?” And I said, “Well, I feel fine. I’ve been doing fine. I feel perfectly OK about that.” Although, I probably didn’t use that phrase at that time. But then I went back and was seeing Bob Kiely that evening—again, the pals were always meeting—and told them I’d had this weird experience. I’d been asked how it felt. I said, “How do you think I was supposed to answer a question like that?” 25 Bob said, “I don’t know. I don’t know. Well, maybe you should ask him. Turn it back and ask whether there is something you should be concerned about.” [00:35:02] So the next day I had an interview with Indiana, and he was a more kindly person, but he asked the same question is so many words—was I prepared to go out into a male profession. So I said, “Well, I’m not sure. Could you tell me, is there some way I should prepare myself better?” Something like that, I thought, to gently ask him his opinion. It’s very interesting though. Illinois offered me a job straight away, and Indiana didn’t. [laughs] Even then it was not very good to say, “Oh, I don’t see a problem.” So, I did have several job offers, but I didn’t have good advice. Tracy: And these job offers were for teaching? Gelpi: [00:35:57] Tenure track. Tenure-track English department [positions]. At that point, one came in as an instructor with a salary of something like nine thousand, ten thousand a year. Of course, these are 1962 dollars, but it was nine or ten thousand dollars a year for a regular tenure-track job. I was offered a job at Berkeley and at Illinois. Now, Illinois, I was told, and I think that they called me and told me this as one of the real positive aspects of going to Illinois, had very bleak in the winter. The library looked out over the fields, but that meant you really got a lot of work done. [laughs] Tracy: That’s a good euphemism for it. Gelpi: [00:36:58] I got offered [a job], too, at Berkeley, but Berkeley, somehow… again without proper advice, I felt Berkeley was being la-di-da or something 26 of the sort—I can’t remember. Then on December 4th, which is the Feast of St. Barbara, I got a job offer—I’d never even been interviewed here—from the University of California at Santa Barbara. Ah, here I understood, this was the Providence of God. I would go to Santa Barbara. Now, the reason I was given that offer, I’m sure, is that at Santa Barbara at that point, the chair of the department was Hugh Kenner, who was a very, very well-known and very prolific and brilliant scholar of Ezra Pound. I had written my M.A. thesis at the University of Miami under the mentorship of Clark Emery, who was also a Pound scholar. So that is what must have struck Hugh Kenner, and then he must have made inquiries. That’s how, without an interview, I was made the offer there. But I also did know that Hugh Kenner was there, and I had this ongoing Pound interest. Though once I got to Harvard, I met Ezra Pound several times…. Tracy: Oh, you did? Gelpi: [00:38:46] Well, I met him when I was in the process of writing this thesis on the religion of Ezra Pound. Clark Emery was writing a book about Ezra Pound and had gone to St. Elizabeth’s to meet him. So Clark wrote Pound to ask whether I might come to visit him in St. Elizabeth’s, and Pound sent back word that I might. So I did see him. That doesn’t have anything to do with this. Tracy: A story for another time. Gelpi: [00:39:22] That’s right. We haven’t even gotten me close to Stanford yet, and that is another story. But, that’s how I got to Santa Barbara. 27 When I got to Santa Barbara, I found now by this time I was twentyseven, and, again, in a very Victorian way… but I had dated many eligible Catholic men at Harvard and other men who weren’t Catholics. I liked my pals, but I knew by this time I wanted to marry, and I found when I went to Santa Barbara that everyone was married. Now, there were certain men who were divorced, but I really am Catholic, and I was not ready. I didn’t want married to me a really elderly divorced man. [laughs] So then, though, an actually wonderful friend I made there was the poet Edgar Bowers, who was very kind to me, and who was at that point closeted. Again, one still had to be closeted. He asked another man, J.V. Cunningham, who was a friend of his and a fellow poet… both of them students of Yvor Winters, who was a Stanford professor. So the first Wintersians I met were Edgar Bowers and J.V. Cunningham, and I met them at Santa Barbara. [00:41:16] J.V. Cunningham, in the second year I was at Santa Barbara, called long-distance, and in this gravelly voice said that in two days he was going into the English Department to head up a tenure-track position in Victorian. [He said] if I would tell him that I would take the position… he didn’t want me to fool around and then pretend. He wanted my assurance that I would take the position if offered, then he would tell the English Department that I was coming to Brandeis. So I thought about it for a bit, because I did love the West. I loved California, but it was lonesome. So I accepted and went back to Brandeis. I did know at that point that my pal, Al Gelpi, had not married. Bob Kiely had 28 married a very dear friend of mine, Jana Moravkova. They had been married a couple of years, but Al had not married. So Al and I, when I went back, we started not being pals [as much as] dates. So while I was teaching in my first year at Brandeis, we became engaged and married at the end of my first year teaching in the tenure track at Brandeis. Tracy: And this entire time he was still at Harvard? Gelpi: [00:42:50] He was still at Harvard, yes, but his time was… the years were running out. He was very happy teaching at Harvard and doing brilliantly. You’ll talk to Al and get his story. So we married in June 1965, and by that time his dissertation, which was on the poetry of Emily Dickinson, had been published by Harvard. My dissertation, which was on the 1890s in the Victorian period, had been published by Northwestern. So we each had a book, and we were both in the line for tenure. We went on a long honeymoon. I sold my Mustang to J.V. Cunningham, because I couldn’t afford the registration along with the high income tax I had as a single woman. I sold my Mustang, and my children have been sorry about that ever since. Tracy: I’m sorry about that. [laughs] Gelpi: [00:44:10] Yes, obviously. On the proceeds of the Mustang we had a beautiful honeymoon in Europe, but both of us felt very elderly. I was thirtyone. He was thirty-three. I thought I might be past childbearing, really, in those days. I came back from the honeymoon pregnant, and that, to us, was a wonderful surprise. But this is where, again, I hadn’t thought it through. 29 There wasn’t proper childcare. Once I had the baby… I mean, I actually had to go to bed for several months. Tracy: You were on bed rest? Gelpi: [00:44:56] Yes, bed rest. So I had to step off the tenure track at Brandeis, and I did that in… I taught one more year there, I think, but on and off. I did that in 1967. From 1967 into 1968 I had a little tiny [fellowship]. The Radcliffe Institute had just started. It was called Bunting Institute then. I had a little money given me for having childcare and babysitting, while I went to the library and worked on Walter Pater. [00:45:38] It was in November 1967 that Al, who now had to go on the job market, got the call to Stanford. Now, he had published a book, so he came to Stanford not… I think it was a sort of year, he didn’t have to go through the whole tenure process. It was really the expectation of tenure, as I remember it. And I came, as I say, having published this book, and having this interest in the pre-Raphaelite period and in Walter Pater in the 1890s as my specialty. As part of the package, I was given a lectureship, so not tenure track. It was with the permission, I suppose you’d say, to teach one course in my area a year. So we came in 1967. We came November to see it, and Al gave a lecture, and then Harvard talk and so on. We loved it. We arrived as faculty members in September 1968. We moved into Junipero House with by now a two-year-old, which is part of the Wilbur complex. Al had been, first, for years a live-in tutor at Lowell House, and I had been director of the Radcliffe Graduate Center for two years. That was, of 30 course, with graduate students who were really my peers. I did have responsibility for their social life and for visiting scholars and guests and so on as the director. I was living with my peers. I wasn’t living with students, but I was a Radcliffe tutor. [00:48:20] So both of us felt that we had a lot of preparation for being faculty residents, and we had been advised to do this. We had rented apartments in Cambridge since our marriage. We had no basis on which to buy a house. We needed to build up some [cash], and we had no equity. The best way to do it was to live rent-free and be a faculty resident in a house. We thought of ourselves as very well suited to do that, and it turned out not to be the same. Stanford was a very different place. The Stanford students were different from Harvard students. At that point, it was still very much a white campus. Tracy: Stanford was? Gelpi: [00:49:24] Yes—the students. There were some African American students and some Latino students, but they were token, you might say. I think they had reason. I think they were, you’d have to say, because they were so few in number. That became actually one of the big problems in our second year. Also Stanford was sports-minded in a way that Harvard was not. It’s like, “Fight fiercely Harvard, fight, fight, fight.” [laughs] That’s how it was… yes, Tom Lehrer, that’s how it was. So we found ourselves not in the swing of it for communicating well with Stanford students. But we also came in 1968. We had never really been in positions of responsibility in the way that we were in our previous experience. We were 31 now responsible in a world in which there were really drugs as well as alcohol, but maybe drugs [were] a more serious problem, including LSD. It was the big time of LSD and lots of experimenting in drugs. And it was also part of the period of sexual experimentation for young people, but both of us were very Victorian Catholic people. I keep saying this and telling you this. We had no personal background that would make it easy for us to even figure out how to operate. We did have assistant R.A.’s, who we needed and were very helpful, but they, too, were graduate students and were really not into the undergraduate scene. We communicated with them well, and they would mostly say to us, “Leave it to us. It’s better that we try to deal with this LSD overdose that’s happening in the dorm. You have to know about it, but it won’t help for you to come in. Let us talk to them.” [00:52:09] So we were constantly aware through our R.A.’s, but we were also horrified and distressed, but I don’t think that we knew exactly what to do. I don’t think anybody did. The person who was the person we sort of spoke to was a young man just here from Yale himself, who didn’t have much experience. He was in what would be the Dean of Students Office. He was a very nice person, but he was, if anything, younger than we were. He was our liaison, too, and he was telling us what to do. He was really feeling his way. All of this was happening, and we weren’t…. Of course, it was happening in the nation. I mean, we had all lived through the assassination of Kennedy, the assassination of Robert Kennedy, and the assassination of 32 Martin Luther King. All this had happened in the years before, and we were still trying to take that in. [00:53:18] At one point when there was a rape in the dorm, a young woman had just gotten raped, Al came in the morning to tell me about that. I said, “Al, I don’t understand. I don’t believe it. Truly, this isn’t possible.” He said, “Barbara, the fabric of society is coming apart.” He was right, it was very bad, and we didn’t have the training or the experience to deal with it properly. Then in the second year, I was pregnant then with our second child. This is by the spring, and really the trouble occurred in the fall quarter of 1969. There were two young black women in the dorm, and, again, in a way that didn’t make any sense, the dorm…. This was one of the first dorms that was coed. Besides being all four years, we were put into a dorm that was an experiment. So they were all four years, and there were three tiers, women on the first floor, men on the second, women on the third, as I remember. [00:54:45] So on the second women’s floor, the two young African American women were put in the same room. They were the only African American women in the dorm. There were, I think, a couple of African American men. There was a dance that we’d given permission for, and so we were away for that weekend. When we came back, we found that there had been difficulties at that dance, and that the two young African American women had felt uncomfortable when the ladies were in the dance. They just hadn’t felt comfortable. 33 [00:55:33] Then that incident, which was just an incident and it seemed to have passed over, in the spring was made much, much worse because these young women found swastikas on their door. They were terrified. So this is about February 1970. The only time to have house meetings, I’ve found since, was late at night. That’s the only time the students were all available. The only place to get everybody together seemed to be in the hallway of Junipero. So the first meeting that we had about the swastika incident became horrific. It has been recorded… one of the things that was really terrible was that we found… we ourselves had talked to these young women. We came to the meeting with them. We thought we were in good communication. Again, we didn’t have enough experience to know that we were talking out of a whole realm that was antithetical to them. In trying to be what we thought was nice in our white way, we were being condescending. We were experienced as being condescending. We were experienced as condescending, and as other. It was in the early times of really hard, hard discussion over these issues. The meeting was very hard and very angry and frightening. Tracy: Angry in what way? Gelpi: [00:57:49] Well, there was an organization. The Black Students Union was a presence on campus, and members of that union did come into this meeting. There was a question of whether those men had weapons, and it seemed quite possible. They wore raincoats. So it was an explosive situation, and there was just the question of what were we going to do for the sisters. I don’t think we had thought up anything good that we could do. 34 [00:58:33] This is the same time, of course… this is all part of a mix of very violent feelings on campus against the war in Vietnam and the beginnings of when there were student strikes. Now, we were anti-war. We were marching in anti-war parades ourselves, so we shared that feeling. But, again, thinking that you shared the feeling was not… we hadn’t talked it through. There were just lots more undercurrents and lots more anger about different things that one source of anger would ignite another source of anger in these very troubled times. Now, at this point… I think by 1969 you also get the beginnings of feminist anger. I don’t remember feminist anger coming into that story of our experience in Junipero. But anger about the war, anger about civil rights, which, again, we can see in the nation that these became the microcosm of our dorm. And then drugs, and then homophobia and the whole beginning of an evolution of how are we going to think about people who are gay. The word “gay,” certainly in my consciousness was very new. “Homosexual” was the word one used. So that anger over homosexuality came in as a current in those dorm meetings, too, because it turned out that there was a homosexual presence in the dorm. But there was then just these young black women had experienced that as horrific. Again, understand that it was another strain, another difficulty, something else that we were not prepared to deal with and dealt with ineptly. No question, I think, though we weren’t alone. I don’t feel that we were stupid. It was that we were inexperienced, and in that sense we were stupid. We didn’t act intelligently because we didn’t know enough about what was really going on, how the world really was at that point. 35 [01:01:39] I did have our second child safely, and we were in the process of building this house. Another thing that was wonderful at that point about Stanford that was a big draw was that it had all of this land, and it was leasing out parcels of this land still. It hadn’t all been used up or grown. So this house was being built, and we moved in here in September 1970. At that time, things were so troubled that people were surprised… you see the glass all the way across the house. It was to get the view of those hills. There weren’t all the trees, and we looked straight out at the foothills, and we wanted that view. But people said, “Aren’t you nervous about all that glass in your house? You put your name on the mailbox. Do you think that’s a good idea?” I don’t know. So you can see how troubled and how, in a way, paranoid life was on the campus. The bookstore, for instance, was boarded up. The Faculty Club just didn’t try to… it had had plate glass before. It just left wooden boards because the plate glass would just be broken again. There were these marches, riots, and so on. A member of the English department, Bruce Franklin, was one of the real central forces in these angry confrontations. So that’s how we get to 1970. Tracy: From 1968 into the 1970s, I mean, there’s definitely significant events— buildings being burned and Sterling’s office being burned. Gelpi: [01:03:53] Now, what was the Research Institute? Tracy: The protests over SRI and at the Computer Center. So there are these big events, but I’m curious… it sounds as though this tension—what erupted into these different events was always sort of bubbling in the dorms or in the 36 daily student life, and that these issues that people were… I don’t want to put words in your mouth, but I’m just wondering was it on a daily basis tense with the students as they’re working through these issues and you’re working through these issues? Gelpi: [01:04:27] It was more than tense. That is to say the spring quarter of 1970, for one thing, it really for a while certainly was, and our dorm was not alone. This, though, was the point at which I think Dick Lyman was provost, and Stanford at points seemed on the brink of chaos and on the brink of chaos in the dorms. Ours wasn’t the only dorm, but ours did seem to have a number of these bubbling problems. So we weren’t the only one, but we, as I say, were a kind of microcosm of the whole. Dick Lyman, as provost… because the person who was president then had come over and was inexperienced and really was an intellectual who wasn’t able to cope with it and who wasn’t coping. I’ve just been to Dick Lyman’s memorial very recently, and he’s credited, very rightly, with actually piloting Stanford, piloting the ship off the reefs. It could have gone… I mean, who knows what would have happened. [01:06:07] Things could have gotten very much worse than they did. But at the time, in that spring of 1970, with all of these riots, with the buildings being—what do you say—stoned and so on, with people conducting rifle practice out in the hills. There was the Venceremos. So there was the threat, a real threat of real violence. In the dorm while I was busy having the baby and after all of this, by the time I came home from the hospital… it was a very brief [stay], though. 37 It’s about that time that the students took things into their own hands and said this was all silly about the three-tier men, women, men. They were going to room wherever they liked, so they did. In the dorm, the whole configuration of where people slept changed. Then, and, again, no one in the residence, nobody… people knew these things were going on, of course. We were in constant touch and trying to think of what to do. People hadn’t come up with answers yet. Because another thing that happened was that the students started bringing dogs into the dorms, but not cleaning up after them, so the dorms became really, really nasty. [01:07:47] Now, one of the things that was pointed out… part of these students were angry about the treatment of the Chicano workers on campus, and rightly so. But they were, themselves, thoughtless because the cleanup crew still had to clean up these places that had become sumps. We left. That was the fall. When we left, that was the chaos of what we left. You’d have to go back to how Dick Lyman brought order. I think one of the things he did was really strengthen the residence office, the dean, and really… but that would have to be somebody else’s story. I didn’t experience that. Tracy: You had left before that. Gelpi: [01:08:43] Right. We left in the chaos, and we left then to move back to not to taking care of and being responsible for students across disciplines and across years, but working with students in the English department. And the English department, too, had been in chaos. Many of these student 38 protestors were graduate students in English, and were leaders in these confrontations. In the English department that spring, and I think even the spring before, there had been strikes. The English department faculty joined the student on strikes. [01:09:33] So I remember in that time, and I went back in those years, I think it was already in 1968-1969 that the English department faculty went on strike, and this was with Ian Watt as the chair, as our leader. There were great worries about whether the library would be attacked. Faculty members had to try to help… whether the files in the library would be destroyed. There were still index cards. Those index cards could be destroyed very easily. So there were fears about that. [01:10:17] The English department was also really against the war and the way the war was being conducted. The strike involved actual teach-ins, and so we would meet, but we would talk about things that were happening in the world scene and in Vietnam and not about whatever the topic was in English. So when I went back to my notes on Pater and the pre-Raphaelites for my seminar, I found out I had almost nothing there, nothing in the way of… the classes were very wispy indeed. In the second year, I taught that again. Again, the class became discussion of many of the events in the world, though there was some more talk of William Morris and his social ideas. So, I think maybe we were learning, or I was learning, to turn these things into… to give them more historical focus, because I remember the second time I taught the course was better, even though the campus was in chaos and some of the members of 39 my class were among these leaders of the chaos, of the deliberate chaos. So now bring us to 1970. Tracy: I want to go back to one point really quick. You had earlier talked about how as a professor’s wife that there was at the time an expectation you would just be a wife and not teach. Gelpi: [01:11:59] Yes. Tracy: But it sounds like Stanford had not a drastically different take but a little bit of a different take in that they offered you at least a lectureship. Gelpi: [01:12:08] Yes, that’s right. I took it very kindly. It turns out after the fact— and maybe this would be the place to say that Stanford also was very forward-looking. Here the person who made that possible was the chair then, Thomas Moser, whose wife, Mary Moser, had been a Radcliffe dean. She was a brilliant woman, and was a true helpmate to Tom, though here she was a faculty wife. But Tom was very aware of women’s gifts and women as gifted and as being as good as men, and certainly as good as men at teaching English, no question. So he became chair after decades in which a man named Virgil Whitaker had been chair, and Virgil Whitaker was avowedly anti the presence of women in the department. Now, we can come back to that. [01:13:27] There was a very famous woman, Marjorie Garber. She was brilliant but a very difficult Shakespearian, as I remember. Virgil had experienced her, perhaps as a young faculty member, and so once he came into power, he decided that women did not work well on the faculty. It was 40 noted outside of Stanford that it as a place where women need not apply in English. I don’t speak for other departments. Now, Tom made an active and very efficacious push to right that, and he brought in not only various professors, but he brought in two young women and put them on the tenure track: Diane Middlebrook and Anne Mellor. And Nancy Packer had been put on the tenure track. So that was three women. That’s extraordinary. Students at Stanford were being taught by women in a way that I at Harvard had not been taught by a woman. So this was another thing that made Stanford seem like a very good place for women. [01:14:58] And it turns out, we learned from Tom Moser maybe years later, that when Al applied, Tom knew of my work and knew of me. He thought of the possibility of asking us, of hiring us both and making it a joint appointment of some kind. That was very unusual at the time, though it shortly became more at least a possibility, even here at Stanford. We can talk about that later. But he thought of this and thought it would make beautiful sense. He asked some of the wise heads—he was a comparatively young man, even though he had the responsibility of chair. So he asked George Sensabaugh, and then he said, “Well, let’s wait and see. If we pushed it, then maybe, but why? Why should Stanford go out on a limb to do something like that?” Here is this woman already with a child and of childbearing years. No, no, no. But it turns out, had we pushed it…. So I can’t just say it was Stanford’s fault. It was, again, a lack of consciousness on my part. We didn’t 41 think of it. We thought ourselves lucky. I thought myself lucky. So you have to take in that part of one’s own history. Once I got here, then it means Al’s salary was, even as a young associate professor, still in the low teens. We needed the money, and we wanted money for a house. So I did take whatever teaching I could. I also was allowed, as many faculty wives who had degrees were, to take sections of freshmen English. Now, Stanford also was proud and rightly proud of its freshman English program and insisted on the participation of all the faculty. It wasn’t simply shunted off to graduate students. [01:17:27] But there were still, since it was a requirement across the university, always need for more courses than they had faculty for, and so that was one way you could get extra work. I took on work as a T.A., grading papers in, like, a course in nineteenth-century literature with a colleague, Lucio Ruotolo, who did treat me as a colleague. But at the same time I saw drawing pay as a T.A. I needed the money, and I love teaching, and loved it, so I wanted to keep my hand in. Now it was at this time, and now we’re getting even before 1970, we came to Stanford as very good friends of Adrienne Rich and her husband, Alf Conrad. Al had met them when I was teaching at Santa Barbara, but whom I met once I went back. And we would phone back and forth. I mean, Adrienne was very much involved, and Alf, were very much involved in the Anti-War Movement in New York, and we were in communication about that. 42 But then as part of that, Adrienne in New York was also becoming involved in I think what’s probably called [feminism], though I don’t know that it was called feminism right away. The first memory I have—and this is very much worth telling—of hearing the word “feminist” in its modern context was from the lips of Adrienne Rich, because she said something on the phone. She mentioned something about feminism, and I said, “Feminism?” [01:19:42] Oh, she had such a beautiful voice, in this rich voice [she said], “Oh, Barbara, drink deep of that Pierian spring.” [laughter] She’s quoting Alexander Pope. It’s through Adrienne Rich and through her poetry… I mean, as a text in feminist literature, there is “Snapshots of a Daughter-in-law,” and we knew “Snapshots of a Daughter-in-law.” We knew “Necessities of Life.” I memorized many of these poems, and I think that probably that poetry and the presence of Adrienne was a huge influence on me and on my looking about me and thinking, “Now, wait a minute. What’s going to happen here?” Because I realized very well that I couldn’t—I mean, my book was now several years behind me, and so I was losing traction, as in a research institution. By taking on all these jobs, all of them very laborintensive—as freshman English T.A., I was grading papers, and I was given the chance to teach—I was getting no chance, and with children and no proper daycare, no chance at all to do scholarship or write. So, there is for me something significant in 1973. Now, I was concerned about this. I was looking back and noticing what had happened at Harvard. I was in communication with Adrienne and I was reading 43 Adrienne’s work. I can’t now remember if I was reading the work of other feminists. I don’t think so. I don’t think there was much. But in 1973, I was approached and was given an offer from San Jose State University to teach there on tenure track, and that gave me the opportunity… here at Stanford I had this ongoing lectureship, though the lectureship was under half-time and with no benefits. By this time I was teaching, as I said, at least two courses a year, and I also had graduate students because of this graduate seminar. I had some graduate students who were doing dissertations with me. [01:23:06] So I was actually a functioning member, certainly a functioning member half time of the English department. So I asked to be put [on the tenure track]. I said, “Well, I have this offer from San Jose.” I used the offer from San Jose State as a reason for asking the English department to offer me a tenure-track appointment. I’m pretty sure that I was asking for a tenure-track appointment half time. I can’t remember whether we asked at that, whether I thought of it as half time. I think so, because with childcare, that’s what I needed in a way. By this time though my mother-in-law had come to live with us in 1973, and she was a wonderful, active woman and a very loving grandmother, and I had help at home. None of this could have happened without her. So, anyway, I asked the English department whether I could be put on a tenure track and given a tenure-track appointment. Tenure track, not tenured, but tenure track. It came before the department, and I was told no. Tracy: Did they give you a reason why? 44 Gelpi: [01:24:39] Oh, yes. Some of the people who voted no… it was a very fraught time. It was very difficult because we were very much part of the English Department community and had friends. And we can talk about all this. Some of the men in the department who were friends of mine and of ours spoke to me much more in sorrow than in anger about my doing this, because I was putting myself forward and asking for something. [01:25:22] Now, there were other faculty wives in the English Department who also had Ph.D.’s. Why, if I came forward, why wouldn’t they come forward? Now, my answer to that was, well, they should have a chance to come forward if they want to and if they have publications, and that doesn’t seem to me unreasonable. It was taken at that point that I was betraying women. By making a demand like this, I was making the situation of all the women at Stanford in the English Department (this was all within the department)… I was making the situation of all women at Stanford uncomfortable. I was making waves that were not helpful to anyone. I did feel, as one aggrandizes oneself, Joan of Arc feelings about it. I was often, though, questioned as how would I… I was clearly such a nice person and such a lovely member of the community. They would not want Al and me to be angry and to cut ourselves off from a community where we were so respected and liked. So why was I doing this? This was just making trouble. That was from the people who my friends. Now, there were people who were my friends, and one, bless him, was George Dekker. Judicious George, very open with me—he did not give that argument, but he felt that my book was now long past, and he couldn’t 45 in honesty say it was perfectly clear to him that I would be doing the kind of research that was necessary. So there were some people who felt that. And I think there were some people who just felt, “We’re having too much trouble with these women who are making trouble, and she turns out as one of the troublemakers, and we don’t want any part of that.” So there were different reactions, but the reactions were all troubling. I mean, it wasn’t horrible. That is to say it wasn’t zero to whatever, but there were enough negative votes to make it not worth going through, and I took the job at San Jose State. The job involved a really backbreaking amount of work, because it was four courses a quarter, and it was full-time. My mother-in-law, Alice, was here, but I found that I was spending… because that was two courses in freshman comp each quarter, so the paper grading was terrible, the children were young, very young, and it was a really hard year. Meanwhile, though, at San Jose State, I was treated very kindly and had made very good friends who stayed friends, but there was a way in which they would ask me, “And how are you doing?” Because there was the Stanford princess. [laughs] Here comes something of that, “Well, you know, it’s hard.” The course load is much harder. The students were a much more mixed bunch. There were some brilliant students at San Jose State, and I had wonderful teaching experiences there, but then there were these remedial students a lot. At San Jose State, very often when you taught the brilliant students, you were teaching them because they were going to go to Berkeley; they were going to transfer. 46 So it was very hard teaching, and I realized then again as I got into that, that I was in a bind, that I had no time. Since with all the paper grading and teaching, I had no time in teaching and preparation for teaching for doing any scholarship. So I couldn’t. I couldn’t prove George Dekker wrong. [01:30:13] So it came actually as a relief to me. San Jose State had voted me in, and it all went fine. I was on the tenure track, but it had been an appointment based on whether the funding came through, and it was the beginning of the drawing back of funding. So the funding didn’t come through for a job like mine. They were working for more funding for minorities and so on, so that they had to say, “We are terribly sorry, but we haven’t got a job.” Now, by very good fortune, when I left for San Jose, though it was all verbal, the chair was Bliss Carnochan, and I think there had been some sort of gentleperson’s agreement that my under-half-time lectureship would remain and would be open to me, that I could come back to that. To Stanford, as an under-half-time lecturer, no benefits. So I did, and it did [work out]. As I remember it, Stanford didn’t even make me eat humble pie. I didn’t find it unpleasant. We hadn’t lost friendships here over that, not at all, and so I didn’t find it uncomfortable. Then another thing that happened in that year before September, in July and August of 1974… now I’m going to tear up. Our daughter came down with a kidney condition called nephrotic syndrome. Children, again, in the nineteenth century, had only at best a 50 percent chance of surviving it. She was in one of the first generations where you could survive it, a child 47 could survive it, if the child reacted well to cortisone. So Adrienne was one of about the second generation of children treated for this with cortisone. Now, as we know now, they were heavily overdosed, not as badly as the generation before her, but she was heavily overdosed with cortisone. But that lasted from the time she was four till she was fifteen. So there was no way I could have had the schedule that I had, because my mother-in-law was helping, but the doctors have to speak to the parent. I mean, there has to be a parent, and I spoke almost every morning to a doctor for years. Every time Adrienne would get any kind of virus or a bacterial infection, the syndrome would kick back in. Then she’d get on the cortisone at these very high doses, then you have to go down very slowly, and as soon as she’d be almost off it, then something else would happen. So this cycle went on for years. So if I hadn’t been home here at Stanford, and if I hadn’t had a comparatively flexible schedule, well, we couldn’t have managed. I would have to have given up the job at San Jose anyway, as it turned out. So I went back to Stanford, and the year then is 1974. [01:34:21] But meanwhile, things had been happening. Feminist things were happening fast, very fast. Before Adrienne came down with the nephrosis, in the spring of 1973 when Al was teaching at the Stanford-inCliveden (what it was then), and I was obsessing about how I would get any work done, we did get an au pair girl. So I got to go to Oxford to work there, and at the University of Reading, and I was working on the poetry of Percy 48 Bysshe Shelley, but what I was working on was Shelley’s fascination with twinned pairs and with androgyny. [01:35:20] So out of that I did write a paper then that I gave at the MLA in 1974 called “The Politics of Androgyny.” It was very learned. [laughs] And, actually, androgyny is a very learned topic, but it had become the buzzword in the feminist movement as women started saying it. For me, I had come to it through the work of Jung, through the notion of the animus, this masculine factor in woman called the animus. Now, I had evolved to reject Jung for the distinction he made between animus and anima, along with Adrienne Rich, who has a poem that has in it the line “I am the androgyny.” It’s a poem that she then removed from the collective works, but that we kept in, and that I’ve heard recently read very effectively in the time of her memorial, when her memorial was here at Stanford recently. So androgyny was a big word, and I was all for it, for women being allowed to fulfill both the qualities considered masculine, which is to say intellect and will and drive and purpose, and the feminine, the nurturing, the caring, the cooking. It was before men cooked too. When I came back to Stanford, along with teaching I was doing this and was getting back into some kind of swim. Stanford meanwhile had hired, I’m pretty sure Estelle Freedman. She had by the fall of 1974 come back to Stanford. So when I returned to Stanford, I was [meeting with women faculty] and this is, again, through women in the department. I think it’s probably in the mid-1970s. It hadn’t been going on before, but these women in the department—Diane Middlebrook, Nancy Packer, Anne Mellor, and by 49 this time an African American woman, Sandra Drake—were in the department, and I was one, as somebody who was there like on the edges and was a functioning faculty member. We would have regular meetings to create strategies for bringing more women into the department. Now there were by this time three of them—Nancy Packer, Anne Mellor, and Diane Middlebrook—who all had tenure, and it was there, and they worked very hard and effectively at this. It was their purpose to bring more women in. [01:38:35] So we met. We talked about it. It was to bring more women in. It was also just to bolster each other. [laughs] So within the department, I had this sense of women. But Anne was a romanticist, and I was still very much working in the Victorian period at that point, really, except for this Shelley project. Diane was in modern poetry, and Sandra was in contemporary novel literature. So I didn’t have all that much—we weren’t working on literary projects together. I was called to a meeting that we held in the library, and I remember Estelle Freedman as the moving force behind this. She had come as a tenure-track but untenured young woman in history, and she had come from New York. She was at Barnard—Columbia, I think, then. She had said, “What are the women doing who are around here?” She’d come fresh from feminism in New York, so she said, “What are the women doing around here?” [laughs] “I don’t know.” [01:39:59] “Who are the women around here?” “Well, There’s someone in anthropology.” 50 So she called a meeting to [gather us]. “Let’s look at each other. Let’s see who we are.” [laughs] At the meeting I think there were—oh, because it turned out we were, well, maybe twenty women. There was Nan Keohane in political science, and there was Estelle in history. Then in anthropology, and that’s where anthropology had hired two to make two joint appointments. So there were Shelly Rosaldo, who was becoming a big force in women in anthropology, and Jane Collier. Now, those are the names that come. Now, Myra Strober in economics, was very important. Indeed by 1974, Myra, along with another woman, Eleanor Maccoby, I think those are the….I was not very much involved, but it was really more the women in the social sciences and economics who established the Center for Research on Women with seed money from Ford for grants. The grants were mostly in social science. But, again, I was hearing about this and noticing it, and with another person who was a faculty wife teaching at Hayward, Marilyn Yalom, she and I were having strategy lunches about, well, what kind of projects could we have that would interest Ford. [01:41:46] So this meeting came in the context of these stirrings and these women gathering and seeing who was available, what were our strengths, and how could we work together to make our strengths greater. Out of that meeting came the really most important… I would make this more important than Signs, to me, almost personally from my personal scholarship. Certainly I’d have to put it with Signs. It’s hard to tell. It is something that if this hadn’t happened, Signs wouldn’t have happened to me: 51 the creation of this project for the study of Victorian women. There were two parts to that project. There was a Victorian part, and then it went on to the modern women. There was a second section. It started as a project for which we got NEH funding to create a team-taught women’s course, one on Victorian women and one on sort of turn-of-the-century modernist women. So in this group of six of us, Estelle Freedman really was, I guess, the only tenure-track woman. We were working [together]. See, among the women, whether you were tenured or tenure track, or whether you were a lecturer or whether you were an individual scholar just working, that wasn’t significant. We were working on these team projects as scholars and dividing up but also sharing scholarship across fields. So this was my first experience of feminist scholarship within a group and interdisciplinary scholarship. It was particularly my [first] situation of interdisciplinary feminist historians and feminist literary…. [01:44:31] I found in doing this work that the discipline of history is very, very different, and that I had to retool it. I had to tool it. [laughs] I had to gain the tools to do history, and at times that was really hard and even humiliating, but very worthwhile, a growing experience. And the experience of working with women and of sharing ideas was wonderful. Then we got this idea because there were no texts, so you couldn’t… there weren’t texts. So we got this idea of creating a book of documents of the period, and that’s the NEH funding went for. Then on the basis of these documents we taught the course. Tracy: So CROW was then— 52 Gelpi: [01:45:29] CROW was our baby. Tracy: —in existence. So you had been doing some team teaching, and that was funded by Ford? Gelpi: [01:45:42] The original funding from Ford was mostly for social science, but it was really just to start up; it was start-up money. There wasn’t a lot of money, but there was start-up money for different projects. However, I did become more interdisciplinary, of course, big time once we got to Signs. [01:46:18] But when I started this, we were history and lit. The second team of this did have Myra Strober, Diane Middlebrook, and Shelly Rosaldo. So you had an economist, an anthropologist, and an English professor. So it was across more fields, but the two teams didn’t much interact, and neither team got money from Ford for that, but the money came from the NEH, but came through the Center for Research on Women. This was is a big plus, that it got this. It was about a two-year project. The person who should be given credit for getting that grant, Marilyn Yalom, was the person who was certainly key. She was working with Myra, but probably for this project, she is the one who put in to the NEH. She was the grant writer. Tracy: The purpose of the project was creating classes or was eventually to create this text? Gelpi: [01:47:33] The purpose, as I remember—now I have to be careful. The purpose, as I remember, was first to give these courses and to create these classes. But then once we got these materials, we realized when we first used them, they were clumsy, and they were in a big notebook. By then we 53 realized that this was a pilot course for other courses around the country that were beginning. And then we knew we had no texts. So Stanford University Press was interested—they could make money on a text like this. They could sell it, which has everything to do with whether it’s going to get published, of course. So I think that we probably proposed the text pretty early to Stanford when we realized what we were onto here, because there was a lot of excitement about that. Then the course actually happened, as I remember, before the book was actually published. We taught it at least once for all six of us, and then as that became really unworkable because there were so many people who were connected with the Center for the Research on Women but who were not really connected with Stanford. Estelle and I then taught it at least twice together. And I loved that. It was just those were wonderful experiences. And Estelle Freedman is… I learned so much from her, because she is just an amazing pedagogue. Tracy: You mentioned this meeting that, when Estelle arrived at Stanford, she had called. Was that the beginning of Center for Research on Women or the beginning of these projects? Gelpi: [01:49:36] It’s not the beginning of the Center for Research on Women. It’s after that. The Center for the Research on Women almost comes first. [01:49:44] It comes around 1973, and I should say here that probably Shelly Rosaldo and Estelle called the meeting together, because Shelly was already very active. I think that Shelly may have been a co-caller of that meeting. The person I was most connected to and that I had most to do with immediately 54 was Estelle. And Shelly, you know, died young, tragically, but I think she had been at Stanford from about 1970. She was a little senior to Estelle here on the ground, and so the two of them joined forces. Tracy: So that meeting that you were a part of then started you down the road to the project that created that book. Gelpi: Yes, we started at that meeting to think about and talk about, well, what kind of thing could we do together. One of the things that came up pretty fast was, since there are really more nineteenth-century sources, and because women writers in nineteenth century were already a power, this was somewhere you could go to and ask where are there a lot of women we can think about and bring to the fore. Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is March 12, 2013. I’m here with Barbara Gelpi to conduct the second session for our oral history interview. We are in the Gelpis’ home conducting the interview today. Barbara, we had left off talking about your work on the Victorian women classes that led to the book and your involvement with the Center for Research on Women. I wanted to jump ahead a little bit in time and talk about Signs, the journal that you edited for five years. To start out with, can you tell me how it came onto the horizon to come to Stanford and for you to serve as editor? Gelpi: [00:00:52] The journal had been founded by a woman named Jean Sacks, who was head of all the journals coming out of the University of Chicago. She had herself originally been a faculty wife and was a strong character, a strong feminist. Its first issue came out in, I believe, January 1975, with Catharine Stimpson, who was a very strong intellect and personality at Barnard College. She was its first editor, and she had two associates. It made a huge [impact]. I can remember the excitement at the MLA that year that I opened this—the idea of a journal that would be given over 56 to the study of women—a scholarly journal. It was mind-blowing. it was highly successful. Catherine had been organizing it from 1974, so really by 1979 she’d already been editor for five years, and there was a plan right from the start that it would rotate. That is to say it would rotate to different colleges or universities, and when it rotated, then it would change editors and associates, obviously. [00:02:45] So fall of 1979, it was due for rotation, and there are two places that came up as possible sites for Signs in the next round. One was the Center for Research on Women at Wellesley, which really was not as closely related to the university itself. It was mostly based on outside funding, I think, and had scholars that were brought there. They were not members of the faculty from the university so much. But it was up and running and I think we felt it was better established than the Center for Research on Women here, though I think the Stanford Center for Research on Women (you’d have to ask Myra about this) had been the first in the country, actually. So these two places put in for it, and we were the ones. Jean Sacks then invited us to present our proposals of who would be the editor, who would be the associates, and so on. So Myra Strober was then head of what was still CROW, I think, or maybe by now it was the Institute. It doesn’t matter—It’s all the same personnel. Actually, the Victorian women’s project, especially the courses that were going on… the book had, I think, just about come out then. I was still teaching it with Estelle Freedman. So the question was among the limited number of women available at Stanford, who would be the editor? 57 [00:04:49] Now, there was a meeting called about this, and I had no thought…. I was still struggling to get published, and I didn’t think of myself as a wheeler and dealer. I told Al that I was going, and at that point I was very much into needlepoint. So I said, well, I was going to go to this meeting. And Al said, “Don’t you bring your needlepoint.” [laughter] I say, “What? OK. Well, all right.” When I got to the meeting, though, Myra was there, Anne Mellor, Nan Keohane was there, I remember. Those are the people I remember, but there were nine or so in the room, maybe. While we thought about what would happen, Anne Mellor said, “Well, what about you, Barbara? What about you as editor?” Anne says I looked like a wallflower who’d suddenly been asked to dance by the handsomest man in the room. [laughter] “What?” There were things that made me possible. One, Catharine Stimpson, who had a big say in this in where it was going to go, obviously, had heard my talk on politics of androgyny in 1974 and had liked it very much. We’d been on a panel together, so she knew that work and knew me. Then the Victorian women project gave me interdisciplinary work only with history, but that I was aware of interdisciplinary feminist scholarship. I think it’s really those two things, and I was this under-half-time job in the English department. I had the time in 1979. The children were growing up, so I could do it, where these other women like Shelly Rosaldo, Nan Keohane—all of these women who had faculty appointments—couldn’t take on this extra job. So it made sense internally. 58 [00:07:24] Anyway, that’s how I came to be editor, and the team formed. Myra, who’s an economist, was on it at that very meeting, and that was very touching to me, because I didn’t think I knew her well. Nan Keohane said, “If Barbara’s going to be editor, I’ll be on the team.” All right. Estelle Freedman, whom I’d worked with before very closely, as you know, was the first part of the team. Then Myra brought on Carol Jacklin, who had done very important work with Eleanor Maccoby, a psychologist. Carol Jacklin and then two anthropologists—Shelly Rosaldo, who was a very dazzling anthropologist, and Margery Wolf. So that was the team, and we did at ourselves up as a commune. It was the time of it, so even though the University of Chicago is extremely hierarchical and the editor has the say, we actually worked as a commune. That is to say, we had meetings in which we’d decide what we were going to do. Also, though, in the office when material came in, with the managing editors we would make a first cut, but then I’d hand out [material] to the team [and ask] whether they would think this was worth being reviewed and so on. [00:09:15] Now, the importance about the coming of Signs also was that the University of Chicago will pay. It didn’t pay well, but it will pay for staff—a managing editor and an assistant editor, and pay for paper, postage, so on. The editor’s salary, though, is not paid by the University of Chicago. It was taken that the editor would be a faculty member who already had a salary and so that the university would give that person release time. That’s what it usually would mean. In my case, the university had to make up the other half 59 of my not very big salary, to be sure, but the university would have to put me on a budget line of some kind. That was one thing, and the other thing was that the University of Chicago expects that there will be space provided. Now, one of the things that was just amazing or that really made it possible for Signs to come was that Jing Lyman was all for this. She was working very closely with us. Jing Lyman persuaded Dick Lyman that this is a university priority, so that we got amazing support from the university. However, it seemed very tight. We went to the MLA that year and made our pitch to Jean Sacks and so on, but we did get it. Now, once it came, we were a really very happy, jazzy team with lots of ideas, but we had never done a journal. There’s no need to go into all the nitty-gritty of how we came together, but I will say two other names that should go in here during those years that Signs was here…. I wouldn’t have managed if I hadn’t had two wonderful [women who] finally they became comanaging editors: Clare Novak and Susan Johnson [phonetic]. Susan Johnson came a little bit later, but she turned out to be wonderful. She and Clare, they took care of all the process, but that process included editing over a number of different disciplines and making across those disciplines at the same time the language of the articles available to people who were in different disciplines. [00:12:14] So that was the big challenge of Signs. However, it was also the big excitement of Signs. Those were wonderful years in which feminist intellectual work was extremely interdisciplinary. People were very excited to think of the different fields in which you could make huge progress if you 60 thought, "Where are the women here? How would this look if we thought about women in this context?" and so on. So those very exciting times were part of the years from 1980 to 1985. Now, I might say that another thing in that time at Signs that was an incredible learning experience [in addition to] learning across disciplines what was going on and across the world, was that this was the time the French feminisms came into the fore, and Signs was very much involved in all of that. Julia Kristeva, Hélène Cixous, and their different parties, so to speak. But in this country, it was a time of great and constant change in feminist thinking and acting and living. When I came to Signs and when I went to my first meeting of the National Women’s Studies Conference held in Indiana that year, I remember, in 1980, women who were out as lesbians were housed in a separate part of the building from the women who were heteros, and that all seems very weird. By the time there was a conference in Humboldt, which would have been in about 1983, then that was broken down, but the tensions between lesbian feminists and heterosexual feminists were strong. There maybe have been some very lesbian separatists who felt that if you were an active heterosexual, you were sleeping with the enemy. [laughs] So all of these issues became very personal, very volatile, and they did get confrontational at times. In what through history one can see was a useful way, and really the Humboldt conference was a very exciting time, people were aware we’d made a breakthrough. We were talking to each other and not about each other. [laughs] 61 [00:15:30] Then the other big and much more painful issue were issues about feminism and race, because the original movement, as maybe you can see, really was the impulse came from white feminists. When it moved over into the universities, whites or middle-class feminists had university positions. Yet within the movement itself, the whole question of now… one of the issues became over the pronoun “we,” so that if white feminists started saying, “We need this,” then women of color started saying, “Who are we? Who are you calling we? Your experience is very different from mine.” Now, the breakthrough text that highlighted that issue, in my experience as I knew it, was This Bridge Called My Back. The editors were Cherríe Moraga and Gloria Anzaldúa, and Cherríe had a connection with Stanford for several years. These were essays by women of color, Latina and African American that really put it out there. They were strong in their statements. [00:17:31] I was at that point teaching feminist theory in the English Department. Obviously by this time something I knew about was feminist literary theory, and so I quite regularly had a course in that that went along fine. Well, no, it didn’t. No, the course itself was extraordinarily fraught from the beginning. I can remember that the first time I taught it, and I mean there were people leaving the room in tears. We’d have to get together and have a process by which we tried to talk this through before we could even talk about the concepts anymore, because the concepts created so much emotion. 62 I remember one of the first places where we had real trouble with the split between those who were for learning feminist theory, which really meant learning as necessary background to understanding it all of the theory coming out of France—the high theory…. The problem was this high theory was itself extremely masculinist and truly, I mean, intellectually hierarchical. The question became if we study this, because you have to start by studying Derrida and Lacan, if you study these people, you become imbued. Their language imbues you with their way of thinking, and how can you really be a feminist and how can you think about women? So it was a very good question. Then you actually needed to know this theory at that point if you were going to make it in graduate school. So it’s just the practical… it’s the other thing. That was the first area of difficulty, but then within another year or so, the difficulty came between the women of color in the class who were interested in identity politics. That was coming out of Moraga and Anzaldúa. Then white Anglo women who wanted to use this class as a way of figuring out [the theory]… “Teach me what Lacan is saying so that I can sound good to my colleagues.” The splits there became very difficult. [00:20:19] I can remember when in teaching This Bridge Called My Back, again, I asked the women of color in the class to lead the discussion, and the discussion became so fraught that we had to stop and then cool down. [We had to] come back just trying to understand each other, trying to talk to each other. 63 I think in the end—this is jumping ahead, but actually now identity politics won, and I think rightly so. We’ll be getting off into other material if I talk about what both those controversies meant for feminism, so that hasn’t to do with Stanford really. [laughs] But they were, I mean, years full of activity. The National Women’s Studies Association in the very last year that I went, 1985, the women of color there really put on a very strong protest. A protest also made to Signs and about Signs, about how the wardens or gatekeepers were white, and they would decide what was worthy in scholarship coming from women of color, and they would decide topics. This was a source of great anger. [00:22:09] Another difficulty that was beginning to surface was that we struggled with giving a really universal scope to the kind of scholarship being printed in Signs. At that point, the technology wasn’t up to getting material from around the world, and so that had its own problems. So those were problems within Signs, problems that Signs has since dealt with, but we were struggling with them. Tracy: Were there tangible ways or intangible ways, in conversations between 1980 and 1985, in which this was coming to a head within the scholarship in Signs? Do you remember submissions or articles or choices of your topics? I’m just wondering how this manifested in the journal itself, if at all. Gelpi: [00:23:20] Yes. I can speak now, first, on the question of giving lesbian feminists a voice. That had a remarkable outcome in Signs in that we published a special issue called The Lesbian Issue, and so that sort of resolved itself. Now, I don’t have names. We were in contact with two or three 64 women of color on the board of Signs, because besides the associates here, we had a board of national and also international people. Hélène Cixous was on it and so on. We had a forum in Signs that stemmed out, and was addressing this gatekeeper problem. Women of color were being given a chance in Signs to voice their own concern about whether women of color had a voice in Signs. It was their recognition, and our recognition that they did not have enough voice. As I remember, that forum was actually in process. Signs went from here to Duke, and I think that forum may have been published when it went to Duke. By the time Signs went to Duke in 1985, there were now several colleges and universities that were vying to have it, which was a sign of its success. [00:25:36] Duke got it because Duke’s proposal put so much emphasis on how it would get more publications and more visibility for women of color. So that it was being addressed, but I don’t think in the pages of Signs that I edited it was answered. It was addressed, but it wasn’t answered. Tracy: Right. You mentioned that Jing Lyman and so certainly by extension President Lyman, were supportive of bring Signs to Stanford. Obviously, this group of women, this commune that was editing Signs was supportive and wanted it. Did you have a sense of outside of those two entities how people at Stanford felt about Signs—if they were receptive or ready for it? [laughs] Gelpi: [00:26:45] Yes. I never got anything but joy and hoopla over the possibility of Signs coming here. Somebody who was extraordinarily receptive, was a 65 wonderful man, Jerry Lieberman, and his staff. He was the dean of graduate research at the time, so we were under there because the Institute’s under that umbrella, so was Signs, because we were housed at the Institute. We were one of the Institute’s projects. He was extraordinarily helpful and interested, so that there was real interest. I think that Bliss Carnochan came after him. I never had anything but positive responses from that dean’s office. I don’t know of anyone, I never heard anyone on the faculty complain. Right away one of the reasons a university wants a journal like Signs is practically this means that their graduate students get hands-on work with what’s going on. [00:28:13] This was very true in English and History, so there were graduate students who would come to be gofers, to help, but who are then involved. And then these graduate students who’d come in to help, you’d say to them, “Would you like to review such-and-such work?” They would get beginning publications and so on, and they get, well, just the experience. Then there was a conference here called Communities of Women; it was a wonderful conference. That was in 1984. The mounting of such a conference is a huge job, actually, and again takes a lot of cooperation from different parts of the university. Graduate students are involved in all of that and then involved in going to the conference. For the university and especially since for my job I was being paid separately, there was no one who was losing anyone’s work, no department. [00:29:27] So I would think that for a university it was actually win-win. Now when we get to the department you can see that the whole question of whether women would be hired has 66 become passé. Women are getting hired in departments, and it was already happening. The breakthrough had come. So it wasn’t the same kind of fight that it was in the 1970s. Tracy: That’s interesting. Gelpi: [00:30:06] Signs was… I mean, the fact that the University of Chicago would think of this. Jean Sacks wouldn’t have been able to put that through. It was her vision, but she wouldn’t have put it through if the University of Chicago as an entity and its big board and so on hadn’t thought, “Yes, there is going to be interest through this. This is good for us.” So feminist scholarship is already becoming a matter of interest, especially—and this is still true—in the humanities and social sciences. The sciences are still working to try to show the sciences that this is relevant. Tracy: So it was assumed by people at Chicago that the editor would be paid and that they would already have space, because they assumed the editor would already have a faculty position. Did Stanford provide any of that to you, in addition to what you were already getting from your part-time lectureship? Gelpi: [00:31:30] So I went from being under half-time… this is the first time I went from being under half-time to being what amounted to full-time. So that meant for the first time in 1980, I could get benefits. Half of my salary was paid through Jerry Lieberman’s office, of course. I guess it was on their budget line and not the English Department where I was still an under-halftime lecturer. But I now had a full-time position. I guess that position would have… I don’t know what slot it would come under in the university, because it’s not from the English Department, because the English 67 Department is the graduate study and research. But it wasn’t exactly a staff position either. Tracy: This time that you were working with Jerry Lieberman, or by extension working with Mr. Lieberman, was the time that Al was in the Dean’s Office. Gelpi: [00:32:37] Right. Tracy: He was the associate dean in there. Obviously there wouldn’t have been a conflict of interest. They would have worked around that. But would any oversight have ever come to Al for the journal? Gelpi: [00:32:52] No, no. Now I wish, because the oversight was tricky…. There was an associate dean, Pat Devaney. Pat Devaney was the person that I dealt with, that I answered to or spoke to. It wasn’t a matter of answering to, but she was my contact back with Jerry, and she was wonderful. Al was involved in a separate set. He was really involved in the side that was working to bring more minorities into Stanford, more people of color—Hispanics, American Indians, African Americans. It was that side of the Dean’s Office that Al was really most closely connected with. Tracy: When it was first getting going in 1974, Signs was the first journal dealing with studies of women. In a more objective sense, how was it regarded as a journal in the 1980s when you inherited it? Gelpi: [00:34:13] Well, the thing is, by this time, there was another journal, Feminist Studies, which is also still going strong. So Signs and Feminist Studies were the two scholarly journals. This is because Ms. had started. There are lots of other outlets where women’s issues are being considered, but the scholarly journals were these two. 68 Signs worked very hard. Again, with an establishment, Signs was pricklier about its footnotes than any journal that Jean Sacks was [overseeing], and then we inherited that. I mean, this is University of Chicago style and things would be footnoted. You would have these articles vetted to the… and it worked within the academy, because Signs was considered a scholarly journals. It’s more important for women to publish in Signs, therefore it had fierce peer review and all of its facts had to be bolstered by scholarship. It did function as a publication that would help people toward tenure, so it really was in that way a material help. Now, this also put a pressure on us when more women are trying for tenure, and there is the pressure between being hard-nosed scholarly, [asking] does this really shape up, and being sisterly. [laughs] But actually, this is in the journal, and it was necessary [to be hard nosed] at that point, and it still is. It makes sense that this is a scholarly journal, so sisterhood has to be taken separately. If you’re really a wonderful person, but it turns out that anthropology is not where you should really try to make your name, then there’s nothing to be done about that. Tracy: I was hoping that you would talk a little bit about the editing process and how this team you mentioned earlier worked together to craft the different editions. Gelpi: [00:37:09] Yes. Oh, I’d be happy to. Now, well, I gave you the names. We’d have meetings, I would think at least once a month. Well, we tried for once a month, maybe every six weeks or so. We had brainstorming sessions about where we would have special issues and what the next special issues were. 69 There were also sessions about where we should look. You have papers, our scholarly works, coming over the transom. Because Signs by the time we got it really within the world of feminist scholarship was the top, we were getting things but over the transom. However you also wanted to get involved and to get the points of view of different aspects of feminism. You did have at this point the lesbian or maybe you should say the women’scentered scholarship. We should think about women’s issues from women’s point of view. They’re studying women’s history thinking about how women had quilted and so thinking of how sisterhood had worked through the centuries in a scholarly way. [00:38:48] Then you have the liberal feminists, say, among economists who would be able to talk about women’s history or… interested in that is Estelle Freedman. Myra Strober had all kinds of contacts with women who are studying women in the workplace from a liberal point of view asking how are we going to make a level playing field. Then there’s another straw: the Marxist feminists who are really at odds with them, because how are we… but that’s then when you get class. Find a level playing field for upper-class white women, but what about working women and so on. So Marxist and liberal [feminism] are some of the big categories. The idea, again, with this was to get those voices into Signs, and people had been friends within fields. So I was interested. It was my area that there was a huge amount going on, and still is. In the field of religious studies about women, what are we going to think about? [laughs] Why are there no women here when we start to talk about religion? 70 Tracy: Those cardinals you watched go in [to the Vatican] today. Gelpi: [00:40:31] Yes. [laughs] Tracy: None of them are women. Gelpi: [00:40:32] I know. [laughter] No. And they don’t—even the most positive— really get it. They really don’t. They don’t get it. [laughs] [00:40:48] And you could see the different fields in which these people were working. People like Nan Keohane, Shelly Rosaldo, Myra Strober, and Estelle Freedman were top in their field. They were very well known as women scholars in the field, and they had big networks. So we would get together to talk about, “Well, when you met so-and-so at a conference, does it sounds as if she’d be interested?” Or, “Could we make this liberal versus Marxist feminism? Could we make that the basis of a forum in which we have two or three articles?” Clare Novak was there. We had another editor the very first year, Margie Weeks [phonetic], but she left after a year. Clare became the managing editor, and that’s when Susan Johnson came on. So Clare and Susan were there, too, and were speaking members of this. Susan Johnson actually was one of the editors of the lesbian issue then when it came out. So it was a commune, and we did have a good time, though there were conflicts within that commune too. Now, the commune, sadly… well, our first sadness was that Nan Keohane, we were proud and pleased for her, she went off to be president of Wellesley. I think that’s the second year, in 1981. And I think it maybe was in 1982, Shelly Rosaldo then… and Shelly Rosaldo’s death in the Philippines was a horrific blow. It shows how much a 71 commune we were, that it was a mourning that brought us all together. We were really terribly shaken by that. Then in time, Sylvia Yanagisako and Jane Collier came on to take the place of these losses. [00:43:17] That commune really worked all the way through. I think that it’s telling that the conference that we mounted, which took a lot of talking together about what would be the focus and whom would we ask for, was Communities of Women. In the 1980s, that was also a theme of general interest—how women coming together had gained in power and strength and helped support each other and then helped their cause. The Communities of Women Conference was also just about… it wasn’t necessarily about women gaining power. Myra always kept saying she wanted us to have a segment on harems. [laughs] We did have that, it was interesting, and we did have a brilliant paper given on how women function within countries where women are totally segregated and what women’s lives are like there. Another thing was religious communities of women. I think Myra was one [studying this], and I was dealing with that. That’s when one of the stars of the conference turned out to be a nun, a Benedictine named Joan Chittister. She was just starting that and is now a power insofar as the church allows power. She’s certainly a power in the liberal Roman Catholic Church and a really strong voice. Other than the things I’ve told you about, I don’t remember any problem that we had among ourselves about priorities. We never had a point at which where someone said, “I don’t want to be a part of this group. I’m 72 not getting heard,” or whatever, that was not [an issue]. But you could see that that group had in it no women of color, so that’s significant. Now, we did hear [about issues of race], we could see that, but we weren’t then, ourselves. [00:46:10] Now, in that group, Estelle was lesbian. I think that the straight-lesbian line, that difficulty really wasn’t something that the group had to struggle with at all. Susan Johnson was lesbian, though it’s interesting at the time, Susan was not an out lesbian. I didn’t know, and she wasn’t out to me for many years. That, it seems now, is an interesting sign of the times. She was not comfortable even with having… that was something she was still having to work through, but that shows how difficult it was in 1981. Tracy: How did Signs benefit from this communal commune of editors? In what ways did it contribute to and improve the journal to have edited it that way? Gelpi: [00:47:37] Oh, I think I would say immeasurably. Now, for me, my interdisciplinary work was with English and history up to that point. I had very little training in the social sciences, and that was part of the learning curve—learning the language of social sciences. I couldn’t have done that if I didn’t have Myra Strober and Carol Jacklin, and these people who would tell me, “Yes, this is the way.” But then I did have to learn it well enough. Sometimes I’d have to work with the language to make this more of a language with a broader appeal. But I didn’t have the contacts, so just for getting material from people who are really doing important work, and people are doing important work are often very busy, so unless you go….If you’re struggling to get 73 tenure, then you’re sending your essay to Signs and hoping, but that’s not the essay that is going to make a splash. You want to do it if it’s good and will show[case] this person, but you want to get something in there that everyone [will say], “Ah, this is the latest word from Nan Keohane,” or from someone she thinks she knows. [00:49:13] So all these people were teaching me every moment, and these meetings were extraordinarily important. They’d say, “Well, talk to her,” but first you notice what she’s written and you know about that when you talk to her. [laughter] A thing that made it a commune also was there were no holds barred. It was not let’s make nice with each other. There was a lot of camaraderie, but also Carol Jacklin could pull people up. [laughs] Myra still tells the story of Carol, because [at the time] Shelly and Nan are very busy with all kinds of [commitments]—they’re on committees, so they’d dash into the Signs meeting half an hour late. We’d been waiting around or trying to get a little bit done on the edges before they come. So Carol finally said, “I take it that you think that what you do is more important and your time is more important than our time? Now, I think we should have an agreement here that when the meeting is called, that we all be there, because you’re wasting our time.” Now, that’s something I was much too gentle… I would never have said it, but it was good to have it said. Again, they heard. They didn’t say, “Well….” [laughs] Not at all. So it was a good process, it really was, and I learned a lot from it. 74 Tracy: Is there anything else about Signs that I haven’t asked you about that you feel like is important to include? Gelpi: [00:51:15] No, I don’t think so. We could always come back, because I don’t think it’s appropriate right here to start going into the details of what we published anyway. Tracy: So let’s shift gears a little bit. I want to pick back up on your pursuit of tenure. We discussed starting this discussion with the avocado ring mold story. Gelpi: [00:51:52] Yes, it has that name. So we’re going back a bit. We’re going back maybe to 1977, 1978—around there. I had certainly come back from San Jose. I was a lecturer, but also, of course, a faculty wife. It was the custom in the English Department, going back decades, that when there were any events in the English Department… and at that time is was a much more cohesive department and smaller, not considerably smaller, but it was much more social. The social side of it was in the hands of faculty wives, so that if someone was retiring, say, there was a big party for that event. The person was a he, usually was given a party, and the faculty wives, not the women in the department, but the faculty [wives] were expected to bring the food and to organize the party. They were to do the party, and they organized among themselves who would do it. Someone would be baking a ham, and so on. So I was called one evening by a woman, Libby Sensabaugh, whose husband was George Sensabaugh, a Milton Scholar. I think that the person retiring was Virgil Whitaker. Now, Virgil was no friend to women in general and was particularly no friend to me in the department. Now, I don’t 75 remember at this point feeling enraged about Virgil Whitaker, but I was well aware that he was no friend of mine. So, Libby called to say it was Virgil’s retirement, and she just went on, and she was taking it for granted this was all just fine. She was asking me to make an avocado ring mold, and she would send me the recipe. So, taking the coward’s way out, I wasn’t going to do that, but I said, “Ah, oh, Libby, it’s too bad. Al and I are going to be out of town that weekend. I just can’t do that.” So then, I think maybe that same evening, I got a phone call from Ann Bender, who was married to John Bender, an eighteenth-century scholar. She was a lawyer and a very busy one, and she asked had I gotten a call to ask me (I think maybe Libby had called her next) about the avocado ring mold. Had I? And I said, “Oh, yes, yes. Well, I’d said I was out of town.” “Well,” Ann said, “I said, no, I wasn’t going to make anything for this party. I didn’t see that that was appropriate.” [00:56:03] Then I don’t know whether she or we got it, but a third person, Mary Felstiner, married to John, who was herself a full-time history professor at San Francisco State and with children, so a very busy woman [was called]. When Libby called her, Mary had answered that, “Oh, I think you mean to talk to John. This is Mary. I’m not in the English Department. Just a minute. John.” 76 So Libby got John. Libby was very flustered and said, “Oh, oh, oh, John. Oh, I mean, if there was something you could bring, maybe you could bring some olives.” [laughs] OK. So then the three of us got together to say, “Well, why was this going on? Why were we…?” What we decided was that we would draw up a letter to the advisory committee to the chair—a very polite letter to say we knew that this had been the practice, but that really it didn’t seem appropriate. We would then ask that the advisory committee would take it upon itself to have the department take its own responsibility for department events. The members of the department should be responsible for those events and not their spouses. OK? Tracy: Their busy spouses with jobs. [laughter] Gelpi: [00:57:46] So the three of us were prepared to sign. Well, we’re going to sign this letter, and we were clear on that among ourselves, and we would send it no matter what the other women in the department wanted to do. [We thought, though] that first we should let all the other spouses in the department know what they were doing and give them the opportunity to sign with us if they wanted to. John Loftis was chair at that point. So I don’t know—it was before email—how we circulated this, but we did circulate this question to the faculty wives, and it created a terrible distress. Ann Loftis called a meeting at her house of all the women in the department—I mean the spouses, the women involved—to take up this question and to see whether anyone would want to sign. 77 The feeling that this was an extremely destructive thing to do, and that for women…. The women friends of Mary Moser (and everyone was her friend and really were glad that Mary and Tom were away in England), thought this would be so hard on Mary. The whole sense of what you were doing it for—and in the department was the sense of being [a part of] this social connection—was really a slap at that. It was really a wrong thing to do. It wasn’t a nasty meeting. It was a tense meeting. I think it partly wasn’t nasty because we weren’t saying we want you to sign or we feel indignant if you don’t. It was tense, though, and there was a feeling that we were really doing something destructive. However, we just said, well, we were going to send it, and we did. [01:00:15] Now, by the time the advisory board got it—of course, they’re all men—they knew what it was all about. I think it hardly got talked about at all. There was just a mutter, oh, yes, yes, yes, yes. It was an embarrassment, so to speak, even to talk about it, but it did become the new way. Now, you can see that in some ways that it prefaced a change and not a change for the better in the community of the English department. There was a point in what those women were saying, because when these entertainments and communal gatherings were put in the charge of the men, the men simply gave them over to catering and they became then impersonal. Maybe as a result then they there were not the kinds of celebrations [we used to have]. There was a speech and so on, when people retired, but retirement parties were not the same. Meanwhile, there weren’t the department dinner 78 parties that there used to be. So it did totally shift, but it was part of the shift as women got busier and could not stop and make an avocado ring mold that, in a way, for women it was necessary. Also it was annoying that you’d use the unpaid labor that was involved in this social work, and that social work has to be something done by everybody. Tracy: A part of what’s so interesting to me about that story is that you had a meeting with the other faculty wives and had a discussion about what was expected and how things were changing. It says so much about how you tried to negotiate the shifting sands of social conventions and norms and all of that. Do you feel that you’ve had many of those sort of meetings in your life where you’re talking with other people about how things were changing and how you’re orienting yourself towards that change? Gelpi: [01:02:56] Do you mean in just personal life or in intellectual life? Tracy: I guess both. Gelpi: [01:03:03] Well, in intellectual life, that’s when I was telling you about these meetings and teaching these classes, and these were the feminist classes, that’s where I experienced it most. So these issues, that were very much personal and gut issues, did come out in these classes. I think that through the 1980s, especially, these classes were a combination of teaching about, women’s history and so on, but teaching women’s history to young women to whom all this was personally very exciting and important. The classes were themselves much more communities of women, because almost all those classes tended…. Maybe this would be a Stanford class in the History Department or the English Department, but we’d get about 10 percent men, 79 and those men usually, if they were interested, were on our side, so to speak. Though they were helpful in that they could bring another perspective. [01:04:31] So that was happening all the time, that almost every class I taught during those years had this personal underlay. Then the last one that was a very intense one—not the last class like this I taught, but the one that was memorable—was one in England taught in summer of 1986. It was called “Gender in Britain,” and was team-taught with Diane Middlebrook and with an independent history scholar, Susan Groag Bell. It was three classes, each of a different format and with different subject matter, but the three of us were involved in all of the classes, and [there were] about thirty students. Again, about three of them were men. We were all at the Stanford in Oxford, so they were living in dorms together or in buildings together, and we had apartments outside. But we were there from morning into the evening, so we were all living together during that time. Though my husband, Al, and my kids were there, actually, but there was this kind of immersion. We had young women coming to us sometimes in tears that what had happened to women was so impossible she was breaking up with her boyfriend. [laughs] “Now, wait, now, wait, now, Sally, let’s talk. Now, just a minute. What’s wrong?” So these things did impinge on life. These changes and whether one could be a really intimate friend of a man were real, real issues and with lives in the balance, or at least temporarily in the balance. [laughs] 80 Tracy: So let’s talk a little bit about when in 1982, you did secure the position of associate professor. Can we talk about the process that went into getting that position and how things changed for you once you’d had it? Gelpi: [01:07:11] Yes, and the lines of the story are straight, although it may not be a simple story. It comes about because the University of Notre Dame, the provost from that university, came to campus to ask Al and me to come to Notre Dame. Really what he wanted to do was offer us both positions—to offer me a position as a full professor in the English Department already with tenure. And Al was, of course, already was tenured. They offered Al a position as dean with a huge raise in salary from what he had and carrying with it a chaired professorship in the English Department. But for five years he would really have to give his energy to the deanship, and it wasn’t going to be a simple job because there was a lot of dead wood. They said it was going to be his job to shape things up and to get new people, and to get rid of people who shouldn’t be there. Now, Al was still in the Dean’s Office, but as an associate dean, and was working on his book. This was A Coherent Splendor, a big book that he was working on and he could see the light at the end of the tunnel. But, he was being told that he’d have to put the book on the back burner, so that was one thing. Al was ready to do that, and this had come up before when Al was offered a position in Chicago, though there I hadn’t been offered a tenured track. I’d been offered just a lectureship. So we said, no, we would have to think about this. We would have to think about it, because if Stanford finally 81 wouldn’t put me on the tenure track, then for my career it clearly was necessary that we go to Notre Dame. It would have been a huge personal difficulty, too, because Al’s mother lived with us. She comes from New Orleans, so there was no way she was going to live in South Bend in the winter. So that would have been a difficulty. Our children were saying no way. [laughs] They grew up in California. The people in Notre Dame knew about that. They had us talking to people who had come with teenage kids who had said no way and now how great it was for them. The big problem was I was into the second year or so of being editor of Signs, and, again, it’s hierarchical. The University of Chicago has the journal follow the editor. Notre Dame was happy to have Signs come. If I brought Signs with me, they were ready to give me a slush fund—the kind of money that we hadn’t even thought about asking for from Stanford— because Notre Dame had money, has money. So they thought it would be wonderful. Now, given the position of the Catholic Church on women’s rights more generally and specifically on abortion and birth control, I realized that it would be anomalous to have it centered at Notre Dame. But I also knew that this was my commune—it was not right that I take Signs away from Stanford. I knew in my heart that I wouldn’t take Signs with me. Something else would have to be done. However, Signs is a big draw. I mean, as editor of Signs that’s one of the things that made me noticeable. Though the appointment was in the English Department, so Signs wasn’t the only thing, but it did make a difference. 82 But I spoke to Myra, as head director of the Institute (where Signs was housed), and told her about this offer and told her what I really thought. Now, this came at a moment when Shelly had died, Nan had gone, and from seeming to ride high for a while, women were having trouble at Stanford. Estelle Freedman had been denied tenure. Myra, herself, was denied tenure in the business school. So it was a rocky time, and we were all angry about that. Myra said so far as she was concerned, she thought it would make sense. If I took Signs to Notre Dame, that would serve Stanford right. [laughs] So she wanted to see what happens. [01:13:22] So we did go. We did visit Notre Dame, and we were given this quite extraordinary offer. Then I went on to New York, because I was now through all that, how much I was aware of it by being editor of Signs. I was now on the committee that chooses articles for the MLA—the Modern Language Association—that meets twice a year in New York and goes over papers that are being proposed for the MLA. So I was going on to New York to do this work, and Al came back here. He came back to the Dean’s Office and Jerry Lieberman, and he told Jerry Lieberman about this offer. He also told Rob Polhemus, who was by that time chair of the English Department, and Rob said, “Oh, you’re Catholic. You’re going to go.” [laughs] Al said, “Well, well, well, Rob, just think about your counteroffer.” [laughs] [01:14:25] So Jerry Lieberman came up with this idea, and Al phoned me in the New York hotel. He said would I consider it if I was put on the 83 tenure track half time. It wouldn’t actually carry tenure, but that I would have the courtesy title of associate professor, because of my age and how long I’d been here. So I was an untenured associate professor. Because I was half time and because I was going to have to spend so much time with Signs still—three more years—I would then have ten years to write a book, it amounted to, and Signs wouldn’t count. Signs did not count for tenure, as editing does not count. So it would have to be a book, and I would have to [write it]. Tracy: So you were being given the chance to get tenure? Gelpi: [01:15:33] Right. Oh, I was being put on the tenure track. And I was being put on the tenure track half time, which carried benefits, even once I stopped Signs, and I was a regular member of the department. So it was a huge change from not being sure year-by-year whether I’d have work. I mean, I had to ask. It was as though my position had by the time I…. Another thing that the dean of graduate research and Stanford had to do, because I didn’t officially by any means have a regular position as this lecturer and yet the University of Chicago, again, doesn’t care. It wants stability and it wants to know that the editor is not going to lose his or her job in the time as editor. They want a guarantee of that. So even before this, I was… again, it’s anomalous, but Stanford said, “Yes, she is.” [laughs] Tracy: We’ll keep her. Gelpi: [01:16:47] We will give her work. She will not be… you can’t be a lecturer indefinitely sure of work usually, so I already did have that, in a way. 84 So that’s how[it happened]. That’s the agreement, and though both of us then were on considerably less salary, Al was able to finish his book and we were able to stay in California. His mother was still here with us. There were all kinds of personal reasons and all kinds of intellectual reasons. I loved it at Stanford, and loved working with these colleagues. I didn’t want to go to Notre Dame. I didn’t want to leave these people. This is where my life was, and so was Al’s. So for us it was well worth it, more than worth it. So when I left Signs… now are we ready to? Now we come to 1985, and Signs leaves. I’m a half-time member of the English department, and I have to write a book. And the thing is, starting with that essay on the politics of androgyny in 1974, I’d gotten very interested in the work of Percy Bysshe Shelley. I’d started thinking about Percy Bysshe Shelley and the image of the androgyne, but as I started reading more and more in Shelley, I noticed more and more the image of the feminine. [01:18:30] When I went in Signs I was working [on this]. So I was already working on a book-length manuscript, and I had well over two hundred pages typed. Now at that point, I didn’t myself type. I’d write it out and get it typed, but I had worked on Shelley and his mother, so Shelley and the maternal. I had my topic. But once I got into Signs and I started reading all of this theory on the maternal—reading Lacan and Julia Kristeva—I realized that my really quite simple biographical approach wasn’t with it enough. So I came out with a topic, and I finally used almost none of the material that I had written before, but I started work on the Shelley book. It did take me, because it’s half 85 time… I didn’t qualify or I hadn’t gotten enough scholarship out there to qualify for fellowships and that kind of thing, so I was teaching half-time and then working to get like quarters off and summers to write this book. [01:20:05] Oh, first, I had to take a year off to learn all this theory, and that did take a year of work just learning it. So by the time I came back to the department, the character of the department was changing. When we left that story in the 1970s, there were some women. I told you about the little group of us—Diane Middlebrook, Anne Mellor, Nancy Packer, and Sandra Drake—that would meet to talk about how we could get more women hired in the department. Meanwhile, then, women had come in. Terry Castle had come into the department. I mean, the poets Denise Levertov and Adrienne Rich were teaching each part-time but were powers and presences on campus. You get a whole younger generation of Paula Moya, Jennifer Summit, so that in the English Department by this time there were proportionally many more women there. Actually the English department was notable in how many women there were. Though, of course, English is an area where women traditionally were encouraged… Tracy: In higher numbers, yes. Gelpi: [01:22:12] And history, yes. So I need, though, a question. What do we want to think about for those years? When I came back, I still was teaching. That’s when I was teaching these courses, say, in feminist theory. Tracy: This is a side question. You were still teaching while you were editing Signs. Gelpi: [01:22:50] Yes. Tracy: So, and you’d taken a year off to put work into… 86 Gelpi: [01:22:54] Well, I never took the year off, but the time that I had [spent] in that. Tracy: Oh, it took you a year. Oh, I see. You spent a year learning the theory. Gelpi: [01:23:04] I mean I was just learning it, yes. Tracy: So by 1992 you got tenure. Gelpi: [01:23:12] Yes. Tracy: And Shelley’s Goddess was published. So, when the department made this arrangement of you would be given the position of associate professor, you’d be put on the tenure track, given the opportunity to publish a book in order to try to get tenure, in terms of the department and your colleagues, what were their reactions and did they echo in any way the reactions of colleagues back in the 1970s when you would try to get tenure then? Gelpi: [01:23:56] Well, I think I told you that when I tried to get tenure earlier, even from people who liked me and thought me clever, there was a question whether I really would publish enough to make me a good bet for tenure. I think that that, and perhaps Signs had to do with this, but that I had the sense that I was treated as a professionally serious person, yes, that I knew what I was doing, and I would do it. Tracy: At that point you were. In the 1980s you were a safer bet. Gelpi: [01:24:52] Oh, yes, much. Yes. Really when I came back, though, I must say—and this is true for the rest of the time that I was there—I missed the interdisciplinary work. I missed the fun and the challenge of Signs. I never had intellectually so interesting and so good a time, really, as that, where I felt 87 so much intellectual companionship with the people I was working with day to day. I was working over in a different part of the campus where women were the center of… it was the Women’s Center, and our ways of doing things and our lives were of an importance. How will I say it? It’s just that when I came back to the English Department, I was moving back into that man’s world. It’s not quite the same. And though I took a big part and was glad to take part, I didn’t find it as much fun and as intellectually congenial as I had over when I was doing Signs. But that’s neither here nor there. I certainly also did not find it oppressive. I didn’t look for it, but I didn’t get the sense that anyone said, “Oh, she weaseled her way onto the tenure track.” I didn’t get that sense at all. For many, I think that it was quite the opposite. A number of people felt this was very good and what we should have done before now has finally been done. So that was all right. That was fine. Tracy: So tell me about getting tenure in 1992. You apply for tenure, you go through a review process—do you remember any of that? Is that even an accurate description of tenure? Gelpi: [01:27:17] Well, yes. Of course, the work has to be sent out. I remember it was ready in manuscript but the book hadn’t been printed yet. It was accepted by Oxford, but it wasn’t printed. Now, being accepted is good, but ideal is that the outside readers will have a printed text. And my career was anomalous and supposedly Signs didn’t count, though I think it finally has counted some with some people, with some readers. I had books also. I 88 mean, these are edited books coming out of Signs, but they were books I worked on very hard. But, again, they didn’t count. [laughs] Anyhow, I remember that the process was hard in that I had to look at… I’m a great one to brace myself for the worst, and with the theory that the worst will then not be so bad. So I braced myself for the possibility that I would not get tenure. If that happened, then I wouldn’t even really be able to go back to part-time lecturing. I wondered what would I do? Should I get into local politics? [laughs] I mean I think I also realized, and that’s interesting, maybe I would have done more good in the world if I’d gotten into politics, I don’t know. [laughs] But I am deeply academic. I really wanted tenure. Now, it would have been tricky. Al had just had his three years as chair. But he was no longer chair, and so that took care of what could have been a really— Tracy: Awkward. Gelpi: [01:29:35] Yes, could have been very… well, he would have had to recuse himself. But Martin Evans was chair of the English Department. I think that the chair of my committee was Diane Middlebrook. Yes, I’m sure. Terry Castle was on that committee, and I can remember a wonderful interview I had with Terry, because each of them met me about the book. I admired Terry’s writing enormously, and so I was very taken that Terry liked the book and that Diane liked the book. That meant a great deal to me. So that there were things about the process that were very, very positive. I can remember that after the deliberations, I think I was waiting, hovering somewhere. But I can see Diane and Ron Rebholz coming with their hands up, raised. Really, 89 again, it was a lovely moment, because they were clearly so joyful and so proud it was fine. So though I was at this point fifty-nine, here I was, like a young thing, rejoicing in tenure at last. [laughs] And with tenure, then I moved from being associate to professor, so I sort of made that… Tracy: Made that leap. Gelpi: [01:31:05] Took that jump, yes. I didn’t have to do another book. So that’s 1992. Now, in the period after that, I was launched on another topic about Christina Rossetti, a topic that I finally found too uncongenial to write about. So though I worked with her poetry, and I continued to work a lot with the Pre-Raphaelites, I didn’t write another book. What I got to doing in that last decade that I was in the English department was technology. That’s when I started… because that’s when it began to be possible to use the resources of the web for a course, and I did get wonderful cooperation from Stanford. Charles Kerns, who was in the library, and various people in the library who helped me with this. So it was, again, anomalous as someone who is so little a techie but I embarked on these courses that because with a topic like the PreRaphaelites, there are just so many resources so. So doing that, I became then the chair of the Technology Committee. [laughs] Now, my job couldn’t be to take an active part in how this was going to work. My job, as I took it, was to bring people together from different areas who could then take this on and to get interest and funding from the university, so I could do that. 90 Tracy: Interesting. Let’s talk a little bit about how you served as acting director of, from 2002 to 2004, what would have at that time been the Institute for Research on Women and Gender. In 2002 had you retired from the English Department, or was retirement sort of happening as you took over this acting directorship? Gelpi: [01:33:51] No. I was just at the point of retiring. I had been in the last two years, so 1999 to 2001, the head of graduate studies in the English Department, and so that was the last departmental task I had. Then I’m pretty sure that that was the end of my teaching too. I’d already started, like, three years of downgrading how much teaching I did, and so I was ready to retire. I can’t remember whether I was still head of graduate studies. Maybe in that year--2001, 2002—I think I still had a connection with the department. I still had an office there, I think. When there became a crisis in the Institute’s history in that Laura Carstensen—she’s in psychology. The person who was director, Laura, was already over her time. She wanted to resign. I mean, she needed to get back to the department full-time. She works in geriatric studies, and she had big, big projects she had to take on. She could not stay at the Institute any longer. But the dean of graduate research was not able to find another faculty member who would take on the job. The person who was his associate, George Dekker, who’s a member of the department, first thought of asking Al to take it on in just to hold it for a while. Tracy: Hold down the fort. 91 Gelpi: [01:36:30] Yes. But then I don’t know whether Al said… Al said, well, no, he wouldn’t be, but what about Barbara? All right. [laughter] So I said, yes, I would do that. So that’s how I [started]. It was just an appointment that I took over, so I was acting chair, and that remained my title. My task was to oversee getting a new director. It turned out also that when I came in that people in the faculty on campus, especially…. I worked very closely in this with Myra Strober because we were very concerned. The Institute’s finances had never been in great shape, but they were really getting worse. Also, even the sense of the Institute’s mission was getting lost. It had independent scholars that it brought together through that scholars program, and that program was working fine. But it was getting to be like Wellesley in the old days, in that those scholars were there at the Institute, and they had the use of the library, but they were not connected with university departments. The connection to the university was becoming quite tenuous, and departments didn’t see the use of it. [01:38:27] Now this is, again, something within feminist scholarship that was the very success of feminist scholarship. The fact that we brought— and we is the old-style feminists—we brought so many women into academe and brought them along in academe, that the success of that in a way, or more than a way, did undermine the communal base of the interdisciplinary study started with us in the late 1970s and 1980s. When these young women were brought into departments and they had to make it in the department. We had to tell them yes, and if your department does not care what you write about women but wants you to do this and this work, do it. Make tenure. 92 That’s what’s important. Very often for getting tenure, though, interdisciplinary work doesn’t count. I mean, doing things like the Victorian women project would not count toward tenure. You have to do something on your own. We still work that way. [01:39:46] So we were getting split back more into departmental boxes, and so the Institute did not have projects then that involved community from the university. It was still very hard to get men involved in and excited in the scholarly work of the Institute. So this was the problem, but with Myra and with a wonderful woman who was a vice provost, Pat Jones, who always had women or has women very much in mind… she was a very strong advocate. Those are the ones I remember working with most closely, but I worked with other former directors, too, like Iris Litt. I had a team of former directors whom I turned to for advice and counsel. We could all see that what we really needed was a director who could come in from the outside and bring with her a kind of plan for how we would recreate the Institute. We started over so that it would have a support and interest from the academic community that it didn’t have at this point. So making this a national search for a director but with a salary to match that. Well, if you were going to bring in a scholar of national eminence, you then have to have a salary that will match it, or match what he or she would be getting at their home institution. Now, meanwhile, the dean of graduate studies had really… a couple of things happened. George Dekker, who was a very, very good friend to the Institute, became desperately ill with stomach cancer and was really out of the picture. And his dean, who’s in Engineering and had always found the Institute anomalous 93 within his research plan, was losing heart and really said that he didn’t see that a whole lot of work, money, and so on was worth it. He was having doubts about whether we needed the Institute. Maybe I’m putting it too brutally, but certainly he didn’t see it as fitting under his umbrella. He saw it as just a constant irritation, almost, to try to figure out what to do with this Institute that wasn’t working the way the others were. The other research institutes have outside funding. Here is this institute that doesn’t have enough funding. Is he supposed to get it, and from where? [laughs] So it was that kind of problem. [01:44:11] The new dean of Humanities and Sciences was a woman, Sharon Long, and he asked her whether she would be willing to consider taking it under her deanship since it really fit there better than it did under his [deanship]. Her decision to take it is one of the things that made the Institute and means that the Institute continues to this day. She was absolutely key. [01:44:49] So that was the first hurdle. Sharon Long said that she would take it under her aegis, and then once having done that, she said she would support it. So that meant she would support a search for a director, a national search, and it also meant that she put us in real contact with development about getting proper funding. In other words, if we were going to have scholarship, then the dean of graduate research was right—to have this Institute that is trying to do scholarship but that has no funding sources to promote its scholarship is in an anomalous situation and is really going to be a problem for everybody. So we needed an endowment. The endowment would be for the director’s salary, and to then make possible 94 grants within the university and for outside scholars to come and to make this a center. So that was the job I had; the main job really was to oversee the search for a director. Meanwhile then I also was very much in touch with development in ways that the previous directors had not been. Development had been around… I don’t know if you have anything to do with development, but you have to have a line. You have to have a dean—you have an entrée. You have to have sources of income—big bucks that are available as people whom the Institute could ask for money. I see the point of that totally. I loved the work I did with development. When they were on board, there were people there who were just at the ready. They wanted to help the Institute, but really didn’t have the go-ahead to do it, and who were very immediate had a history of interest in the Institute. It was a very good time, good time in some ways. It was not a good time in that there were big changes in the structure of the Institute that I had to implement that were very difficult. Getting a director, it turns out, is very hard. That is to say, to get somebody who will come… but if that person has a spouse then what will happen with that? That means two positions and so on. So that’s how those two years passed. [01:47:55] However, by the end, the person who was the chair of the Institute—the Institute had a board of trustees that was made up of people from around the country…. It was from the beginning the Institute had had that, and it had associates who really were sources of smaller funding in the area. Michelle Clayman was head of this big board, and she’s an extraordinary woman and a financier from New York. 95 She gave the first million that would cover the director’s salary. So that was while I was there, and was huge. Tracy: That million went into the endowment that you were trying to raise. Gelpi: [01:48:58] In the endowment, right. Then, finally, that’s how it’s now the Clayman Institute. I think that she is a further benefactor as well. All the preparation for that and the funding for that, though I left it… well, yes, I left it, and I’m no party to anything. Then what happened was that a history of science scholar, Londa Schiebinger, came to the History Department half time with the Institute. Wonderful. She’s in history of science. One of the things that she really [focuses on] and one of her points is you need to think about gender with high institute. She has written powerfully on this topic, and she was nationally known for this. Actually, I had a connection with her. She had as a young, at that point, assistant professor, written a brilliant essay for Signs. One of the first, she was. So I had been her editor. So when she agreed to come, she took over raising the rest of the endowment, and she did. So but that was after my time, and I had no further part in that. Tracy: So in 2004 when you left the Institute, when you were no longer acting director of the Institute, was that your last… Gelpi: [01:50:51] Yes. I totally retired in April 2004. And at that point, I was seventy, so it seemed time enough. [laughter] Well, and I don’t know. Not that I was… but actually, that’s not a Stanford thing, but I thought it was time. I wanted to have time to travel. I mean, I saw it as it was time to stop. 96 Tracy: We’ve documented this pretty well all through both of our sessions, but you’ve certainly seen a lot. I mean, you’ve been at Stanford since 1968, so you saw 1968 through 1970. You were on campus of all of that turmoil. You’ve certainly seen it change and grow over the time. Gelpi: [01:51:50] Oh, well, yes. Now, in the humanities, I think that the huge area of change… the English department has changed. Well, I told you that it was really this… it certainly seems smaller in this small group. But I think at the time when we came to Stanford, though there were these noted people at Stanford, in Harvard’s eyes, the Stanford English Department was not a national department. But it did become so within… the English department itself became nationally known, and that’s, as I say, because of the people who were coming in—Anne Mellor, John Bender, and all of these people who helped to make that happen. Bringing in people like Terry Castle, Stephen Orgel—that was already starting when we came, and bringing Al here was part of that. So from 1968 to the 1980s, you saw a steady rise in the importance of the Stanford English Department, but that’s Al’s story. It became a real center for the study of poetry. [01:53:40] Then, of course, Stanford in other ways became this world university in engineering and so on. The Silicon Valley had started. Maybe in this connection I could say that very recently, in the last couple of weeks, a man who’s now a lawyer in a big firm in New York came to stay overnight with us. He was Al’s student from 1973 to 1977. He got his Ph.D. in English. He then finally went into law school and became this very busy lawyer, and 97 he did come back a couple of times on cases where he would really do allnighters, you know. [laughs] When he came back this last time—he was recruited by a law firm here in this area—this was his first time just to kind of be here and look around and look at downtown Palo Alto. He was just absolutely openmouthed with astonishment. He said, “You have no idea how different this place looks.” [laughs] And it’s true. I think that since we live in a place that looks pretty much the same, and our little part of campus looks the same, and Palo Alto has changed gradually, we’re not as aware. But he said it’s different. The whole atmosphere is different. It’s electric in a way that it was not in 1973. Tracy: That’s interesting. Before I keep you too long, is there anything that we haven’t talked about that you feel is important to include? Gelpi: [01:53:40] No. I think we covered it...