 Devaney: Hello. This is Patricia Devaney interviewing Anne Miner as part of the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. The date is June 25, 2014, and we are at my home in Palo Alto. Anne, your life has taken many turns. You started in 1962 at Stanford as a medical student, dropped out after a year, took a variety of jobs, and then became involved in the women’s movement. In 1971, Stanford’s president appointed you to be consultant to the president on affirmative action for women. A year later, you were hired as Stanford’s first full-time affirmative action officer, a position you held for six years, when you decided to go back to school. This time you became a graduate student in the Stanford business school, where you earned your PhD in the area of organizational behavior in 1985. Somewhere during that time, you had married, had a child, and separated from your husband. You then left Stanford to join the faculty in 15 the University of Wisconsin’s business school, where you worked your way up to become a Distinguished Professor with an endowed chair. So let’s explore your life and career in this interview with a particular emphasis on the decade between 1968 and 1978, when you were so instrumental in increasing the status of women at Stanford. First, let’s start with your early life. Would you talk about where you grew up and what your folks did and how many brothers and sisters you had? Miner: [00:01:34] Sure. I was born in St. Louis, but mostly lived in Evanston, Illinois. My father was a newspaper editor and reporter, and my mother was somewhat of a writer, but she was mostly at home. She did spend a time being executive director of a sorority, which was an important part of her life and an activity that probably affected me. I have two older brothers and one is much older, one is a little bit older. Devaney: As a little girl, did you have thoughts about what you wanted to become when you grew up? Miner: [00:02:17] Well, I used to stand on a post outside our house, or next to it, and sing, thinking that I would be an opera singer. [laughs] Okay, I don’t know if I really believed that, but it seemed like a great dream. Devaney: But you actually still do engage in music, so the dreams of childhood come true many times. Miner: [00:02:37] Yes. [laughs] Devaney: What expectations did your parents have for you? Do you know what their attitudes were toward your education and your career? 16 Miner: [00:02:46] I have no idea what they thought I should do as a career at all, but I don’t think they had a strong gender view. I think other people did, but they didn’t, so they just were sort of neutral. Devaney: Do you recall what was going on in the external world when you were growing up that may have influenced your life’s directions? I mean, what were society’s attitudes toward women’s roles and how they might have influenced you? Miner: [00:03:15] Well, the era--to be precise, I was born in 1940, so to me, early childhood was World War II, and remembering we would be putting things on the windows because there might be an air attack on Chicago, which wasn’t very likely, but who knew at the time, right? There was a sense of the country being under duress. But around gender, it was pretty simple for me. I mean, the first time my mother said I could not go out to play after dinner, she said it was because I was a girl. That led me down a direction that never changed. I always thought that doesn’t sound right. Now, in retrospect, I realize what she really meant is, “Because you’re only four years old, you dumb kid. You’re not going out.” [laughter] But had she had more sense and said, “Because you’re four,” maybe I’d be a different person. From the outset, I just never liked sex roles. I never liked anything [that involved sex role assumptions]. I remember saying I was going to be a doctor and someone said, “Women can’t be doctors.” Devaney: Someone, but not your mother? 17 Miner: [00:04:24] No, not my mother. That’s my point. It didn’t come so much from my family. It was from the society. Devaney: Where did you go to college? Miner: [00:04:33] I went to Evanston Township High School, a big high school in the Midwest that’s very competitive and full of aspiring people. Devaney: Was that because you lived there? Miner: [00:04:43] Yes, we all did. Everybody did, and it was a big public high school. The public education system is what I thought was normal. I never knew anybody who went to private school. Then the other kids, who were hardworking and in drama and all these things that we did, they said, “We should go to Harvard or Radcliffe,” whatever you want to call it, and four of us went from our class to Radcliffe, which was a big number. Devaney: You make it sound like a casual decision, but Radcliffe, in fact, was part of Harvard. That was a very big deal and a tough school to get in. Miner: [00:05:20] It was, and it was an aspiration, I have to say. I did apply to Stanford, I got into Stanford, I almost went to Stanford, but I think because my friends were going to Boston, I went to Boston. Devaney: Did you have thoughts by then, when you got there, about what you wanted to major in? Miner: [00:05:42] No. I’m one of these people that there are two ways people’s lives go. Some people, they know they want to be a journalist when they’re ten. I never knew what I wanted to do, ever, in my entire life. Mine has been all “do the right next thing.” I mean, I [eventually] had proximate goals where I 18 would go to med school, but I had nothing like that [when I entered college]. I just knew to do what I knew to do. So I was an English major, and I did a lot of drama and I was on the poetry thing. There was a literary magazine called The Harvard Advocate. I was a member, writing and publishing poetry, and acting in plays at the time. It was a very exciting time. But about my junior year, I thought, “Well, what happened to medical school?” I thought, “I could do that. I bet I could do that,” and so I switched, and I went pre-med in my junior year, and I took calculus and organic chemistry and all these things, which was intriguing. I applied to medical schools, and I got in. Devaney: You got into several medical schools? Miner: [00:06:49] That’s a good question. I don’t remember how many, and at that time it was an enterprise, because we were told one of the prestigious schools had a quota. They had a hundred students and a quota of two women. There was nothing hidden about it. It was an overt system of gender slotting, and medical schools did not want women. It was Johns Hopkins, maybe, that publicly stated, “We’ll admit two women.” Devaney: Did Stanford have quotas for women? Miner: [00:07:19] I read something recently and it looked like they maybe did, but the big thing was they had five out of sixty, which was considered radically huge. Progressive for the era. Devaney: Come back to that decision to be a pre-med. First, as a little girl, you probably thought you would be a singer. In college you were into poetry. 19 What was the change that made you decide midway through college that you might want to be a doctor? Miner: [00:07:48] It was more like I thought I always had wanted to be a doctor, but that I hadn’t had quite the courage or spunk to actually do it. That was sort of my thought, that I could do this. It was similar to when I got my PhD-actually a similar transition. Then I talked to all these people, and actually many people I knew, including men I knew, said, “If that’s what you want to do, you should do it.” So I did it. Devaney: To what extent do you credit Harvard for having encouraged you to do this? Miner: [00:08:21] Boy, that’s an interesting question. The whole culture, even though we went to Harvard classes--and we were, in all senses that way, Harvard students--there was a whole thing about the role of women that penetrated life. In fact, before I got there, women were not allowed in the undergraduate library. The graduate students were actually Harvard students, but there were these remnants of Harvard College. Somebody had to get that fixed. I think that was fixed by the time I got there, but there was [some] culture of “women matter,” and there certainly was a culture at Radcliffe that we were supposed to be strong. Devaney: Would you back up a little bit and explain a more about what the relationship was between Harvard and Radcliffe? Miner: [00:09:09] That’s a good question. There never was any Radcliffe faculty or anything in the world. They hired Harvard faculty to come teach the Radcliffe students in the early 1900s, and somewhere long before I was there, they just got rid of all of that, and Radcliffe would admit people. It was a 20 weird system. But once they were admitted, it was all Harvard classes, all the faculty were Harvard. It was a coeducational institution, but not the dorms. Devaney: So Radcliffe was really just an administrative arm of Harvard to host women students. Miner: [00:09:41] They had, if you remember--was it Mary [Polly] Bunting who was the president? She was an interesting type of feminist at the time, a very strong feminist, and she had a vision that there was a special role for women, but Radcliffe needed to be standing up for women. In that sense, you were encouraged to take any aspirations, strong culture. You know, Radcliffe women are going to achieve things, but you’re going to achieve things with your special role as a woman. They would have special programs for women to come back, and the focus was on how you were going to be an educator of children. So it was a mixed message. Devaney: Did you see yourself as a feminist in college? Miner: [00:10:21] I don’t know that we even used the word “feminist” then at all. I don’t remember when The Second Sex and Betty Friedan’s material was. But for me personally, as I said, I never thought the world made any sense in terms of sex roles. I thought they were crazy and stupid. Even when I was a camp counselor in college, we had canoe trips--typically nine people, six kids, three grownups--and there had never been a woman who had been the head counselor on a canoe trip in charge of the canoes. I said, “That doesn’t make any sense,” and so I led canoe trips. It was like little micro things, and I just never saw it. But I never was confrontational. I just said, “Wouldn’t that be 21 fun?” [Basically I saw the world through feminist values since childhood but in that era, sexism was the norm.] Devaney: You didn’t get pushback then? Miner: [00:11:14] No. Devaney: So you came to Stanford for whatever reasons as a medical student in 1972. How many women were in your class, did you say? Miner: [00:11:24] Five out of sixty. Devaney: How were the women treated by either their male colleagues or by the faculty? Miner: [00:11:32] I have a hard time answering that clearly. Sexism was so much part of the general culture, you kind of had to go out of your way to notice it, right? So were there sexists? Of course. I shouldn’t even go into it, but there was one guy in one department who was just crazily sexist. I don’t mean harassing. But in the culture of the time, they were trying not to be sexist, let me put it that way, and they meant for the women to succeed. It was a waste of money if they didn’t, so they meant for it to work, and there were some very successful women students. Devaney: You stayed one year. Why did you decide to drop out? Miner: [00:12:19] I did not do real well in the anatomy class, and they said to me, “We’re not going to kick you out, but we’re going to make you take that class again.” And I thought, “Really.” [laughter] So I said, “Why don’t I take a leave of absence?” And they said, “That’s a good idea.” 22 I took a leave of absence, and the longer I was out of the medical school, the happier I was. I took that as a sign that I shouldn’t be in medical school. I know we don’t want to spend too much on it, but I have to tell you, to this day when I drive by our huge hospital at UW, University of Wisconsin--which is like here, it’s this medical world--I think, “Thank you, higher power, for not letting me continue medical school,” because I just think I would have been unhappy going every day to work with sick people. I mean, I like sick people. We’re all sick people. [laughs] But I’m so grateful I didn’t do that. I was connected mostly to the psychiatry department, and maybe I would have done that. But I’m glad I didn’t do that. Devaney: What did you do after you dropped out of medical school? Miner: [00:13:24] That’s a good period that’s probably not too salient to this project, but I went to Europe. I just kind of came back across the U.S., couldn’t decide what to do, and I finally decided to come back to Palo Alto. I spent quite a bit of time, which is relevant to what we’re talking about today, as a Western girl--you know, temporary typist--so I’d be typing at NASA, Hewlett-Packard, maybe Fairchild. I don’t remember. But all those big companies around here--General Electric, I think--gave me a fascinating tour of organizations. But one of the assignments was in Encina Hall, where Bob Freelen was--Encina Hall at Stanford where the Development Office was, which, of course, I’d never heard of. I didn’t know Development existed, actually. But I went there, and this man’s secretary was gone. Actually, before that, they gave me this list of names to alphabetize. That was the Buck Club, which was Stanford’s male scholarship for athletes, a very happy thing. But 23 that meant I knew these people in that office and I worked for this guy, Bob Freelen, who was a very fun and interesting man. He was the director of the Annual Fund for the development office. The role of the Development Office was to raise funds for the university. It’s a huge staff, huge operation with lots of people. So all that happened then, just to wrap this up. Because I worked there, I met those people [other people than development staff] and I did some help. They had a journal and a publication, [probably Per/Se published starting 1966] and I probably helped fold things for that. But then after that, some medical school friends asked me to work with a small company that sold information services, an entrepreneur. I’ve always been mystified why they asked me to do that, but they did, and I became the executive vice president for operations of TOLOS Associates. It’s now long defunct, but that had a huge effect on my life in the sense that I was an administrator, and I went and took a small business course to learn how the world works. I had no clue until that point how the corner drugstore ran, so to speak. [I knew nothing of the everyday way commerce and regular institutions work.] It [TOLOS Associates] was educational, and it had some Stanford links, because there were Stanford professors involved in advising this little company. But eventually the company went under. The founder just one day didn’t come to work. [laughs] That’s pretty much it. Devaney: How long did you work at TOLOS? 24 Miner: [00:16:24] I don’t remember. A while, a year and a half, and enough that I borrowed money from people to invest in it, etcetera. It’s a classic startup story, except that it’s one of the 90 percent of startups that failed. But at that point then, Bob Freelen was sitting in the Development Office at Stanford, and we sort of were vaguely in touch. He had some problem with coordinating his mail-appeal programs, mailing out mailings. Devaney: He knew you because you had worked there as a temporary before you went to be executive director at TOLOS. Miner: [00:16:54] Precisely the point. Yes. Now, since we’re on the gender thing, it’s important, I think, to notice that that was a classic gender role thing. I was doing one thing that young women could do. That [temp secretarial work] and waitressing were the two things I could always earn money doing, and that’s because I was a typist. One time at NASA--this is going to be a vanity story--but I was typing a document, and I asked one of the people I was typing for, “Well, what does this part of the satellite do there?” And the man said, “What? Can you understand the point about the satellite that you’re typing about?” Then I realized that was a no-no. I was supposed to be a mindless person who had no clue what I was typing. It was a gender role that assumed you were not processing; you were just doing the typing. So the Stanford Annual Fund Program needed someone. According to them, they needed somebody who would help with these mail-appeal things, and they offered me a job, and it was Bob Freelen. Either that one or the 25 next job, I remember it clearly, I was making $7,000 a year, and they offered me $10,000 a year. That was 1967. Devaney: That was good money in 1967. Miner: [00:18:11] That’s what I thought. I said, “You have to be kidding.” Nobody ever gave me that kind of money in my whole life. That made it attractive, so I went. Devaney: What did you do in the Development Office? Miner: [00:18:23] I had a little cubby, and I did hundreds and hundreds of thousands of mailing pieces to alumni. It was my job to make sure they all went out. But within maybe a half year--I’m not sure how long, not too long--a [professional job] opening came. [In the mail appeal job] I was not a professional. All the professionals [were] males in these offices around a big bullpen in the middle where all the women were, and I was sort of in a cubby halfway between. In terms of the [unspoken] rules of the office, I went to coffee with the women because I was a woman and because I was doing a job that wasn’t a professional job with the big offices around the outside. But then I got promoted into a male job as the director of the mailappeal program. So then I’m talking with all the class agents. It was a fabulous job, it was incredible, because you met people from the class of 1914, ‘15, ‘16, and I know all those [folks]. They’re all dead now, but they were so interesting. Devaney: So you were the first woman to have what had been a man’s job at that time. Miner: [00:19:36] Yes, and it [was] also beginning to feel kind of my life as Joan of Arc. It also involved going out to, like, El Centro or Bakersfield and taking 26 kits to the alumni, representing the university, talking about sports and so on. They had never had a woman field fundraiser before, so Freelen got a lot of heat for that. They said, “You can’t do that.” I remember at the time that I was grateful that he was willing to go argue with people, that they should have a woman field fundraiser, because I didn’t feel I had the courage to do that. Later I would have, but I didn’t then. Devaney: How many years did you work in the Development Office total? Miner: [00:20:20] Four. Devaney: During this time, what was happening in the external world with respect to civil rights? This was what year now or what era? Miner: [00:20:28] 1967, 1968. Devaney: So all hell was breaking loose on American campuses all over, civil rights movement. Martin Luther King Jr. was killed in 1968. The women’s movement, gay rights, I mean, it’s all kind of coming together. What, in fact, was happening at Stanford around these issues then? Miner: [00:20:46] Great question, and I think this is a cliché. A lot of people believe this, but I do believe that the complete sense of everything boiling up influenced the willingness of women to think there might be a women’s issue. In my experience, in my [field fundraiser] job, I’m writing memos every day to Stanford alumni about the students’ demonstrations or constantly translating to alums what is happening up here, because they were angry. Devaney: They were angry about student demonstrations. 27 Miner: [00:21:18] Of course they were, and so we were kind of the translators. That was part of my role, and I’d go to demonstrations with my dog and report back. In addition, there was the women’s liberation movement happening by that name, where there was an explicit agenda of consciousness-raising. It wasn’t the straight economic equal pay issue. It was something more fundamental. I remember some of the radical women, the famous saying about the place for women--I can’t remember, it’s a famous radical student group. “The place for women in the movement is prone,” or on their backs. Those were the sayings [about political, ethnic social movement groups at the time]. There were all these politically radical people since 1962, so I said, “Wait a minute. Wait a minute.” I was in a women’s liberation group that was local here in Palo Alto, and at that point, what strikes me looking back, is I had been socialized by the Annual Fund, by the Stanford Development Office ways of doing things, that I just would replicate in this women’s lib world--I would produce the roster of all the attendees on Monday night group the second night [the same as] what I would do in the Development Office. Devaney: Wait, wait. Yes, but at the time, the women’s movement initially was more awareness-raising among women. Miner: [00:22:35] It was everything, but that was part of it. Devaney: Part of your role at a personal level, not a professional level, was to bring women together and to sort of organize some of their activities? 28 Miner: [00:22:48] Well, self-select. I mean, it was a social movement, and I was in it, and I was like these other people. But I just went looking in my old files, and I noticed that I would then voluntarily say, “Well, I will make the list. I will produce a roster.” I didn’t type the roster. My secretary over in the fundraising office typed the roster of the women’s group. So I was involved, and I was kind of a quasi-organizer. Devaney: This was totally unrelated to your job in the development office. Miner: [00:23:15] Absolutely. Devaney: But that was okay with them that they had your secretary typing up your-Miner: [00:23:19] Looking back, if I were going to interview those people, I’d say, “Why did you let that happen?” Because looking back, we did things like make speeches at the Kiwanis Club about what is women’s liberation. But this was something that was laughed at. It wasn’t only despised; it was laughed at. So there was a lot of anger about the women’s movement. Devaney: Say more about what you mean by the women’s movement. Miner: [00:23:57] It is interesting, because it wasn’t a top-down movement, it was a bottom-up movement where many people spontaneously said something, and clearly it was partly triggered--and a lot of people said this--by the black liberation movement where people would say, “You shouldn’t call me a boy when I’m a grown man.” So a woman would sit there and say, “Well, wait a minute. So why am I called a girl?” Many of the things that the women’s movement did were clearly imitative or learning from the other social movements going on. That was happening here at Stanford. 29 Devaney: I was curious about what women’s liberation was and how it was expressing itself at Stanford. You said that you were not only part of some of these spontaneous groups, but that you helped organize them. Miner: [00:24:46] Yes. And since I didn’t get into trouble doing that, I went on doing it on the campus. Some of the people were the same people. If you look at those rosters, some of the people appear much later in stories as sometimes more radical women on the campus.1 But at that time, I wasn’t mindful of that, so I went around on campus, and I don’t know why exactly I did this, but I went to the meetings--there were all these same spontaneous things happening in the YWCA, the Stanford Distaff Club, which was women faculty and women staff, the Stanford Faculty Women’s Club, which was [then] comprised of faculty wives [founded in 1896]. That’s what it was. For some reason I got into helping all those people. Devaney: At some point you met and worked a little bit with the wife of the Stanford president, Jing Lyman. Is that right? Miner: [00:25:43] I did. It was sort of like people milling around doing things, right? Then you’d run into each other. The Stanford wives, Women’s Club, I think, wanted to do something about the employment of women. They wanted to get out of this sort of tea-party-only role. So it was, again, a sex role question. I said, [interpreted this as] “No, we’re not just little ladies. We’re doing stuff.” [Anne Miner’s note] I am referring to Glenda Jones who would attend women’s lib group meetings in Palo Alto--this is somewhat later but also was a major force in the union and SLAC with a Marxist viewpoint of class warfare. 1 30 And in fact they were. [So they did] and I helped them.2 I believe I helped them with a pamphlet they did called Going Into Labor--I think I helped with the design of the pamphlet or the writing or something. Devaney: That was something Mrs. Lyman was involved with? Miner: [00:26:16] She was a force. Devaney: Was she a feminist? Miner: [00:26:21] I don’t like to use that word, to describe someone else’s agenda but she was an activist around these women’s questions, absolutely. Devaney: Why don’t you like to use the word “feminist”? Miner: [00:26:29] Why don’t I? To describe someone else’s activities? I think it was used to connote things to some people that I don’t think are particularly useful. , But I’m a feminist certainly in the fundamental sense, that I think we should change sex roles and women should have a different situation, but so should men. But, yes, my caution maybe comes from that era when that word “feminist” often was used in a pejorative way or to mean that you’re some kind of crazy, as they said, another bra-burning woman. But if you had to generally say that a feminist means someone who assumes that sex roles are not good--that there’s something bad about that, and that women in [Anne Miner’s note] It is important to clarify that they were already doing all this. I just helped. They were already very active in wanting to create new programs for the women who had set aside their careers for family but were interested in re-entry into workforce or education. 3. [Anne Miner’s note] In a way there were two ‘flavors’ of activism at that time. In one flavor, the goal was a society where men and women could develop their potential equally in all areas--as when women became doctors or full professors without it being a surprise. It would end socially constructed sex roles. In the second flavor, women kept a distinct role in the family and perhaps in social welfare, but this distinct role was honored and supported by society (as in special courses for returning full time mothers). I am a feminist of the first type, but have always respected the second vision. To some degree, we are still working out as a society what mix seems best. I always felt we should start with the default of full equal opportunity, and experiment for a half century or so. 2 31 particular need to have different roles, more opportunities--sure, of course. We should probably encourage its use to help overcome the old stereotype. Devaney: Given the period, it’s interesting that the wife of the Stanford president would have been such a presence herself on these issues. Is that how you came to the attention of Stanford’s president in 1971, Richard Lyman, when he asked you to become a consultant to him on affirmative action for women? How did you come to his attention? Miner: [00:27:45] Who knows, really? I wasn’t there in some private conversation, but I don’t know how much it was that. Also by then, in 1969, I’m going around doing names and meeting all these people. I’m going around the campus, meeting with the professional women of the Stanford medical school, where they had a big issue, and I said, “Oh, well, maybe you could do these things.” I always was in this kind of staff role. I said, “Well, here are eight things you could do if you want. How about childcare? How about salary equity?” I was like a little Janice Appleseed going around and suggesting we do things about it with many other people. I was by no means the only person. I was just one of the movement, but I did do one thing which brought me to the attention of the president. There were so many people at that time--and this was a big point we’ll get to later--you could know everyone on the campus who was willing to care about women, because it was very risky. Women who did that were often shamed or were made fun of by their male colleagues. There were women students one time that wanted to do a survey of the staff of secretaries, whom I knew a lot because I really was one in many 32 ways, and they assumed that if you’d given a survey to the Stanford secretaries, they were going to hear, “We should rise up and take over.” I said, “Don’t do that, because I can tell you that’s not what you’re going to get. You’re going to get people who are going to say, ‘It all seems fine to me,’” because they were acculturated to being safe and nobody wanted to speak out much. Some people did. I knew all this. The point of the story, though, is that I then created an organization called the Women’s Forum, and it was a name, and it invited all the groups. We had, I think, eighteen groups at one point, and we would meet and we would discuss issues. That also included Judy Poole, who was a medical school researcher who eventually was to become a full professor, but she was an advocate and a very powerful person; Jing Lyman; Joyce Kobayashi, who was one of the student presidents; and Marg Lozoff from the Human Problems Institute. And that was visible to the president because he knew what we were doing and we would copy him [on some reports]. Also when you work in the Development Office, you staff events that the president hosts, so I knew him because we were doing alumni events over in the Faculty Club, where I was the person with the nametags and providing staff support. I met him all the time that way, because that was our job. Devaney: Were you surprised when he approached you in January of 1971 to be a consultant to him on affirmative action for women? Miner: [00:30:43] Somewhat, but the key is, the most visible thing we did, was there was a great example of how organizations work, that Joyce Kobayashi, the student president, happened to be on the Committee on Committees, the 33 [Faculty Senate’s] organizing committee. She said, “Hey, maybe we could get a Committee on the Education and Employment of Women in the formal system,” because all this is out of the university system, right? We’re all volunteers running around the periphery. Devaney: You’re doing ad hoc groups. Miner: [00:31:14] We [were]. Nobody has any power of any sort. So that was a serendipitous moment, and we said, “What a great idea.” And Jing Lyman was for that, other people were for it. Devaney: This is to create something called the Women’s Forum? Miner: [00:31:31] No, we had the Forum. I already had the Forum. I did that. Devaney: It brought together these eighteen different separate groups of women working on women’s issues. You then wanted to institutionalize it within the university. And who had to okay that? Miner: [00:31:44] Well, it had to go to the Faculty Senate. So we, in a two-month period, wrote the documents. I wrote the charge to the committee. We wrote all this stuff. Then the student--it’s a fabulous story--she was on the committee, she took it to them. Devaney: This is Joyce, the president of the student body? Miner: [00:32:00] Yes. And they passed it. This would have been the end of that summer. She was a smart and really gracious person. And totally to our astonishment, they said, “Fine,” this Committee on Committees. So they took it to the Faculty Senate, the governance body of the Academic Council. So in October of 1970, because spring of ’70 we did the forum, then this all came up, and we said, “Great.” We thought, “We’ll just solve this 34 whole thing by having this committee created, something that has real power and authority,” and went to the Senate. I went to that meeting. The president, who was then provost, I believe, said, “Maybe we should have a committee, but we have too many committees, and it should be temporary,” because I remember that was a big issue for us. And we said, “No, no, this is going to go on a long time, not temporary.” And maybe this is my Joan of Arc saying it, I think I remember arguing that point, but someone, and our group, did lots of lobbying with the Faculty Senate and their spouses. The faculty made it a standing committee. Lyman knew me. In that sense he knew me. Devaney: So you had organized this Women’s Forum of all these disparate groups on campus, you and the Stanford student body president and some other people took it to the Academic Senate, which was the governing body for all academic policies at Stanford and proposed that the Women’s Forum be part of the university. Miner: [00:33:52] No, the Committee on the Education and Employment of Women. And actually, technically, of course, we didn’t do that. The Committee on Committees was proposing a whole bunch of committee reorganizations, and our committee was part of it. Devaney: So you had to get it through, first, this committee, which was presumably primarily a faculty committee, and then it went to the Senate as a whole. Miner: [00:34:18] Well, they had a student [member of the advisory group]. But it was disputed. I had one faculty wife, if you want to talk about these sort of off-the-record non-obvious stories. It looked kind of smooth, right, and we 35 had all those organizations listed as being part of it. But I had a call from one faculty wife saying, “Anne, you’ve got to stop this. It’s outrageous. Don’t do this. They’re going to hate us. This is too much. The men faculty are going to [be angry and it will be our fault]. There will be a big backlash, because you’re being too pushy.” -- [laughs] Devaney: What was the charge to the Committee on the Education and Employment of Women? Miner: [00:34:54] It was a long list. I said, “It’s going to study the educational opportunities. It’s going to consider whether opportunities are equal for men and women.” It was definitely non-confrontational language, but it was explicitly saying, “There’s something serious and fundamental about women that the university should do something about.” She felt that to even make that strong a view was enraging to the men or whoever had power. Devaney: Was it passed easily or was it a big argument in the Senate? Miner: [00:35:30] That’s a pattern that we’ll see. We can’t do it all day, but it happened many times. I don’t think there was a lot of argument, but I think there was some, and there was certainly some that sided with Lyman on giving temporary status. But it’s a pattern that occurred in the medical school too. I think what would happen--I’m just guessing here--is that the women’s liberation movement had gotten far enough that people didn’t really want to publicly trash women. Even if they didn’t like it, they weren’t going to stand up and say, “I’m against the Committee on Women.” But did they care? There was a 36 passive support, I’m happy to say, but I don’t know if you could poll their brains on what they were thinking. Devaney: Were you already a consultant to the president when the proposed Committee on the Education and Employment of Women was-Miner: [00:36:19] No, we did that before. Long before. Devaney: So by this time, the president knew perfectly well who you were. Miner: [00:36:23] It’s hard to say. I was a visible proactive person. Devaney: So he asked you if you would then become a consultant to him on affirmative action for women. What does the term “affirmative action” mean? Miner: [00:36:37] That’s a great question. Of course, it’s a big social issue, how people interpret it, and it’s a subject of sustained controversy to this day. What does it mean? What should it mean? Conceptually, the biggest feature about that phrase is that--and Lyman did write a good thing about this too. There’s this concept that if you’ve had past discrimination against a group, any group, that’s considered wrong. And you say, “Oh, that was the wrong thing and we don’t like that.” But it’s not enough to say, “We’re going to stop this.” This concept of affirmative action says that once that happens, you have to do two things. One is you have to take affirmative steps to ensure that further discrimination does not occur. You have to actually do something to show that. And second, you need to take steps--and this is where all the controversy comes--to “remedy the present effects of past discrimination.” That’s where the wars come. 37 Devaney: Does this meaning of “affirmative action” apply at a few places like Stanford, or more generally, with respect to past effects of discrimination against women faculty? Miner: [00:37:53] The concept, as you know, was actually designed and had nothing to do with women, and it was very controversial to apply it to women. It was designed around black employment. It was designed by the Department of Labor to deal with labor unions. They had spent thirty years with statements saying, “We won’t discriminate,” but nothing happened. So they said, “You have to do better, and you have to do something affirmative to change this bad pattern.” [00:38:23] To recruit more blacks, and to not use illegal standards--the whole idea of standards that has an adverse impact and that you have to prove that you should use it. It was well worked out in labor law, and it was around minorities. What was going on in the very time we’re talking about was adding women into that machinery around “what does it mean to do this.” The biggest question was that whole system wasn’t designed for universities, and all of a sudden the concepts were being applied there. Devaney: At some point, the U.S. government did pass regulations requiring employers, large employers who had federal contracts, to take affirmative action to hire and pay women and minorities who are underrepresented in the workplace. Miner: [00:39:19] Let’s get that straight. In 1968, an executive order was issued by Johnson about employment discrimination. And it’s not a law; it’s an order 38 by the federal government for federal contractors only. So if we had been willing to give up our federal contracts, we didn’t have to do any of this legally. That executive order went on kind of morphing, and they added women in 1970 in the external world. They added goals and timetables for women in 1971. This is all the Department of Labor. Then in March 1972, another hidden wrinkle was that professional women had been exempted from something that is a law, Title VII. Title VII says you will not discriminate by race or sex, but they had exempted professional women for some reason. Professional women were not included at that time. So in ’72, they added them in. That’s also when they did Title IX [requirements on gender equity for students]. [00:40:41] It wasn’t until 1972 that the Department of Labor gave it to Health, Education and Welfare as the oversight group for universities. That’s the first time universities really became involved in it, when it might touch faculty or professionals. They [HEW] were delegated [enforcement responsibility by DOL]. The Department of Labor tells Health, Education and Welfare, “You are the enforcers,” and so they were scrambling trying to write these regulations, and they did, but they were developing them all that time. Devaney: In the middle of all of this kind of federal frenzy, you were appointed by Lyman to be his consultant on affirmative action for women, and I saw from a document that your charge from President Lyman was, and I quote, “to carry on a special study and analysis of the employment of women in the 39 university, review the status of women at all levels of employment, study current university policies and procedures applicable to this matter, and provide recommendations for policy changes needed to achieve the elimination of sex discrimination in employment actions.” That is a big charge. How did you go about that assignment, and what were some of the major issues you addressed? Miner: [00:42:05] That was January 1971. I think we should note another thing here. I had a student who wrote a dissertation on two topics within this area, and she’s an organization theorist as I am. Devaney: She’s a recent student? Miner: [00:42:25] No, this is 1976 and 1977 when she wrote this. It was in the dissertation archives at Michigan. It’s a published dissertation. She was a graduate student in the Stanford School of Education, under Jim March. Her name was Sue Estler. So she’s noticing this history, the same history, and it’s not the main focus, this part, but her analysis, which I agreed with but I hadn’t thought about much, includes the point that there was this turnover in the governance of the university. So we had President Pitzer there for a couple years. Some of these years, I’m saying Dick Lyman was the provost, now who we think of as President Lyman. He was not the president of the university, but he was operating as a provost. When that Committee on Women was approved, I think he was still the provost. I think he was not formally the president until 1971. 40 Devaney: So Kenneth Pitzer was the president of Stanford when the Committee on Women was formed and the chief academic officer, the provost, was actually Richard Lyman. Miner: [00:43:35] Yes. Devaney: Then Ken Pitzer left Stanford after two years, and Dick Lyman was promoted from provost to president in January 1971, and it was at that time, that he wrote the letter and brought you on board. Miner: [00:43:53] Yes. As I understand, he was acting president that fall, the fall when the Committee on Women got created, for example. I was not a university officer at the time. Lyman had advisors: the chief legal counsel for him, and Robert Rosenzweig, who was his kind of éminence grise, advisor on many things, who ended up being the head of External Relations, but he was an advisor to Lyman all along. For reasons I don’t remember, I knew those people, and two things happened. One was that Pitzer didn’t appoint me to the very Committee on Women that we had formed, which I found stunning. It was a very helpful, educational lesson for me. I thought we owned all this. But they didn’t pick us to be on the committee. They picked other people, [although] they picked good people. Devaney: What year was the Committee on the Education and Employment of Women formed? Miner: [00:45:05] In the fall of 1970. Devaney: By January of 1971, Pitzer was gone, the president was Dick Lyman. 41 Miner: [00:45:11] But right then is my point. I mean, Lyman’s official start date was January 1971, and he couldn’t appoint me as a consultant to the president before then because he wasn’t the president. So I’m just saying this is part of a general set of actions, I believe, that Lyman took to establish what he wanted for tone and what kind of a style he wanted as president. So it was many things he did and who he appointed as provost, and what he did on other issues, because there were tons of issues. I think my appointment was just one of several things where he said, “Here’s this issue. As an important issue, here’s what I think we should do,” and he knew he had other advisors who were, I think, suggesting this strategy of having someone do something. But the simple answer is many people, myself included, believed that this changed the game in terms of discrimination questions. You could not go through pre-existing models of how the university should handle discrimination and just put “and women, and women, and women” under every little phrase, because there was already a big affirmative action plan. That was the fundamental issue. It wasn’t going to work to do that. Lyman and those folks said, “Well, then we need somebody to kind of go out and look into all this and come back with some things that we could do that are meaningful that aren’t just taking the federal regulations and putting in ‘women, and women, and women.’” That basically was the charge. How would you translate these questions and make them something that the community would believe in and understand? But it was true, it was nested in the template of knowing that externally the university would submit some 42 kind of revised [formal affirmative action] plan [to the government], and they didn’t have any basis for making that plan. So it was a charge to me. I would say one thing I notice in it now is that there’s nothing in what I was asked to do then about education, nothing about admissions, recruiting women, nothing. It was a straight employment study. Devaney: Your job was focused on employment. Miner: [00:47:18] It was, and that’s because of the external question. I mean, I think that is true. Devaney: What external question? You mean because of external regulations. Miner: [00:47:24] There were no lawsuits at that point under Title IX, et cetera. There weren’t lawsuits around educational equity at that time. There were actual federal contracts held up at Harvard and, I think, Michigan. My view of that is--later I saw it more clearly, but I think I knew this at the time--that Stanford, but especially Lyman and those folks, felt that if there was a social movement that had merit, [important] merit, that the best thing for Stanford to do was to get it before it crystallized in hostile ways. We should play a role creating what was the vision and what should this mean, rather than waiting for people to come get us, and that was a very Lyman-y approach, and my whole education, so to speak, was around consulting with others [as a way to get things done.] Fundraising is all consulting. You don’t have power over anybody, right? You can’t tell volunteers to do anything, so it’s all built on consulting, having advisors, learning, and that was the style I brought to the job, and that’s what he wanted me to do, I think. 43 Devaney: Let’s put this in context. In 1971, there were riots at Stanford for the Vietnam War, there were riots about civil rights, and there were protests about women. Stanford had sit-ins in the President’s Office protesting the war. Pitzer quit through all the chaos because he couldn’t handle it. Lyman, a very gentle history professor who had been provost a short time, came in as president. He faced not only student riots and sit-ins in the President’s Office, he was facing questions about one of the faculty members who was going to be fired for causing a riot. He was dealing with the awareness of all of the federal legislation and regulations that were being formed. Miner: [00:49:22] Many of them. This is just one little one. Devaney: So this one having to do with employment of women, was it possible that he said, “I’m going to pick the best woman I know, who’s got the broadest sense, give her a charge, and get on with this, because I’ve got to deal with the student riots”? Does that make sense to you? Miner: [00:49:43] Anything’s possible. I don’t know what was inside his head. Devaney: His legacy is very much about dealing with the student riots. Miner: [00:49:50] But he was seen as tough on that. He was seen as calling the police when nobody else would. Actually, he was seen as a very tough guy. Devaney: But he was seen as a very gentle man who handled it without going through the Kent State kind of crisis. Miner: [00:50:03] He didn’t shoot anybody. Devaney: Right. Nobody got shot, and, in fact, in the final analysis, considering the intensity of the hostilities, Stanford came through it pretty well. 44 Miner: [00:50:12] I agree, but I think that you’re giving your own interpretation on whether he was seen as gentle or not. He was actually seen, I think, as very tough by many people. But I don’t think it’s important, because your question has to do with what did all that have to do with him appointing this consultant. Devaney: It’s the environment in which you came in, is what I’m saying. Miner: [00:50:32] That is correct. As I say, I think an important thing to know is actually Stanford did resist some previous federal--I wasn’t there, but I understand--the previous enforcement of these same guidelines we’re talking about--affirmative action guidelines. Devaney: For women? Miner: [00:50:52] No, they had nothing to do with women until later. Remember, it didn’t happen until 1970 or 1971 that we were even covered. Devaney: So Stanford was resisting affirmative action for minorities? Miner: [00:51:00] It was not resisting doing it, but it was resisting setting formal faculty numerical goals, and I believe it did resist. Devaney: Are formal goals the same thing as quotas? Miner: [00:51:07] No, of course not. Devaney: What are they? What are formal goals? Miner: [00:51:10] It’s so great because at that time these were such issues, we would have public debates about this, does this mean quotas or not. But this is really not intellectually difficult. They’re completely different. A quota means that if, for example, we’re hiring and are admitting people to the medical school--we’ll go back to that--and we’ll have forty-five people admitted or 45 fifty-nine people admitted, we have a quota of five women, then we have to make the last one a woman to get to our quota. A goal says, “Well, we think it’s reasonable,” it’s like in fundraising. “We think it’s reasonable to achieve this goal, and so if we [don’t] get to that same point, that tells us maybe there’s something we’re doing wrong about recruiting.” It doesn’t mean you necessarily will do anything to get that number. It says this is a warning sign, a wakeup call. These goals tell you aspiration levels or how much do you have, where should you recruit. Devaney: So goals could be numerical, it’s just that they’re not quotas. They’re just “hope-that-you-can-get-there” plans. Miner: [00:52:15] These are like you would do in budgeting or in anything else. Devaney: Let’s come back to your assignment. What were some of the major issues you addressed as consultant to the president? Miner: [00:52:26] The purpose of that job, the assignment, as you said, was to study the question and to write a report, and that’s what I did. Devaney: And provide recommendations for policy changes. Miner: [00:52:38] Yes, so that’s what I did, and I went around and I met with everybody in personnel and faculty advisors and women. Another thing for me personally was I didn’t really understand how the university ran--how it was organized. What power did deans have? How do faculty appointments occur? What is the medical school doing? What is SLAC? So I had this fabulous, fun time. It was like being paid to go to the movies, because I could walk into all these rooms and say, “Hi, I’m working for Dick Lyman. Tell me about everything at SLAC.” I was not anybody’s enemy, so it was 46 like going to college. It was great, and I had a wonderful time learning all this stuff. But I also had views, and I think I showed you that picture today. I like organizations. I like to think about how you can change things by structure and policies. So I was thinking all the time, “Well, what could we do that would matter?” Nationally everybody was doing this, so I was going to conferences where everybody was trying to think about what to do about women. There was a huge network of people saying, “We at Harvard, we did this,” or, “We did that.” I was just like a little Johnny Appleseed in reverse. I was sucking in different strategies from what you might do. Devaney: So Stanford wasn’t the pioneer here. We were kind of in a situation where everybody was at the same time trying to deal with these issues. Miner: [00:54:19] They were, but to be fair to Stanford, I think it is definitely true that there were schools that were more adversarial. [00:54:27] And a famous story--this was told by people explaining why the federal HEW, Department of Health, Education and Welfare, the auditors, were a problem, because they didn’t understand anything about universities, which was sort of true--how they were at Harvard and they threatened the president. They said, “President, you have to give us a list of all the department heads now. There are faculty issues here.” Then so the president said, “Well, we could do that, but we don’t actually have an organization structure written. There’s no organization chart. Why do you want one?” 47 [According to the story] the auditors said, “Well, we want it because if they don’t do affirmative action right, you would threaten to fire the faculty department chairman.” So that makes perfect sense if you’re in an industrial context, if you say, “I’m going to remove you as the chair of your department,” that’s a threat to make you do affirmative action in the university. [But the point of the story was that] most of the faculty would have said, “Great. I’m so grateful I don’t have to be the department chairman [any longer].” There’s no aspiration to do that. It’s absolutely true. Devaney: [laughs] And besides, faculty had tenure, and they couldn’t be fired by HEW. Miner: [00:55:46] Well, not by the university, but they could be fired as department chair [by colleagues usually]. Besides, they didn’t have that much power over their colleagues in some cases. I tell that as a tale that there was a cultural war going on, and that’s one that shows [why Department of Labor] eventually went to Health, Education and Welfare [to develop and enforce affirmative action in higher education]. The theory was they might understand education better. But most of the people on that side [DOL] were trained in an industrial context. I want to make this point. Stanford could have been among the universities that actively resisted. Many did. They wouldn’t give any records and they would refuse to set goals or that sort of thing. I think it was a strategic choice for Lyman--we debated this some, for example, around faculty numerical goals. Could we do that? Could we actually use that technique of setting goals for how many women faculty or minority faculty you might expect without it turning into a bloodbath where federal auditors 48 came and held up all our contracts? Lyman is like the President of the United States, his job is to keep the institution safe, so he was worried about that. But he made some choice, and I think he was heavily influenced by Robert Rosenzweig and Jim Siena and probably his wife and other people whom I don’t know, and probably Bill Miller on that issue. Devaney: Let’s go back. Rosenzweig was an advisor to the president, Siena was the university lawyer, and when Dick Lyman became president, he appointed William Miller as his provost. Miner: [00:57:20] That’s right. There also were many new deans, so it’s another element in all of this. There was a big turnover in that whole group, so that made a big difference, and Lyman did that. He encouraged all that. Devaney: You’re saying Stanford decided to cooperate strategically with the government to try to implement these things. Miner: [00:57:43] To try to get a lead. We would meet with HEW, and it was, in some ways--I have to be careful about this. It was sort of, I’d say, educational again, because I, like everyone else, had an image that outside forces would be simple and clear and sophisticated. Then you’d meet with the folks whose job it was to enforce this, and you’d realize they didn’t know how to fix this. They were career, nice people. Stanford, in a sense, was attempting, and one part of it was to actually think about things we could do that were creative and different and would work, with the thought that we would do that to show to the external people that we’re serious, so don’t come punish us, because it was protective. But also, I think it was honest. I think that was hoped for. It was a hope. 49 Devaney: Do you think in those days that the university-federal government partnership was, in fact, more of a partnership and that universities and the government, in fact, did work closely together on many occasions to come to some compromises and some changes that needed to be made? Miner: [00:59:02] That would be an area where you or all the people in research administration have deeper knowledge, but my sense is that there was more cooperation, because after World War II is when the huge funding came from the federal government for research. I would say in the HEW context, there were many--I mean, I flew to Washington, I talked to J. Stanley Pottinger, who was writing the guidelines on women. He was the associate director of the Health, Education and Welfare who was charged with this women and education problem. It was a problem from their point of view, partly politically. Because what were they going to do? They didn’t know how to solve it, and it was very contested. Stanford, in that sense, was doing what you’re saying. It was attempting to say, “Yes, we’re all in this together. We should solve this. We’re helping people comment on the guidelines of what should happen.” I think it was a mixture, but I think Stanford--if you look at the years, we were typically a step ahead of what those regulations required. We were like one year ahead of what they technically required, but we knew they were coming. We knew that they were writing these guidelines. When I was doing my study, I was slowly being educated about all that. I didn’t know that, but I learned about that, so it was one of the many contexts. When I wrote the recommendations, they were a mixture of what 50 others thought, women and men, there were many men who were very smart and active. Good things to do, coupled with items that I knew were going to be in federal guidelines within a year or two. It was good that Stanford just got on with it. Those were the two sources, I would say, of what became recommendations. Devaney: Before you get to your recommendations and the report, talk more about some hidden barriers that you encountered as you were trying to address these issues. Miner: [01:01:13] One of the things that surprises me, looking back at all this, is that while the formal report came out in the fall of 1971-Devaney: This is your report in response to the charge from President Lyman. Miner: [01:01:27] That is exactly right. It’s a big report. We published 12,000 copies of it. Devaney: That came in October. You got your charge in January. So now we’re talking about the period between January and October when you were doing your research. Miner: [01:01:39] Yes, we are. I’m just going around talking to people. And this is one that I feel is an example of when social change happens and it becomes so embedded nobody can believe it wasn’t this way before. The women faculty, because I was not a faculty member, all felt and reported, and it seemed clear there were several things. One was the nepotism requirement. It was widely believed and enforced in many cases that you couldn’t have two family members [as faculty in a single department], but they’re usually talking about a husband and wife, who were in the same department 51 as faculty. There were women scholars or PhD’s who were told you cannot be here on the department faculty because of the nepotism policy. So that was one. Devaney: Was this a formal written policy? Miner: [01:02:33] I think there’s a dispute about that. Clearly it was written at some time, but whether or not it was formally written, it was so widely believed, it was used and it was enforced. That was one where looking at records recently, I think the new provost was especially helpful, because we thought, “Why are we waiting for a report to later say we should get rid of the nepotism policy? Everybody thinks it’s a bad idea, we can’t defend it, so we’ll just get on with it.” In a sense, we implemented that issue. Devaney: What do you mean you implemented that issue? Miner: [01:03:15] I can’t remember the administrative details, but I think we had the Committee on the Education of Women already, which we’d set up through the Forum, so I believe that’s one that went there, and there was a recommendation then. But I have a memo from me to some department chairman of the med school who says--so this is like April, 1971-- the middle of the report. There’s no report saying, “What is the thing on the nepotism policy?” I have checked with the provost, and I’m writing back saying, “The provost says you can’t use them. You can’t use them. You can hire.” Devaney: You mean there is no nepotism policy? That is, policy against hiring spouses? Miner: [01:03:54] That’s right. So you just have to take [steps to avoid] a conflict of interest. 52 That was a great one. I met a lot of people. There was somebody who had to write that policy, had to write a clarification that’s clear what you had to do. Devaney: Was that written during that period? Miner: [01:04:07] Yes. That was when that got issued, I’m pretty sure. Devaney: Because up until that time, there were many, typically, the husband who had the job and the wife was either called a research associate or a lecturer, even though they may have met in graduate school, they got their PhD’s at the same time, she may have been just as good a scholar. We had a lot of wives who were either research associates or lecturers, who never made it into the faculty until then. Did the change in that nepotism policy result in more women -- or any women -- getting appointed to faculty positions in those departments? Miner: [01:04:39] Some, sure. Another huge one, still a big issue today in higher education, is the general concept--and I always thought it was important what we thought was the general concept--that another way women felt, if they were on the faculty, the huge barrier was given sex roles as they were enacted, which is still mostly true--maybe we should clarify. The tenure clock is typically six years, and you had that amount of time to get a certain number of publications of some sort, and if you don’t have it, then you’re out of there. You’re gone forever. It’s not like you’re not promoted. You’re gone, you’re dead. You’re in another institution. 53 That happens to be the same age for many women when they’re having children, so you have one group of people where, as they believed at the time, the women are going home and helping the man get tenure, and then you have these women who are having babies, and they’re supposed to be writing the same number of publications. It doesn’t seem like a level playing field, and that was why they leave. But the women had no right to take maternity leave. Separate from that there was a question after you have the baby, it’s not like you just get up the next morning and rush back to writing your papers. There was the same thing. That spring, I believe, all those policies got revised, and a very important one was maternity leave. That was symbolic of a big issue, too, that it should be a right, not that you have to grovel and say, “Well, can I not teach classes next fall because I’m having this baby?” But more important-Devaney: What was the maternity-leave policy that got passed? The idea is that you got several months off after having a baby, with a guarantee of getting your job when you returned to work. Miner: [01:06:36] One was to have a baby, yes, and that falls into all kinds of legal questions, because there were laws about whether you had rights to take time off for your baby, but that was also a big conceptual thing. That was one where I felt a compromise--and you asked me to talk about some of my feelings about all this. To get what was needed in practical terms, we had to basically say that having a baby is like being sick. That’s what we had to say, because that was the only way. Devaney: Because you could use sick leave then for your maternity leave. 54 Miner: [01:07:07] That’s correct. If we wanted to get them paid any money during the time they delivered a baby--this is kind of like having your liver out--we had to do that. I remember thinking, “That doesn’t seem like a good longterm conceptual thing to have in society,” but I was a very practical person, and most of us were, and we said, “We think they should get money when they have these babies.” Not everybody liked this at all. We had senior officers who would say to me, “Anne, this is nuts. What are you talking about? We shouldn’t.” Devaney: You shouldn’t pay women when they went to have babies? Miner: [01:07:40] No. If they have a baby, it’s their problem. It’s a private action. It’s not part of the public. It took longer to get the policy done on the staff side, but we used the same model where we said there are two issues. One is when you physically have a baby, then you can have this paid leave. But you’re using sick leave, if you want to do that. I just thought it was terrible to call having a baby being sick, but you had to. Then the other question was what about all that time when you take care of a baby. Then there was a different war, which, again, is still happening. Those of us who thought deeply about sex roles were thinking, “Well, why shouldn’t the man be able to get time for infant care too? Because once you’re not nursing, anybody could do that, in principle.” So we did do that. On the staff side, there’s a parental-care leave. Devaney: But that was far, far later. 55 Miner: [01:08:36] That one was a couple years later, but it was only because we had a lot more people to work through the policy on the faculty side. Once we got the right players, that kind of thing was pretty swift. The main thing I’ll say that matters, leaving aside the infant-care question, was that very spring we got this change that faculty could delay, they could get a year’s extension of the tenure clock for every child they had. Devaney: Women and men? Miner: [01:09:04] I believe so. I would have to check on when the men came in. Certainly eventually they did. [01:09:09] But the point was that at that time we were mostly worried about the women, and, again, it was an ideological thing. I felt it had to be women and men, but I would have settled for women at that point. We certainly did it for the women, because I remember that I was reading that lately. There was a policy and that had national implications. That was disputed all around the country. Devaney: Did we lead the charge on that one, or was that pretty common among top universities then? Miner: [01:09:34] Not so common, because I remember going to meetings where I would show that off as a proud thing that we had done quickly, that we got done, and we didn’t have to have a big bloody war bath over it. Devaney: So we were leaders in that one? Miner: [01:09:44] I believe so. 56 Devaney: During that basically ten months that you were a consultant, you got rid of the nepotism policy at a formal level. You got maternity leave for women, although they had to get paid sick leave. Miner: [01:09:59] Faculty, yes. Devaney: But you also then extended the tenure clock to an entire year that women could have longer to be considered for tenure, so they could take some work off to take care of the baby or to nurse the baby or do something in that first year. Miner: [01:10:14] Yes. Devaney: Were there any kind of part-time employment issues that came up? Could faculty work part-time? Miner: [01:10:30] Not at the time. It was believed that was not possible, and that was again tied to the women who were already here. A lot of these issues, it does have that theme. Could we tap the institution into the women who were already present who had scholarly talent, from my point of view, was more like could we be fair toward women. The idea of part-time work--that was part of Jing Lyman’s idea. It was a whole social movement, which probably didn’t really happen, that all the issues about the sex roles would be solved better if we could have more parttime jobs. That was a very widely held idea nationally for everybody. It seemed like, why not faculty? I loved that one. I remember Al Hastorf, who was the dean of Humanities and Sciences. He was an inspired person, a friend of all these issues, but way beyond being a sympathetic kind of smart guy, he was very creative. Yes, there would be a formal change. It’s always 57 good to clarify, because the people say, “Was there really a prohibition?” Maybe not in writing, but in effect there was a prohibition. So a statement was put in writing that said part-time faculty employment is possible, and that was then executed. Devaney: Would that give you twelve years toward tenure if you were working halftime? Miner: [01:11:48] You would have to look at the minutes of the meetings, and you should have been on the committees, because that, of course, was a big issue. I don’t remember the resolution. I just remember that that’s why that one took longer, we had to get that one through. Devaney: Were any men working part-time, or was this just a concession to women? Miner: [01:12:07] The idea was both, but, I remember a female Anthropology professor telling me, “You won’t believe this. We went to Dean Hastorf and said we’d like to split a position or one-and-a-half positions, my husband and I.” This is Francine Cancian and Frank Cancian. I think it was them. I remember thinking, “Boy, this is exciting.” She was very young, and they felt that they had not tricked the institution, but that they had found a way to get something wonderful, as if they had won it from the institution. I had just been in meetings months before where these [very same] senior people were saying, ‘Well, we want to encourage this to happen, so we’re going to set this up.” It’s like they set up a game in which something is possible, and here were these people walking in excited to play the game. That was the first time I had experienced what a central administration can do that’s powerful and positive, because these were smart faculty people 58 who, once they saw the structure and the incentives, used it to do exactly what the people designing the structure had in mind. I find that was a turning point for me to see that you could do these little things, and they would change behavior. Devaney: Several faculty members at the time got the dean to agree that they would have a one-and-a-half percent time faculty appointment, and they would share that in some way? Did they both get tenure then? Miner: [01:14:17] I don’t think so. I don’t think this has a happy ending. But probably we should be candid on these tapes. I can’t swear it was Francine who told me that. It was a faculty member from the Anthropology Department who told me about this at a party. Devaney: Forgetting the specifics, in general, would you say that part-time employment for women faculty has actually been successful? Has it been broadly implemented? Miner: [01:14:42] I think it was important then and had symbolic impact then. It was a token of faith from the campus. I’m sure if you looked at these cases, there are some where it made a big difference. But was it actually a major structural factor that changed many women? I do not believe that, but that’s because the nature of the job of a faculty member is such that it’s a brutal, competitive profession. Nobody in the outside world grasps how competitive the major research universities are. So it’s like saying could you be a part-time player for the Green Bay Packers? You could, but you would never start, and your bones would be broken when you went out to play. [laughs] But it was an important ideological change, and it affected some people’s lives. 59 Devaney: We’ve talked about faculty, but what about the graduate women who might someday become faculty? Or talk about minority women in this process and how were they affected. Miner: [01:15:48] A major issue through all this, doing this study, I spent a lot of time with Luis Nogales, with the senior officers in the university who were members of some then-identified minority group, black assistant to the president and the Chicana representatives--different language gets used for these--the Black Association of Staff Women at the med school. There was a big concern about the danger, which, to some degree, did happen, of the focus on women wiping out the previous focus of previous focal groups, that [were] seen as a legitimate people to worry about affirmative action for. That was initially blacks, and then later Chicano, Latino, whichever word is okay or is used. Devaney: So, underrepresented minorities? That basically was black, Hispanics, and American Indians. Miner: [01:16:56] Yes. Devaney: The minorities were covered first, in terms of the laws and regulations about affirmative action programs. Women then came afterward. And because 51% of the population is female, there was a worry that women were going to upset the applecart for all of the ethnic minorities. Did that happen? Miner: [01:17:17] I fear to some degree it did, but more in terms of attention. To be clear, the issues with minority faculty are huge and systemic and to this day, have not been solved in some fields. It’s not any different today. There’s probably, I think, six black PhD’s from business schools now. 60 Devaney: Yes, I think we actually had more Hispanic faculty in 1971 at Stanford than we do today. Miner: [01:17:50] Could be, I don’t know. But I looked at some data today. Actually minority faculty continued to increase during the time I was there in tiny numbers. I don’t think it was an immediate threat. In staff employment, we haven’t really talked about much, we did very well on hiring minority secretaries, which was a huge issue and an important goal, but it was sort of not a [contested] issue around the women’s side, except to make sure we did that. On the other hand, I would say in the mental space of thinking about the issues, clearly it was slightly easier, if you were a current dean, to deal with some of the women’s issues when the issues had to do with a highly educated woman just like you, except she’s a woman, than a faculty person from another language or ethnic group or who comes from another culture and is being incorporated into your world. It’s just the more different somebody is, the more energy you have to put into dealing with that. Now, I think in that sense, it did hurt those programs. Devaney: Part of it was the availability pool, don’t you think, and a lot more women? Miner: [01:17:50] That was my first point. Devaney: You had a lot more women available to choose from. Miner: [01:19:25] They’re both true, though, they did have them, and then there is a kind of cultural gap to some degree. There were two things going on. The other thing is, technically in the formal external issues, the employment question had to do with who was hired in what jobs. But in the university context--and this, too, is to this day, I think, to many people looking at it--it’s 61 an issue raised before, it’s that no matter how hard you work on hiring minority or women faculty, if there aren’t many people in that pool, then you’re just buying people who might be at the University of Wisconsin, but then Stanford hires them. Is that worth something to Stanford? Sure. We should do it. But does that help the national situation? Not at all. A good thing that happened then, which I’m happy when I see it, I basically wrote in my report about that and said that the whole program has to include recruiting women into engineering, business, law, and we folded in the formal structure in reporting as much as we could, that you have to analyze those pools. That wasn’t totally successful, but I think we won the battle conceptually that graduate student women representation was part of the employment of women and intrinsic, and that was a big national question too. Devaney: You weren’t just trying to steal the same person from another institution. You were trying to expand the pool within academia. Miner: [01:21:05] If Stanford was going to do anything, in some areas the most important thing you could do would be that--more than one woman in some little department. If you have ten women on the market in computer science, that’s really a national effect. Devaney: That’s right. You are affecting the pool enormously. So here you had done all of this in a period of only ten months. Miner: [01:21:27] One pause in that. I have to say this because we have used this convention here of “you.” But I didn’t do all that. I catalyzed it sometimes, but it was this team of Lyman, Miller, Rosenzweig, a couple sympathetic 62 deans, and then we had this faculty. It was like all the players. I didn’t have the power to do anything. I probably wrote or drafted part of the language for those policy changes. I didn’t have the power to make them happen. That would have been the provost and the president. Devaney: Your job at that time was to study the status of women and to recommend changes needed to achieve the elimination of sex discrimination and employment. That was your job. You weren’t expected to actually implement policy. Miner: [01:22:16] I’m not saying we failed, but I’m saying we shouldn’t say I did it. It was many other people. Devaney: Well, a lot of big changes happened within that ten-month period without a lot of argument. Miner: [01:22:27] A relatively small amount. Devaney: You had the right people in the right jobs who were in agreement. Miner: [01:22:34] It was exciting. And they’re willing to defend people. Devaney: Yes, because you were really moving out of people’s comfort zone and what they’d been used to in all these areas. Miner: [01:22:44] Yes. They all said, “You don’t want to assume.” It’s funny. They did assume women had more stakes in children’s issues, but they did in the sense that institutionally we should fix it. That is not a block. That was new. Devaney: To what extent was it that these were very special people, or was it the culture that was changing, society was changing, and these people were changing along with society at this time? Miner: [01:23:12] Which? That people were willing to go along with these things? 63 Devaney: The people you’ve identified. Miner: [01:23:19] A little bit. I’m sure that was from a fundraising model in my head. I learned this whole style and only involved the people who are for something or who have key knowledge. You might involve people who are against it, but you need to learn what those arguments were. I know one vice president, as I said, hated all this. He said, “This is really stupid. We shouldn’t get into anything about children at all. This is sick. It’s morally wrong.” [laughs] And he was not alone. I think it was a mixture of the cohort of senior administrators with a general culture change, because everybody was reading the newspaper and all. There was still the grassroots. There were women all the time writing magazine articles and talking about this. [01:24:28] Later on, after I was the affirmative action officer, we were presenting about our plan and program. Stanford has high status, so people from other schools who had less national standing wanted to hear from us what we were doing so they could go to their school and say, “See, Stanford did that, so we can do that.” We were at the AAAS, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. There were two of us, and we gave a presentation on our plan and program. This was a year later. It was after all this, but a lot of this stuff was in there. Someone in the audience said the same question that you just asked me. They said, “How do you account for this happening? Because we don’t think of Stanford as a radical school.” It wasn’t going to be at the forefront of social change, in their view. 64 I gave some long answer like I just gave about complicated things. My colleague with me was Professor Bienenstock [Arthur Bienenstock], who was then the faculty affirmative action officer. He said, “Well, that’s all true, but you also want to keep in mind that Stanford is a university that has a president whose wife--,” and he named something that she did, like “publishes things about women’s work” and so on “and a provost whose wife runs an abortion clinic.” He used that phrase to get that shock value. But he was saying he thought it had to do with the personal values of the two senior officers on the academic side. So I don’t know the answer. Devaney: You’ve established now that in October of 1971, Stanford’s two senior officers had wives who were really on the team here. Miner: [01:26:31] Yes, that was one part of the context. Devaney: But you then submitted your report to the president, as requested, which was called “Academic Employment of Women at Stanford.” You issued this in October of 1971, and in which you said, yes, we have a lot of women, but they’re all in clerical and office positions, that the professional positions are pretty much dominated by men. You showed that ethnic minorities were also underrepresented and you said affirmative action efforts clearly were needed for both faculty and staff positions at Stanford. Most of your report focused on the employment of faculty, and by that, we’re talking about those people that were specifically hired just to teach and direct Stanford’s research programs, rather than staff whose jobs support the faculty and the institution as a whole. In your report, you showed data 65 that only 4.5 percent of all of Stanford’s faculty were women in 1971, with no women faculty at all in four of the university’s seven schools. Only 2 percent of full professors were women, and no woman had ever been a dean. How did you go about that study, and what was involved in gathering that data? Miner: [01:27:45] This is the study we’ve just been describing, starting from January in consulting the many groups. Devaney: That’s very specific data, and that had probably not ever been collected before, had it? Miner: [01:27:56] I don’t think they had collected it before. I had a little office over near where Merrill Carlsmith was working on the study of education. [01:28:04] He was a professor in Psychology, and he was running the Study on Education at Stanford, another huge study going on at the time. I just worked there. I had a faculty advisory group of people who helped me get those data, and there were many. One question is which universities to use to compare to Stanford. You knew if you included all universities in your comparison, Stanford faculty would say, “Well, of course, those are all bad schools so they have more women. We have higher standards.” You knew that was going to happen, right? So we were very careful in selecting our comparisons. We compared Stanford first to other top schools, University of Chicago. [laughs] And we were worse than them. That was a conscious choice in terms of framing the data, so you couldn’t escape it, but then we did show it compared to all other universities. 66 Devaney: We were worse not only than places like Chicago, we were worse than the typical average university? Miner: [01:29:06] We were way worse than that. You knew that would happen because they were bad schools, of course, they had more women. That’s a joke. We thought about it: How do we present these numbers to frame it so it seems legitimate? Devaney: Stanford could not justify its lack of women because it was a top school because that they could see that other top schools had done better than Stanford had at that point? Miner: [01:29:31] But our goal at that point was not, quote, “Stanford,” in the sense of the president. He didn’t have any doubt this was a problem. He knew, and he had opposed many things. The purpose of, or one of the purposes of the report, was the normal faculty member who was nervous or said, “This doesn’t seem like a good idea,” or “I’m against this.” Or mostly the deepest problem was, “Why bother?” Devaney: I’d like to quote one of the things you said in your report that I thought was very eloquent. You said, “The low number of women faculty means that many Stanford students complete their entire undergraduate or graduate education without ever interacting with a member of the regular faculty who is female. It means that women students in particular receive the continuous covert lesson that in spite of whatever may be possible in theory, it is not possible or even natural in fact for women to aspire to serious scholarly achievement.” 67 Miner: [01:30:39] Yes, let’s talk about that for a second. Remember when we were talking before about the external and legal pressures. Those were all about employment rights. You’re not going to do something. This is a completely different argument here. Devaney: This is the guts of the matter. Miner: [01:31:04] In my opinion, it is, and I saw it as being about sex roles, in general, and that is the 50- or 100-year project. From that point of view, this is just an instantiation [or embodiment of the issues]. This is just a case where sex roles have this brutally terrible outcome, from my perspective. But you knew that it’s not just the men. The Sally or Bob faculty person or person who influences things could really dispute the discrimination side. They might not even care, or they might say, “Tough luck,” or whatever. But they often typically did care about students. People deeply care about students in the great universities. Even if they don’t pay attention to them, they do. The point of this report in many ways was partly to make that very point, that it’s completely unrelated to the external things. Our deep values as a research institution that trains people, and as educators, include the wellbeing of those people, and how can you do that to those students? That was the spirit. Devaney: Yes, far more compelling than trying to adhere to some federal regulation. Miner: [01:32:17] Exactly. So it was transforming in some cases that were technical requirements, but saying, “Well, why?” Seriously, we didn’t have to do all 68 that. We could have resisted. A lot of things didn’t get done. But that was the spirit. Many of the things I wrote have little side essays. If you read the report, there’s something about--well, maybe you think this doesn’t happen, but actually there’s a little study that shows there’s unconscious discrimination. Nobody asked me to do that, and looking back, I don’t know where in heaven’s name I got the courage to do that. I mean, I believed it, but I don’t know. That had to have been my colleagues around me saying, “No, no, you should put that in,” including all the women faculty and men faculty who cared, who were saying, “Yes, yes, do it. Do it.” Devaney: Yes, and people with good hearts were discriminating without even realizing it. Miner: [01:33:10] Of course, that was the main issue. But one more time, it is almost impossible to remember how taken for granted the assumption was that women don’t want to do this, that they shouldn’t be--it’s not like “kind of” or a few of them might. No women. The women’s role was to help men do things. That was it. There were a few weird people who didn’t do that role, but you would never think that was, quote, “a problem.” There’s no problem. Devaney: It’s just the way society was. Miner: [01:33:45] It’s how it should be, yes. This is part of that attempt to convert that saying, “No, no, there is a problem.” That happens all the time in organizations, that if you want to get something done, you have to reframe it so what was okay is a problem. 69 Devaney: Well, we’re starting to talk about the fact that you had completed your report to the president. Then Stanford had posted an opening for a new full-time affirmative action officer. There had been an early affirmative action officer, Luis Nogales, but he also was an advisor to the president, an assistant on Mexican American Affairs, and he had other kinds of responsibilities. Then he left Stanford. He became a White House fellow. Then, Stanford had a job opening for the first full-time affirmative action officer, and there were some two hundred applicants for this job from throughout the country. Miner: [01:34:58] That I did not know. Devaney: And you were selected in June of 1972. Now, this was considered to be a major appointment. You were now a major university officer. This was covered in the press in various parts of the country. What were your duties now that you were the Stanford affirmative action officer? Miner: [01:35:22] Yes. I remember I sent to my parents a press release from the [Palo Alto Times, 1972, Editorial on appointment as full time affirmative action officer]. A previous article about the initial appointment San Jose Mercury News that said [something like] “Women’s Libber appointed to major post at Stanford.” [Actual headline was “Women’s Lib Aide Gets Key Post at Stanford.” That’s indicative of the times. It wasn’t just weird to do, but it was like it made a danger of Stanford as being tarred, as being deviant. You know, “What are you doing with a women’s libber in administration?” Devaney: This was the charter of the job. 70 Miner: [01:35:56] The conception, it wasn’t a complicated thing, the result of all the conversations about all these things you might do about women. In the report that I wrote to the president, there are twenty-eight recommendations of what should be done, and they included appointing a woman to work for the provost--I had forgotten this--to be coordinating the faculty side, because it clearly had to be a faculty member who was the public advocate for the faculty issues for the long run. Because anyone who is not a faculty member has zero credibility, unless they’re like you, Patricia Devaney, who gained great credibility with the faculty. [laughter] You get that, right? But it’s true. Devaney: [laughs] Miner: [01:36:45] My point is, there were twenty-eight recommendations, and they all were things that would be part of an affirmative action plan, and they were things like documenting hiring. Devaney: This is Pat Devaney interviewing Anne Miner in my house. It is June 26, 2014, and this is our interview session number two. Anne, last time we talked a lot about your early life and your experience at Stanford the year before you were appointed consultant to the president for affirmative action for women. And we talked about the context in which you were working. We had many riots on campus because of the Vietnam War. Windows were being broken and people were throwing rocks through them. We had the military coming out and trying to keep the protesters in check. The Women’s Movement was part of something much bigger. It was sort of unparalleled social change in American universities, and it was quite momentous that you were able to accomplish all that you did in the context of all of the stuff going on at Stanford. Let’s go back and talk a little bit about the recommendations in the report you submitted to President Lyman after you had done your study about the status of women faculty. Can you summarize what those recommendations were and where Stanford went with them? 73 Miner: [00:01:29] Sure. But before I do that, I need to clarify. I think you’re entirely right about the nature of the chaos going on, but actually the existence of so much other social change is one reason it was easy to do. First of all, I didn’t make those changes. Everybody did; it was a collective thing, [including men such as] Carl Degler, and many other women. The point is, the general chaos and social change made it easier for people to accept change about women because it was like everything was up for grabs. Remember, I mentioned the strongly radical people, so the women in SDS, Students for a Democratic Society, the strong antiwar…. Remember, they were the Weather Underground. They were actually blowing up buildings. [00:02:23] They were anti-Vietnam, but they were also anti-social class, which is a deeper thing, too. It was about anti-elitism. In a way, it made it hard because, as you pointed out, it meant the administration faced this multipronged world--everything’s falling apart. On the other hand, it enabled change because this was seen as just one more goofy thing. I shouldn’t use that language, but I think another interesting point is if you read the medical school documents from the early time, which became a point of great struggle and confrontation in the university, the early documents will say things like--this is not me; this is other women, smart powerful women--: “One thing we intend to do when we work with you, Dean, about changing things in the med school here, is we want to do things in a ladylike way.” They [some, not all] use that exact phrase. 74 Why are they saying that? They’re saying it because of what you are pointing out--that the context is one where other people are throwing bombs. So they’re saying, “Stick with us.” Implicitly, the message is, “We don’t intend to be that kind of a problem in this world.” This is some women, not all women. Other women were saying, “We will throw a bomb.” But I agree with you that context had the double edge of, in a way, making it harder on the administration to know what to do, and maybe struggling in some ways more. On the other hand, it definitely made it easier to propose some kind of change because everywhere there was change. Devaney: You came on as the consultant to the president to do this study in January of 1971, and in October you submitted your report with all of its recommendations. Could you talk about those recommendations? Miner: [00:04:11] Thank you for asking about them. They were the sum of my own thinking and then endless consultations with many people and attention to the federal guidelines about what we had to do or what they wanted us to do. There were twenty-one [numbered] recommendations, [regarding the Academic Council] so it was a big long thing, very detailed, and basically it had two big parts. [It also included 13 recommendations regarding nonAcademic Council and research roles]. This report is on academic employment of women, so it mentions lecturers and research associates, but it’s still academic jobs [only]. The entire six thousand people who were not academic employees were a later project in terms of what the structure would be. This one said, “But we should have the structure,” and most are about what the [president and] provost should 75 do, mainly about the provost, and then many about deans. It’s basically saying formally we have to start differentiating, within one thing that might seem like one huge giant issue, which is the employment of women at Stanford. It’s like many, many subcultures and areas and practices and, on the academic side, when the provost should do most things. Devaney: Let’s back up for a second. Let’s define our terms. What do we mean by academic women? Miner: [00:05:30] That’s a good point. We have the Academic Council, the group I think we talked about yesterday, which received by far the most attention, and that is deliberate because Stanford is a major research university. In the end--if what you’re interested in doing is making long-term major change which is hard to reverse--what you need to influence is the nature and values and composition of the people who are the tenured research faculty. In the end, what research universities do that no other institution does is produce research. That’s what counts. Devaney: So the Academic Council, in fact, consists of people who are working toward their tenure, as well as people who do have tenure, as well as research professors, as well as professors teaching. It’s the people who are appointed to actually direct the teaching and direct the research. So there were, I don’t know, a thousand of those people as compared to six thousand on the staff. Miner: [00:06:30] Correct. We’re focusing on the thousand, and, even with that, mostly on Academic Council kind of issues, because that was where the power and the permanent part of the institution is. That may be a sad thing, but that’s the truth. That’s what the formal recommendations mostly cover. 76 They recommend that the provost should publicly state that we want to do something about it, that we’ll create goals and timetables, that the provost will appoint a person in the office. It says, “The provost will appoint in his office an academic woman who will be a member of his senior staff who will allocate approximately three-quarters of her time to the administration of affirmative action for academic women, including--,” and then it goes on and on and on and on. Another thing that was recommended was salary equity studies by year. An important issue that was recommended was to do something about tenure, how does gender affect that-Devaney: What do you mean? How does gender affect tenure? Miner: [00:07:35] There were many concerns that there was discrimination in the tenure process. Remember, we have people who come in, and there’s lots more of these people, and then they’re here typically six years, and it’s like a game or tournament. In those six years, you have a shot at getting tenure, and if you get tenure, then you cannot be dismissed, except for being a criminal or various other things. It’s a lifetime appointment to protect academic freedom. But you could see in the numbers there were way more women in the assistant professors, the lower level, than associate and up, which is typically the tenured level. So without really addressing it in the report, the recommendation says that the provost is supposed to do a review and articulate the issues that are standing in the way of tenure acquisition for 77 women. Some of those things were at the time believed to be childcare and the joint appointments and all that stuff. [00:08:35] But everyone knew that in some ways it was a boys’ club, some of the aspects of the tenured faculty. This report flagged that and said there should be affirmative institutional activity to investigate what are the barriers to women getting tenure, which, at Stanford, I’m sure, was and probably still is a continuing struggle. That’s a very hard, subtle issue. But that was in there, that that would be a proactive thing to do. Also that we should study the lecturers and the research associates who were not in the Academic Council but were carrying out many duties in the university. Just to wrap this up, another recommendation was that each dean was supposed to look at policies and programs and advance searches, and I think it also actively pushed the idea of working on the pool that we’ve talked about before in areas where there aren’t very many women candidates--if you have to have a PhD to do this, then you had to look at how many PhD’s there were. For minorities, and for women in some fields, there weren’t very many. So a dean could think, “All right. We need more women geologists, and I’ll put a lot of my energy into that.” This report recommended that they do that. Devaney: Before we get into what happened to those recommendations, let’s move on to the next phase of your life, which is your appointment as a full-time affirmative action officer at Stanford in June of 1972. The stated duties of your job, as written in some report, were to, quote, “provide coordination between faculty and staff programs and support for the principal officers and 78 their line managers in terms of staff affirmative action.” In addition, you were Stanford’s official liaison officer with outside compliance agencies as well as one of several university officers working with minority and women’s groups. So to whom did you report in this job? Miner: [00:10:49] The early structure, you can see in this 1971 report--the beginning of not just me, but Stanford trying to figure out the right way to structure this--it was clear there had to be a faculty-versus-staff emphasis, but some things were across all areas. Initially, the answer to the question is that it morphed quite a bit in the first few years, and I don’t even remember exactly all of them, because we couldn’t quite figure out how to set it up. In the end, I reported to President Lyman. There was an earlier period where I think I reported to the vice president for business and finance, but that wasn’t working. Similarly, there were duties and things that would shift back and forth between me and the Provost’s Office. We had never done this before. Nobody knew how to do it. So we experimented. Devaney: Why didn’t it work for you to report to the vice president for business and finance? Miner: [00:11:51] If I were going to guess, looking back, it was a structural thing that had to do with the symbolic importance of a reporting relationship to a president, and that as long as it was under business and finance, it didn’t have enough status, because staff did not have the same status as faculty in a research university, sort of these terrible truths. It was sort of like a medieval society, and in the medieval society, faculties were the royalty and everybody 79 else was not. You can’t have somebody who’s a commoner reporting to a duke, trying to tell one of the king’s men what to do. [00:12:36] Everybody was kind of wandering around and eventually-not very long, maybe a couple years into it, or maybe a year--it was decided, no, if this is going to work, it’s got to be under the president. That’s why my main advisors were the legal advisor to the president and Robert Rosenzweig, because they were on the president’s staff, and they were my main kind of consultants, other than people who were real faculty in the field. Devaney: The people who were directly responsible for implementing affirmative action programs for staff and faculty were men. The people to whom you reported or had gotten your primary advice from were men. Basically you had oversight responsibilities for some men and you reported to men, but they were all men. Did they take a shared view of the importance of affirmative action and the direction it should take? Miner: [00:13:33] That’s a good question. One interesting thing is I never noticed what you just said until I got that question from you just now, that those were all men, because I think it is for me as though professionally I always worked with all men. [00:13:55] I mean, as many people have discussed--and I, too, later realized--it was more of a struggle for me to work with women. In fact, later we’ll talk about my role working in CROW, when I was a co-director of CROW, the Center for Research on Women, which was this really cool thing that started at Stanford. 80 Devaney: Which is currently the Institute for Women and Gender, right, the Clayman Institute? Miner: [00:14:22] That is the one, in between other names. When I took on that role [Co-Director of CROW], I remember observing that the habits of interaction, the ways I dealt with people, had all been learned in context where, for the most part, I was the only woman. When I actually had to share influence or work with women who were powerful and had control over me, I had to learn some other things. I was uncomfortable. It wasn’t what I was used to. [00:14:50] I was used to this other setting. So at the time, I was like a fish in water, I didn’t notice the water, of course. In terms of the other question, did they share the same view or my view--is that the question? Devaney: Was this a unit? Because you said you were all trying to figure this out together, and how it was all going to work. Were they kind of all fish swimming in the same direction or were they just like herding cats? Miner: [00:15:20] Yes, more than you might think, because the other key person would have been the provost Bill Miller. I think an important thing to remember is they were all learning to work with each other. I was on many dean searches. [00:15:38] All of them are trying--they were, “How should this chart work and where is this?” Didn’t they create the vice president’s group around that time? There was a whole new structure created for many sorts of decisions. This was just one of those things, and they were enough of a mind 81 that it seems to me that it was why there really was a different flavor here from some other schools, and it was because of all that turnover. There weren’t people who were entrenched. Devaney: So the governance of the university on this issue was basically new and, therefore, they didn’t have traditions they had to follow. They were kind of figuring it out themselves so they could be pioneers as they proceeded. Miner: [00:16:21] I believe that’s the case. They were more willing and able to do that because they didn’t have to do it, including the deans. Devaney: You were also the university’s liaison with external compliance officers and presumably the press. It seems to me that you were in the news quite a bit. How did they treat you, the press or the federal government? Miner: [00:16:38] I mentioned the “Women’s Libber” headline in the San Jose Mercury, so initially they treated me just the way the culture was struggling. Some would be very serious and respectful. Others would think this was a joke. Others assumed it was some kind of symbolic gesture that meant nothing, which happens a lot in organizations. They do that--say, “We should care.” I do remember one transition, which may be stemming from the focus of these interviews you’re doing, which is my whole previous experience in any public situation had been as staff. I was involved in writing lots of things that somebody said to the public, but what I was doing, I was writing a script that I gave to Kenneth Cuthbertson, who was the vice president for development, or that I gave to Richard Lyman, who was the president. 82 I never gave those talks. I was the person behind the stage, and a big transition for me in ’71, ’72, after I took this job, was that I had to be the one who gave the talk. It took me a year to learn when the reporter called, don’t answer the question. Answer with what you want to see in the paper. That’s a kind of simple idea, but I never knew that. It took me some articles that weren’t what I wanted, and so the next time you call and said, “What do you think of the war in Vietnam?” I said, “I think there should be a change in sex roles.” [Devaney laughs.] That was a big education about that public role. As far as the federal government, they were fine. They were respectful. Stanford has such a national, international level of status and power, that when you walk in from Stanford, you could be a paper bag and they don’t care what your gender or anything else is, it’s like, “You’re Stanford.” I did have a woman in Health, Education and Welfare explain to me that she went out of the way every time she possibly could to make sure money did not go to Stanford if at all possible because it was an elitist, condescending, sexist, racist institution. [00:19:13] [laughs] It was so interesting, because it was evidence of the internal diversity in the government. The government’s not one thing, right? This woman’s doing that. Someone else is a friend of some Stanford--well, something happened in that era. There was a proposal to have some of these gender issues to apply to teaching. I think it was in a regulation proposal, because there were new regulations, and one regulation came through and everybody’s reviewing them. I am, but also Lyman. One of them, a proposed 83 regulation from HEW, said something like, “And then you will, as part of your affirmative action program, review all the syllabi for all the classes for sexism.” Well, that sort of made sense to those of us who wanted to change the world. Lyman picked up the phone, as I recall, called Califano [Joseph A. Califano, Jr.], who was the secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, whom he knew well. He said, “You don’t want to do that.” This is a phone call. This is not a letter. This is not a report. It’s a phone call. He says, “You’ve got to agree that’s crazy. We can’t have that, because that’s interfering with intellectual freedom of the faculty,” which it was. So he said, “That has to go,” and it was gone. That was a phone call on a Friday. It was out of there by Monday. At the time, I was impressed by that process and educated, and I understood. I learned from it, but that is sort of my own journey now [in my current full professor position at Wisconsin]. If there was even a whiff of something like that in anything I’m connected with, I would [want to] assassinate the person who said someone should review what I teach in a course, because now I’ve internalized all those norms about a university has to have the faculty free to teach whatever they want to teach. But at the time, yes, it just seemed to me not a bad idea. [laughs] Devaney: I think it was also an example of what we talked about earlier, the kind of partnership that seemed to exist between universities and the federal government on many levels, when telephone conversations actually were very effective in resolving a lot of different issues. 84 Miner: [00:21:25] Sure. But it was also adversarial because, as you pointed out the other day, they held up millions of dollars of contracts at Harvard and Michigan, so it was both. We had the woman who wanted to punish Stanford, and the other, all at the same time. Devaney: Let’s talk about your job now as the university’s affirmative action officer. What were some of the key activities you were engaged in? Miner: [00:21:44] First, let’s sort them into the cross-campus ones and then the staff ones. If you don’t mind, I’ll talk about the staff first because I did have a point-person role on the staff side. There I was the main oversight person doing it, and then on the campus side I was working with many other people. Would that make sense? Devaney: Sure. You’re talking about the staff affirmative action for the non-faculty employees at Stanford, of whom there were like six thousand? Miner: [00:22:16] Right. I had to turn to that in an operational sense as my main focus. One curious thing, is why was there never a parallel report? I was going to write another report on staff at Stanford, which would talk about all these things, but it became clear then that it took many months to write a report that you could issue in an institution like Stanford. You can’t be screwing around, as you pointed out. You can’t have the numbers wrong. It all has to be organized. It had to have writing. By then, it was like the train was leaving. We were already committed to doing things. There was no doubt we were going to do something. I turned instead to actually changing things and writing [policies or specific program documents]. 85 The point is, we knew we had two big issues regarding staff. One was minority representation in general, still a big issue, and we had many activists, personnel and elsewhere. But my job was to help that be coordinated and integrate the women into it. The second issue, which is better perhaps to talk about, is upward mobility for everybody. Any minorities and women who are here, they weren’t in any major position, so how was that to be changed. A great deal of what I did was trying to work on that project. In fact I did find a report from an early point where we said we need to identify people in the personnel department who will be point people on upward mobility for particular groups. Again, kind of using the fundraising model, they were supposed to particularly identify good candidates who were minorities on campus and be watching them. You, Pat Devaney, were a general person on women. So you remember that. Devaney: Many, many years ago that was, yes. Miner: [00:24:13] It was many efforts to figure out what could you do about this upward mobility. One conclusion that many of us drew--you and myself included--was that [the lack of mobility for minorities and women] was a great example of a problem that was not just applicable to minorities and women, that most mid-level staff at Stanford, not faculty--these would be associate deans, people in the Dean of Students’ Office, people in contract administration, all around the campus--that the typical career pattern was to get in one area, it was very difficult to get out. There weren’t too many people moved across departments at Stanford. Some people did, but not many. 86 The complexity of doing things in this kind of an institution was such that simple models, especially like those taught in business schools about “oh, you need a clear goal and then you set some kind of schedule and that’s going to happen,” were useless to the people who were-Devaney: You mean career goals. Miner: [00:25:16] Well, no--how to get things done. Both. The career goal point, but first it was clear that there was not going to be what you call succession planning in a university, which is what people thought some companies did. We would have a plan. “Pat, here are your talents. Here’s our ten-year plan for your career.” People were expecting that. But that was not compatible with the decentralized university where there is no [simple] structure. Devaney: And each hiring officer had the right to make his or her own hiring decisions. Miner: [00:25:52] That’s right. So the personnel did. But that same issue [complex, decentralized structure and processes] comes up in how you actually get anything done. We used to draw a picture in the seminar that we ran that was a big circle, where you start on the outside of the circle if you want to get something done, and the president and those people were in the middle. If you have an issue, sometimes you just have to go around the whole circle. You go to your dean and another dean and another dean and another dean. It’s not a power structure like a firm where there’s a clear hierarchy. It’s a weird collegial system. The second thing that a lot of people faced in these middlemanagement positions was how to get things done in that kind of world? I helped prototype with some other people something we called the Tooth 87 Fairy Seminar. I don’t know if you remember that. It was called the Tooth Fairy Seminar because many of the mid-level people, including minorities and women--this I suppose may not have been the greatest thing--kind of had an assumption that there was a tooth fairy who would come and give them the key to their mobility. The point of the Tooth Fairy Seminars is to say, “No. It’s a Darwinian system, so the advancement comes from you learning how to get things done in a way that makes you stand out, and then you can influence your own fate.” That was the spirit. That eventually became the management development program that was institutionalized. It came, in part, not only from me but because people in the personnel office agreed with all this, but it was very much something that I spent enormous amounts of time on because I believe that it didn’t do any good to get a dean who was told he had to hire a woman or minority to do something if there wasn’t a person who actually was more sophisticated about how to get things done. We were trying to add that into it. So that was one thing we worked on. Another example was the affirmative action seminars, which we ran for I don’t know how long, and that was about a two-hour seminar, which was similar because it was seminars. It’s different because it was university-wide. It was about just what we talked about earlier: What is affirmative action and why are we doing it? We actually had a workbook there where participants had to answer questions. A mixture of people attended the seminars. It would be by area, so it would be department heads, faculty, maybe a third faculty. 88 Devaney: Were they required to go? Miner: [00:28:13] That’s a wonderful question. They should have been required to go. I suspect they weren’t. I don’t know, can’t remember. It was an effort to do this education and speed up processes. But it did do what we talked about yesterday. The movie that started the seminar began with a symphony, whose name I can’t remember, but I heard it over and over again, very loud clashes. It was sort of like Beethoven something or other, and then it shows a picture of $10 million class-action lawsuit. It told about the legal basis for some aspects of these things, and it had a very frightening effect. It was to underscore that while we’re doing things for the reasons you and I’ve talked about--we’re doing it because it’s good for the world and it’s good for our students--if we don’t get it right, this is on the compliance side, then terrible things could happen. Many people did not understand that. It was a mixture of positive, what do you do, but it had this element of clarifying. Those were some things that were very important on the staff side, from my point of view. Devaney: What about issues of salary equity? Miner: [00:29:22] Great question. In the ’71 report, I recommended that there be salary review every year of salary equity for everybody. I believe even maybe in our formal plan we said that we would start this, called the Salary Equity Project. But it devolved then along these two lines of the Provost’s Office doing anything about the faculty side, and then personnel and my office doing the rest of the six thousand people. That project was a great example of the naiveté on my side and I would think the personnel people knew this 89 was a slightly delusional thought that we could do it in ten months or something. [00:30:19] I remember there was a job classification project. We had all these people who were getting reviewed. What are they? So it’s very hard to do salary equity when you don’t know how to compare apples and oranges. It was all munged up. It was all bundled up with that. Peggy Riedman, whom we talked about yesterday, who was in charge in that project, would say, “We can’t do this group. We have to run the analysis by average salary and by this group and by that group.” The great thing that happened, which was interesting, I thought, was we were going along and we would just run big reports. I will tell this funny story. We ran one report. This took a long time to get done. The only data at that time you could use was payroll data. Personnel did not have a system yet that worked. We were running all these categories in the mean by men and women. What was the mean salary? Well, some of these categories, it was really not accurate in the sense they were huge categories [payroll groups with many people in different roles]. They were all put together technically. In any event, when you ran the mean analysis, and you saw means for men, and for women, there was always a very large difference between the salaries of men and women. Devaney: And minorities? Miner: [00:31:37] Yes, though there was less. Minorities, we’ve often found out, all these analyses, the sample size was not big enough that you could draw any statistical conclusions. But, yes, there were consistent patterns. 90 I gave that to the chief legal counsel for the university, for a weekend. I said, “You know, we’ve got to do something here on this. Take a look at this thing.” I met with him the next week, and he sat it on his desk. He was a great ally, and he was completely behind all this, but he also was a funny man. He said, “Well, Anne, I read it through. There seem two reasonable conclusions. One is that we have a salary equity problem that we should fix. The other is the women really are inferior.” [laughter] [00:32:23] I thought it was hilarious. I mean, he could say that because he was an ally and he never thought that was the case. We first had to make the case that it was important to do, and then we embarked on this long project. That went on for a long time. The part I liked about it was it was one of these creative, opportunistic things that are so fun to be part of. We did have some changes we knew we could do, and that was really, mainly in the personnel department--people who could do the volume of calculations, saying we should do this, and this, and this. We were all working together. President Nixon created the wage price freeze, as you may remember. You couldn’t change prices, and you couldn’t change wages, so Stanford was forbidden by the federal government from raising anybody’s salary at that time, and it didn’t. [00:33:25] This had to be ’72, because I think I was already in this job. I’d have to look at the year, but it had to be when I had some formal responsibility. 91 The interesting thing was in that wage price freeze nationally on all employers, not just universities, there was an exception, which is if you were making an equity change. You could change somebody’s salary if they were a woman or minority and you were fixing a salary inequity. We went to the vice president’s group, Peggy and I, and we said, “We think we should take advantage of that provision in the regulation,” and we laid out three approaches and made an estimate of how much money it would cost. I think it was $50,000 versus $300,000 versus $1.5 million. Those were our estimates based on something, and we deliberately set it out, so we thought, “The middle looks kind of attractive here,” and that’s what they did. They approved this project and said there would be a campus-wide project, not just faculty, and all of the changes would go back to the beginning date of the project, ’71, and you won’t get hurt if you didn’t get your case reviewed until April. We can do this, because it’s a loophole. [00:34:50] The money allocated had to have been in the order of a hundred thousand dollars to three hundred thousand dollars. I think it was less than $1 million, I think it was more than fifty thousand, but I’d have to go look. To cover adjustments, salary adjustments. [00:35:06] This all has to do with what you want to call equity, right? If equity is within your job classification, you are making less than other people [in exactly the same job classification]. That’s the strictest one [definition]. Devaney: What if you’re a man and you’re making less? Is that equity? 92 Miner: [00:35:25] You’re not allowed to solve the problems by hurting men. You can only solve the problem by bringing women and minorities up. You’re not allowed to take money away from men. Devaney: But in the course of a study, you could see the average salary is x, and here’s a high-performing man whose salary is at the twenty-fifth percentile. Would he have been included in that? Miner: [00:35:45] This is why it takes years and years and years to do salary equity stuff, because the minute you go--and it seems like a simple idea--you do these pictures, and it says, “Well, wait, there’s all--.” You do scattergrams, too, that show where the salaries are, and then you get into exactly these kinds of questions, and it’s very hard to be effective without having expert knowledge. How do you know he’s a high-performing man? Why do you say that? There are different ways to do it. One is you do salary matches. You just match people in pairs and say, “Shouldn’t their salaries be the same?” The point here is simply that we then embarked upon doing it at all, and there were many people involved. The first pass, it had to have been around that much money, maybe half-a-million dollars, I would think. But looking back, you’d have to say it signaled we should have seen better than we did, that this was a twenty-year project, because even if you do one round of corrections, it turns out--two things--that the method, it wasn’t adequate. That wasn’t quite right, because we didn’t control for performance, right, or we didn’t control for length of service, etc. The other one is even if you fix it--and I have seen this in my own life in the last ten years--most institutions 93 I know, they fix it and then even if it was right, if somebody could think that something was right, it erodes. [00:37:17] I would say what got done in that era was a typical pattern--if you had like a band [of salaries with high and low borders] women were below the line of what the minimum should be. You’ve got dots, and most people are in the middle, some people are above the line--in personnel, it would be that graph that has the length of service, right? It’s like a big sort of band. Devaney: You’re talking about you’ve got a line that is the fiftieth percentile for salaries, and some are above and some are below? Miner: [00:37:49] No. I’m talking about two lines, which is about one standard deviation away from the middle. [00:37:53] There’s the band of everybody in the middle, and then there’s a bottom line where we actually don’t think anybody should be below that. Devaney: You actually had salary minimums and maximums for staff. Some of these women and minorities were below the salary minimum. Miner: [00:38:05] The typical pattern, this is everywhere. This is every institution I’ve ever seen. This is faculty; this is staff; this is Wisconsin. The pattern, if there were no intervention, it’s typically that the women and minorities are almost all the people below the line. Below the bottom line, the least line, are women and minorities. 94 [00:38:23] Almost all the people above the high line are white men, and that is my point about this. It’s a very deep social pattern that replicates all the time. Devaney: Do you think that that pattern has anything to do with the training program, the Tooth Fairy thing that you were talking about, that particularly women think that if they do a good job, somebody’s going to notice them and promote them, whereas men maybe are going to be trained to be a little bit more assertive about asking for raises or threatening to leave? Miner: [00:38:53] Great question. An exciting aspect of that time was those sorts of questions were unanswered in terms of academic research. We didn’t have the research to answer it, so we all were doing trial and error and learning. We actually considered having assertiveness-training classes. We did have assertiveness-training classes for women on the theory that we could correct that [top down decision bias], but you’d really rather have the women also pressing [for fair salaries]. The answer is that would be a Myra Strober’s perfect question. Professor Myra Strober was an economics professor who specialized in wages and gender. Answering in detail your question, which was a causal question, what is causing that [patterns in wage differences] has been what academic studies have spent twenty, thirty years working on, and my own view is that it’s all of the above. Certainly women, on average, were socialized to be less willing to push. That was part of the same sex roles we’ve talked about. But as an institution, we were saying that shouldn’t be the pattern, because that’s not supposed to be what you’re paid for. That’s not part of your job description, 95 called “go in and ask for more salary.” We didn’t want a situation where there were unbalanced salaries. The point of all this is that was a major focus for a lot of studies, and some of these got done, but it also, I think, sensitized people. Devaney: In the six years you were there, what extent do you think salary equity issues for staff were at least improved? Miner: [00:40:27] Unquestionably improved. When I look in my heart, when I think, “All those years when I wanted to change people’s souls and everything, what did I really do that was worth anything?,” I think, “There are a bunch of women in the world and some minorities who have money they would not have had ever since 1972.” If I hadn’t pushed along with these other people, it probably wouldn’t have happened. Devaney: That’s great. That is a great sense of achievement that you could take with you. Miner: [00:40:51] I feel good about it. Devaney: Let’s talk about higher-level positions. You’re now talking about staff, but what about key leadership positions? What did Stanford do for affirmative action in trying to find minorities and women for those jobs? Miner: [00:41:07] As you may recall, I was put on [practically] every search committee at that time, including the football coach, the basketball coach, deans of engineering, deans of education. Devaney: So your responsibilities, let’s just clarify, were just as much to represent underrepresented minorities as they were women in that time. By “underrepresented minorities,” you mean which groups? 96 Miner: [00:41:43] It changes with history, but at the time it was, as you pointed out, Native Americans and what we then called Chicanos, which later branched out because that was seen as too narrow, and even earlier, African Americans. Those are the three groups. On these search committees, my role was to help influence that, which would have included trying to help find women and minorities, but also where I felt had more impact was--it was exactly where things were. We’re interviewing a dean and my job is going around the table, and they expect me to ask about affirmative action, right? That’s where it was. It was the advocate’s problem. The question would sometimes be, “Do you believe in affirmative action?” Remember, it was still controversial. Devaney: You would ask the candidate that? Miner: [00:42:37] Yes. One, is the person themself a minority, but even more important at that point was, what were they going to do. It’s tempting to treat it like it was a matter of attitudes. Did they like women and minorities? That was the implicit question. Are you mean-spirited? But part of what we were doing then was teaching, we thought, a different approach where we would say, “Give us examples from your own prior experience where you have increased the number of women or you have worked with women and minorities. They would say, “Oh, in my lab, I went and recruited black scholars from Howard,” or the like. In that sense, I was participating in what the institution wanted as diffusion of the skills and goals and trying to get women and minorities in these roles. 97 Devaney: Were there any grievances? You were doing your best, but did you get pushback from white males? Miner: [00:43:36] They rarely came to me, the white males. Some. Devaney: But was there pushback? Miner: [00:43:41] Oh, sure, yes. You and I were talking the other day with another person who was there at the time, and it made me remember or realize, I think much more than I was aware of at the time, that a lot of men, white men, were powerful. Carl Degler, who was a faculty member, male. He was a professor of history. He became the first chairman of the Committee on the Education and Employment of Women. He said to me one time we were talking about all this, “Don’t forget,” because I was very cheerful and how everything was great and the world was changing and all these men were for it, because that’s all I was getting in my sampling, right? People didn’t come up to me and say, “This is crazy,” or, “Don’t do this.” He says, “You’re not in the room.” [laughs] He says, “There are many rooms you’re not in, and you don’t have a sample of what they’re saying when you’re not in the room.” It was his way to remind me that there was a lot of resistance that I was not likely to be hearing directly. But the fortunate thing was that that is one thing that a lot of people, like the so-called good deans, Al Hastorf, whom I mentioned yesterday, and Lyman or Miller, were resisting that. I know Lyman heard complaints, because he would sometimes mention to me about that--that we’d gone too far. Devaney: Complaints from white men? 98 Miner: [00:45:05] Absolutely, and staff maybe even more than faculty. I mean, this is kind of a silly speech, but it is almost impossible to overestimate the power of fear in the workplace, right? It’s like when you have a reorganization. Everybody’s afraid they’ll be gone. I mean, who would you fear if you’re a white male? You’d say, “They’re going to get rid of my job,” and that’s how they interpret it. You had to really work hard to clarify what was going on. In terms of my own experience, most of the grievances I had, and this was where we learned--and I did--enormous things about how we needed to change, because a more typical case for me would be a woman or minority who would come to me and say, “They’re not doing this right.” They were heartbreaking cases, because sometimes the grievant had a point, and then in some ways it wasn’t too hard. I would go and talk to the supervisor or sometimes the faculty one I would talk to, Provost Miller or Artie Bienenstock, who was the kind of faculty lead. Remember, as vice provost for faculty affairs, he had the charge of the implementer on the faculty affirmative action side. He got that role of implementing the recommendation that the provost should have an academic woman do all this. He took that job. I said there should be a job, and it was filled by Artie, it wasn’t a woman, which was different from my early imagining. But it was that job. The design was clear. It was a high-level person who worked for the provost who would be in charge of implementing this two- or three-quarters’ time. Devaney: So come back to those recommendations that you had made in 1971. How many of them were actually implemented? Do you have a feel for that? 99 Miner: [00:46:54] I would say 80 percent were implemented. Devaney: Which ones were implemented? Miner: [00:47:01] The recommendation for a Vice Provost for Faculty Affairs was totally implemented in terms of the structure that I had envisioned, which I had created after talking to various people. It’s not like I was from outside. I already knew that President Lyman and Provost Miller thought it was going to work to have some kind of associate director to do this. I knew that before I wrote this in there, but maybe they thought it was okay. Because I had argued with them about it, and a big one was the goals and timetables. My point is, most of these we did. In terms of the point of it, the principle, you could say, “Well, it wasn’t a woman.” Maybe that mattered or didn’t matter. It may have mattered to my life, but it didn’t matter subsequently. But were they implemented well is a very different question. Devaney: You mentioned that people like Carl Degler said you don’t hear the pushback because you’re not in the room. Do you think by having a man, a white male, actually be the faculty affirmative action officer, he would be in a better position to push back on these arguments? Miner: [00:48:10] Yes, of course, and that was why, I may even have favored that myself by then, because the woman or the minority was always perceived as being an outside advocate in some sense who wouldn’t really deeply understand the norms. No, it was a good move. Devaney: Let’s talk about how old you were in this period of time. You were a young woman here, and chances are almost all the men, white men, you were 100 dealing with were actually quite a bit older, which sort of exacerbates the power difference. Miner: [00:48:54] I was twenty-nine when I started organizing women on campus, so I was thirty-one when I did the report on women. I was thirty-two when I started the job of university affirmative action officer. Not too young, really. Devaney: You felt comfortable in dealing with all these people. Miner: [00:49:14] We’ve talked about it. I felt like I was at a county fair. This whole thing was like, what, are you kidding me? What am I, little Anne Miner, doing here in the president’s staff meeting every Monday morning? [00:49:30] The president had a staff meeting every Monday morning, and all of a sudden, having been a little person writing little tiny reports and begging to get in somebody’s office, I’m there every Monday, and I can talk like anybody else. He goes around the room, and I say, “No, I think our policy should be such,” and I just found it hilarious and wonderful and fun, that part. It was so like going to the movies or a county fair, because it wasn’t just like reading one book, right? It was no matter where you went, there was a whole new thing. Devaney: Were you the only woman in the president’s staff meeting? Miner: [00:50:04] No, there were several there. I think Sally Mahoney, the Registrar, may have made those. I don’t think I felt a gender thing there so much. There, I probably did feel more the age thing, that way. Devaney: Come back then to talking about other key issues that you faced as the university’s affirmative action officer. You mentioned just now childcare. 101 Miner: [00:50:29] Yes. The first thing I wanted to clarify was that I had a direct personal responsibility around the staff program, and there we focused on mobility, salary equity, and many other things. Then I had a generic one, one of many issues that affected everybody, so that would, for example, be childcare. Devaney: You said you had the first responsibilities for staff employment, and upward mobility. But the broader policies like childcare affected faculty as well. Miner: [00:50:56] Correct. I had a role which was less clear. I mean, nobody told me to do that. I never had anyone say, “I think next year you should do this rather than that.” I was proposing that I would say, “Here are my priorities.” Devaney: Did you get any kind of annual performance evaluations and goals for the next year? Miner: [00:51:18] No. I mean, it would have been a surprise. Who would have expected that? But it’s the same issue, which is this kind of Darwinian Theory, that if you want to be in this world, you shouldn’t need that. It’s too top-down. Everyone is supposed to be an entrepreneur, and that was the implicit culture. Devaney: Do you think that was unique to Stanford? Miner: [00:51:40] No, that’s higher education. That’s the faculty culture. I live in it now. It’s like, “We’ll give you tenure if you can show us that you will in the future create original scholarly research that no one’s ever thought of before.” If I could say to you, “Pat, what I want you to find in the next ten years is x,” then you’re not creating original research. It’s exactly that norm, that 102 the premise is you’re supposed to discover and propose. That was the culture, and I didn’t even notice it then. I now see it’s part of an academic culture. [00:52:16] I found it fascinating, and I did find it frightening, if you want me to talk about that. There was a side of it which was sort of my Alice in Wonderland feature. For some reason, Jing Lyman and Dick Lyman, the president and the president’s wife--I think it was the President’s Office--sent me a tree, a bonsai tree, as a present in celebration of something. Maybe we had a compliance review that went well, I don’t know. That was great, and then we had that in our house. Devaney: Were you married by then? Miner: [00:52:51] I was married by then. Around the same time as I became the university’s affirmative action officer, somehow in my spare time I got married to another Stanford employee in the Development Office., I did not change my last name though, so] my name was different [from his last name.] We would go to meetings and hear about each other without people realizing that we were married. That was fun. [00:53:13] I was married to David Glen, who was in the Development Office. He stayed. Of course he knew the Lymans, too, because he worked with them in Development. For some reason, we invited the president and his wife to dinner at our house in that period. [00:53:32] It didn’t seem like a big deal too much until we realized-probably I realized--that I had killed [by neglect] the bonsai plant that was 103 sent. [laughter] That’s the point. I didn’t pay a lot of attention to the plant, so I go over there and look, thinking, “Well, that’ll be great. I’ll put it on the table.” I look and it’s this yellow, puny, withered thing where all that you could see was this wire holding it. [laughter] A sign of this issue of how we did feel like babes in Wonderland, which we thought, “This is the worst thing that ever happened in our lives. How are we going to do this?” Devaney: The bonsai plant is dead, and they’re on their way to dinner. Did you go buy another bonsai plant? Miner: [00:54:16] We did. But it went on from there. I think you’re right. It mostly felt like an apprenticeship. Do you know what I mean? I didn’t feel afraid, and I don’t know why not, but I didn’t, because it was fun in a strange way, and I believed in these things, so it makes it very easy to do when you believe in it. Devaney: Before we leave your job as the affirmative action officer, would you talk a little bit about the creation of the Center for Research on Women? Miner: [00:54:48] We want to do that and childcare? Those would be the two. [00:54:53] Childcare, it’s an odd issue, because if you say, well, it’s about sex roles, you’d say, well, then we shouldn’t worry about it, because that sort of says women [can] get ahead if you don’t have childcare. That’s the pragmatic issue. In fact, women did have more responsibility for children, so it did matter in terms of advancing women, and it was ideologically a huge fight. I had senior officers explain to me that it was immoral for Stanford University to get involved at all in childcare, that this is a private thing. It’s 104 like, “Should they buy your liquor? Well, no. If you want to drink, that’s yours to pay for.” Similarly everything, not only childcare, but the cost of-Devaney: So, “If you want to have babies, that’s your business, but we’re not going to pay for it.” Miner: [00:55:45] That’s right. Their view was, “It shouldn’t be covered by insurance. Come on. Are you kidding? If that woman wants to have that baby, let her pay for it.” These issues we see are still rippling through society today, and, I mean, those are going back. The childcare one was totally that way. It had tremendous advocacy [in favor of childcare however, which was crucial.] At the SLAC group, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center group, there was a woman named Glenda Jones who was a more aggressive advocate organizer whom I knew from Women’s Liberation days. They had very effectively lobbied and gotten some kind of support of SLAC. Then there was the Bing Nursery School, but that was never designed to be childcare; that was designed to be education. It was part of the Department of Psychology. You could send children there, but it was an elementary school. But it was seen as, well, why isn’t that childcare? Somebody would say, “Well, no, because that’s not childcare. That’s academic research and a school.” There was a phase where sympathetic people involved in Escondido Village had a center. Escondido Village was the graduate student housing on the Stanford campus that was tremendously relevant in terms of who was affected by all this, all these married graduate students. They took a [general purpose] room, but the people had to go in there and pick up the toys every 105 night, because it was really a room for meetings, but they were running a childcare center. I don’t know what I was doing on this day, but they did a sit-in at Pitzer’s office. Do you remember a child-in? Devaney: The married graduate students did a sit-in in the President’s Office at Stanford? Miner: [00:57:29] No, all the people. It was a women’s issue. Many people cared, and I think it was the Escondido people, but I’m not dead sure. Someone organized it. They organized a sit-in for Pitzer. I’m giving the history of childcare, so I’m saying it’s bubbling up all this time [before I was formally involved]. It went back a long way, but not much before ‘68, not before this time we’re talking about. Devaney: What is it exactly they wanted? Miner: [00:57:54] That’s the point. If you asked one person in that group, they’d say, “There should be free childcare for everyone. Duh.” There were countries where that was the idea, that everyone should have this because it’s a citizen’s right. Other people said, “No, that seems a little extreme. We don’t give free anything to anybody. We’re a private institution,” [and so on]. So exactly what you said was what several senior officers said: “We don’t even know what is the issue.” Somebody said, “Suppose there were free childcare. What is this? Is this $2 million? Is this $1 billion?” Nobody knew the price structure, and nobody knew what was good childcare, because everybody thought that we probably wouldn’t want Stanford to be running a childcare center where children were starving to death or whatever. 106 I actually heard a woman, I just remember being so outraged. A woman on a panel about childcare who was an expert, because this was an advocacy thing. But she was outside of Stanford. We were talking about the price of childcare, and someone said, “Well, there are these really inexpensive places, but they’re dangerous to the children.” She said, “That’s too bad. The consumer should pay the price. If they’re not willing to pay the price for childcare, then too bad.” I thought, “Really? Are you kidding me?” Because it’s not the parents who paid the price; it was the little children.” The point of this long tale is that was a time that was very unsure, and nobody agreed on what was the role of the university. Although the university did, in fact, provide the space in Escondido or helped that happen and did some things. Devaney: But did they pay for the childcare providers? Miner: [00:59:47] No. The principle then, which remained for a long time, was that if there was going to be a center, it was like they’re not in the university budget. They’re in a separate budget. The theory was if you want this is to happen, then the entity has to be self-sustaining. We’re not going to run a childcare center. And that was very deep. This was an issue linked to the Faculty Women’s Club, which was a most important positive factor for many years. They were running a consulting service. They said, “Even if we built something, it’s not going to be enough, so what people need is a way to find childcare.” This was Phyllis Craig and Louise Wright. They were tireless. Phyllis Craig was a faculty wife, 107 a member of the Faculty Women’s Club, who finally [also] ended up giving money to support childcare. What I thought was the core problem to get solved was there needed to be a public statement, as in the affirmative action report, that the university intended or believed it had a role to facilitate childcare. I was pretty sure that’s all we could do, actually, but that was going to be a huge thing to do. There was going to be the fight, but I wanted something in public--I didn’t want those senior officers to look at me and say, “No, this should be like buying liquor.” Right?” But there were all these questions. We hired Aimee Leifer, who then was, I think, an assistant professor, a student of Eleanor Maccoby’s, or maybe of Eleanor Maccoby’s husband, Nate Maccoby. Aimee had moved from being a doctoral student who had previously worked on an admissions study. Later she became the research associate who was paid to do the study for me--the Leifer Report. I knew her because of Eleanor Maccoby and because she worked on another study [with] me on admissions. The [childcare] Report was paid, and it took a long time. It made people really mad because it took a long time. It’s a 100-page report, it’s in the archives somewhere, and it answered all the questions. How much will this cost? What does childcare involve? How many people do you need? What is the difference between a six-month-old and a three-month-old? What is the state of things? I think I gave it to Miller. Devaney: This is Aimee Leifer’s report, written under your auspices, that went to the provost. 108 Miner: [01:02:44] I believe so. Probably sponsored maybe even by the provost’s money. I don’t know [now]. It was totally successful in the sense of it was accepted. The president and provost said, “Right. That’s the right policy.” [01:02:58] The overall recommendation was that there should be an active program to facilitate when possible. They should do that. So, issues of space, if they could do it. What it said, it didn’t propose--it said it’s not ready yet [for university subsidization]. But we knew this was all we could get. We were not ready yet for the university to actually pay for the childcare itself. Many people were very angry about it. The people who wanted everyone to get free childcare were angry because it didn’t go far enough. It didn’t say they should pay for everybody. Others were shocked because it went too far. I was annoyed at some people who didn’t even like the facilitating idea. These were colleagues. This is inside people. I complained to some of them. One of them--I don’t know who it was, and I don’t think it was me--said, “Here’s an idea. What if we thought of things this way, that when you build a new building, you create more problems with childcare, because there are people there that don’t have childcare. [So funds should be set aside to support cost of building new childcare for people in the building, or elsewhere on campus.”] Devaney: You mean the creation of the building creates the increased demand for childcare because you’re hiring new people, some of whom are parents? Miner: [01:04:39] That’s right, because another thing she [Leifer] had to assess was what was the demand, which was the provost’s question. He said, “What if 109 there’s no demand? Nobody’s willing to pay for what it takes,” for example. This laid out the demand in her report. I said, “A lot of demand is being met, that’s true,” and they had a whole chain of childcare providers in Escondido Village of graduate students. I thought that we should be spending money to actually pay for these centers, to build new centers. This [advisory] person said what you just said. There will be new people if you build a new building. They need childcare. Now we’re making the problem worse. We’re colluding with anti-childcare. What if we had a policy which is that when you build a new building for $5 million, you have to put X percent, some percent of the budget, toward having a childcare center in that building, [or allocated to other childcare on campus] which was a very popular view at that time. You should have the childcare in the building. And that policy got approved. We’d have to go look at the documents--not large amounts of money, but there was some substantial amount of money that went to the childcare center, the Stanford Community and Childcare Center, which by then did exist, and they got their own money. Devaney: Where was that? That was the actual physical facility? Stanford Childcare facility? Miner: [01:05:54] Yes, CCSC, Childcare Center of the Stanford Community. We’d have to look at the history as to when this money was infused, but I know its robustness, its ability to function was very positively affected by that money. 110 Devaney: When did this childcare center at Stanford, the physical facility, actually get started? Because we’ve gone now from facilitating it in Escondido to an actual structure. Miner: [01:06:20] I’m pretty sure the people who were running this center in Escondido, as I remember it, became the founders of the CCSC, and what they did was get a space that wasn’t in Escondido Village. It’s right near the Credit Union building, close to Escondido Village. Still there to this day. It’s still a major thing. They had an infant-care wing, which was in Escondido Village. Devaney: What you’re saying is that a policy was, in fact, implemented that for newbuilding construction, some portion of the building project would be set aside for childcare, which, in turn, then was used to help subsidize the Stanford Childcare Center. Miner: [01:07:07] On the logic that if you weren’t going to put it in your building, then you had to help the need be met. Parents paid almost all the portion, but there was in some sense subsidy. It was maybe partly for the building. As I said, this was a long time ago, but the important part of the story, from my point of view--it was a lesson to me, too--was about watching someone who was really gifted take something and say, “What do we want to really have happen here?” I think it may have been Sally Mahoney who said this. I don’t know who did it. It was after Leifer wrote the report. The person said that we should do something, basically, and then here’s all the need. Then after that, the question was, what should we do, and there was a struggle because no 111 one wanted to spend real money. Then whoever it was thought of this idea about the building, putting money in buildings, which was implemented. It’s a case of instead of the institution tricking people by pretending to do something good, so to speak, and not doing it, this was the opposite. This was [spending real funds] in support of childcare without publicly admitting that we were supporting childcare. Devaney: You think that actually passed? Miner: [01:08:17] I know it happened. You can read about that. But whether it’s still there, I doubt. [01:08:24] I just want to finish it, which is, the Leifer report was my work for a long time, or to oversee that, and I did see it as one thing that I did that was very important and kind of characteristic of this role. Eventually, when you want to talk about running childcare, you need many people and all kinds of expert knowledge. What my job was, is to catalyze something so that it could get outside the [informal, advocacy parts of the] institution, which is where it was, into the [formal, committed] institution where other people would be the ones making it happen. I thought it was a success from that point of view. Devaney: Let’s go to the creation of the Center for Research on Women and what your role was in that. Miner: [01:09:06] Great. I can’t remember the very early ones, but it was in the early stages--after the very beginning of the Affirmative Action program, so we’re [talking about] after [there was community awareness and early hiring..] 112 We did hire more women. As you know, and there was a cohort of women recruited to be in [schools] where they weren’t [there] before at all-business school, law school--and there were other active women. [There were contested and intellectually challenging issues] like some of the questions you’re raising: Is the reason that salaries aren’t the same because women don’t ask for raises, or is that because men have a bias, an unconscious bias, which is also probably true.? Nobody knew the answers to all this stuff, and nationally everywhere there were women’s caucuses organizing, .e.g., in sociology, economics. We knew that Stanford’s a research institution, so we should be researching about that, and there were women who got together and were supportive of creating--it had to be, because no one else is credible of doing that, really, in the end. I’m not saying there aren’t researchers. There are research associates, but if you want legitimacy-Devaney: You couldn’t establish a research center at Stanford that wasn’t led by faculty. Miner: [01:10:37] You could not. We’d have to ask Myra Strober in more detail. Professor Myra Strober, the economist, was one of the early advocate women economists. But we were talking about the structure, and I remember going to Ted Geballe, he was a physics professor who ran a center called something like physics for the future of the world. We went and we said, “We want to create a center. How do you create a center?” He said, “To create a center, what you need is a letterhead. That’s what a center is.” [laughter] He was serious. He meant it in a sense that there are centers that are more symbolic and that they’re a way to get money, right? 113 But we felt that other people didn’t see it the way we saw the need for research on women. We thought that the issues to research women would take the RAND Corporation. There were so many questions and such important ideas that anybody could see this should be endowed at $100 million immediately. That’s how we saw it. I did experience the thing that then you could feel your vision, this was not seen the same way by other people, who thought it was mostly a justice question. It was just like there’s been a little unfairness, we’ll stop that. Or is there really nothing too big going on here? Devaney: But why weren’t those kinds of issues already addressed in departments like psychology and sociology? Miner: [01:12:24] That’s a good question. There you have Eleanor Maccoby and Carol Jacklin, who were doing research on gender questions. You had the Bems. Do you remember the Bems, Sandra and Daryl Bem? I can’t remember when they were hired. They were in psychology. There was Shelly Rosaldo, who was a rock star in anthropology, who later died. There were women who were doing things, but traditionally--this may seem a little extreme since we’re trying to avoid generalizations what we could call gender questions were not seen as important questions in most fields, or the women weren’t there at all. Or another way to look, you think if you’ve got a book in those days about the history of something, you would look and in the index there might be no women or there might be an index item called “women.” So women were like the opera. I mean, they were like a subject, but they weren’t an important subject, and they weren’t normal. It’s 114 back to that question, “Who’s normal?” It’s like when I was in medical school, literally we studied the human body, and then we studied the woman’s body. [laughter] The point was, at the time I generally believed--and I’m not so sure this is true anymore--it could be that if we really included women in especially the social sciences, that we would develop radically different theories, different understandings. Sylvia Wynter, another important name, Professor Sylvia Wynter, a black woman faculty member--I think she was in Portuguese Studies. She was very creative, and she believed that about minority issues in the social sciences, if we understood the processes that affected the fate of minorities, it would actually change the nature of theories. It wouldn’t be just like, “Now we understand how it works in Montana and yesterday we knew Illinois.” It would be different theory. But that was the problem. That was, to me, an important idea that maybe this would change the nature of the social sciences, but you had to have a way for people to get together. So there was a seminar. Myra Strober, I think, was the first head of that institute. I was involved and I went to seminars. Then in ’76, I believe--I don’t remember why these transitions occurred, but Diane Middlebrook took over and then I was asked to join Diane as the co-chair of that institute. For a few years, I was a co-chair. [01:15:08] At the time, the institute was funded by university money, some grants. In academia it’s a soft-money world, and maybe the university gave us one academic administrative staff position. That might have been. I don’t remember, but I do remember there was a woman in the Provost’s 115 Office in research administration who said, “The trouble with you people--.” [laughs] Because by then I was going in with Diane, we’d go in together about budget, and she’d say, “You just don’t get it. You don’t ask for enough money. You’re too wimpy, and you’re not--.”. This person said that, which was true, and we were not. But I was more skilled than Diane in asking. That’s why they asked me to do that, I think. Diane was an English professor, very talented, who said to me, “Anne, I’m glad we’re working on this together, but you need to remember that I see all administrators with a mixture of fear and contempt.” I found that fascinating and totally helpful, because I realized she wasn’t just talking for herself; she was talking for many faculty. So every time I talked to them, I’d think, “That’s right. There’s that funny mixture.” Devaney: What’s the fear about, that they could say no to you, and the contempt is that you were below them in rank? Miner: [01:16:40] The contempt is you’re not an intellectual. That’s basically it. But surely you’ve witnessed that. The fear is that you have secret tricks and sorcery and power that you will use to harm them. Then there were all kinds of fun fundraising experiences, and she [Diane Middlebrook] was very active in that. She would go out and do seminars, the salon series in community houses, do a session on poetry. It was like watching an institution learn how to fundraise, because it was all about how to raise money. There were efforts to get large grants, and it’s not that we didn’t know an endowment wasn’t a good idea, but it definitely never got in the game of going up to the system and having the Development 116 Office believe that this was a prospect for a $5 million or $20 million gift. I think that never happened [in that era]. It must have eventually happened. But at the time, although I do have memos from maybe the Development Office saying, “We’re having a visit today from the head of U.S. Steel, and he says he’s interested in research on women. Come to lunch.” It wasn’t as though there wasn’t effort, and it’s a mixture of our effort and where society was whether we got the money. Devaney: What do you think were the biggest achievements of the Center for Research on Women while you were there? Miner: [01:18:07] I think we made some headway on the institutionalization of the [vision of the importance of research on women]--because we did have two staffers. They hired Laraine Zappert or Marilyn Yalom at one time, so there was now not just a secretary person, but a professional researcher, who were both skilled researchers. I thin Laraine Zappert is still at the university--I do believe I looked her up--a talented research associate, so she did work. Devaney: The Center for Research on Women was actually directed by a faculty member. Now you had these two people who had PhDs who were doing research themselves. And you had administrative staff, and the university was funding some portion of this whole enterprise. This was considered an independent center. It was separate from any particular school, right? Miner: [01:19:10] Absolutely. We had on the board originally Eleanor Maccoby, James March, and those people who gave time to make that happen. James March is an influential faculty member. He was in sociology, education, 117 business, and some other place. He was a big-time guy. I think he was education at the time. Devaney: At one point I think you said you were a university fellow. Can you tell us what that University Fellows Program was? Miner: [01:19:59] The university had a major grant to, as I understood it, increase basically citizenship, especially on the faculty, to see the university as a whole and not in their own fields. That was my understanding. But it was a large amount of money, and it was, I thought, a very well designed program. They would buy out a faculty member’s time--I think it was a third of their time, a third of their teaching. It met every week when I was there, and it would meet in the President’s Office and notably included quite a few minorities and women faculty, because it was part of the idea of having women [and minority development for leadership]. The faculty developed, I would say, impact or perspective, but half the people were staff, so it was a mix. It was half faculty and half staff. Devaney: My recollection of the program is it was funded by the Ford Foundation, that each fellow--there were a total of about twelve--half faculty, half staff, the staff were chosen by the faculty, and the idea was to bring them together as colleagues and friends over dinner in non-scheduled meetings where they actually could get to know each other and they could interact between disciplines, because they didn’t want the silo effect of people just sticking to their own discipline. In fact, many really fabulous interdisciplinary programs 118 came out of that, with people talking to each other. You were an administrative fellow chosen by the faculty one of those years. Is that right? Miner: [01:21:30] I think I was chosen by the president, but I was chosen by somebody. [01:21:33] But just to underscore that, yes, that all sounds right to me, but there’s two different things. One is the chemist is talking to a biologist, there’s that issue. The other issue is that the faculty, who typically think only as a chemist and only as faculty, learn about things like tax policy or whatever, so they’re learning from the administrators a different view of the institution, particularly one that binds them to the institution of Stanford, not to the profession of being a chemist, because they didn’t want to lose faculty. I went to that program. It was very educational and fun, and they had incredible food and incredible money. But we also had a meeting at the time, and one year Herant Katchadourian from the Medical School in the Psychiatry Department, said something like, “This is getting boring to hear about tax policies. Why don’t we each give our own intellectual biography.” Every week I heard someone of those twelve people say, “Well, I grew up in Texas, and I was a small, terrible person, and then I got my chemistry set.” So you heard their journey of going from childhood to being a Stanford faculty member. I talked more about what we’ve talked about, the affirmative action issues and how I saw it, but as I listened to the faculty, I had this overwhelming sensation that until that very minute, that very half-year, I had assumed that somehow faculty had a secret sauce--it’s like this royalty thing 119 again, that they had some bloodline that made them fundamentally different from the rest of us and certainly from me. I think maybe William Massy was one of them. He came after my talk [where I put up a little diagram on how do you say what is best qualified person if there are two criteria?] [01:23:33] So he says, “Do you realize what you’ve just put up there was exactly what’s called a demand curve in economics? You’ve just kind of on your own dreamed up something that is a well-known issue.” What happened was, I thought, “Whoa. Not only am I not not like these people, I’m exactly these people,” when they would describe their inner life and how they looked at the world and how they would obsess and talk too much. Their kind of mental description of how they entered the world, which was to speculate all the time and think about things. That had a big effect on me, coupled with the next thing I’ll talk about, in terms of making me think about my own career and my role in higher education. Did I want to stay doing what I was doing or, if I couldn’t be on faculty, maybe I should think about that. If you’d asked me could I be a faculty member, up until 1972, I would have laughed. I’d said, “Who are you kidding?” Devaney: Why did you hold faculty in such high esteem? Miner: [01:24:37] The secret-sauce issue. I don’t know. When you’re a staff member, there’s this kind of deference that you’re required to do, so they must know something. I don’t think I had a clear view of it, but I just believed that was true, and I certainly knew they had the power. Devaney: You never aspired to that kind of a role before you became a university fellow? 120 Miner: [01:24:55] Not at that point. But in a similar era, we did have a research seminar at CROW, which we thought was very important--the Center for Research on Women, that I was not leading because I wasn’t a faculty member, but I did go to it because I was a co-director. I went to a wonderful research conference out at Carl Djerassi and Diane Middlebrook’s house in Portola Valley. [01:25:21] Diane Middlebrook was my co-chair, and Carl Djerassi was her significant other, who was a wealthy chemist who made money from Syntex and was a Stanford faculty member in the chemistry department. The point of this story is that in these seminars I would watch. Oddly enough, in reflection, I think Eleanor Maccoby, her name always appears in things, she’s just an interesting woman, she had some effect on me in terms of the mixture of intellectual integrity. She was incredibly careful in what she said, never said anything wrong. But she also was very angry at the sociobiologists. She said, “That’s terrible. The whole field of sociobiology is sexist.” Sociobiology was a field that was becoming popular in biology, which was profoundly sexist. I mean, it really was, and the whole field was. It wasn’t like some people in it. I had never heard anybody say something like “so that field is a mistake, and I personally am going to work with other women intellectuals to influence the future of this field in universities.” I’m sure, if she’s done an interview, she’s unbelievably polite, she’s a loving woman. She’s mentored women I knew. But she was a fierce mind in this context. 121 Watching her, watching the women talk, and the readings, then I thought not only maybe I could do this, but I see better what it means to be a social scientist. That basically was modeling social science. That had an effect on something we’ll come to next, maybe, which is why did I stop being affirmative action officer and go back to graduate school, because I did. There was a really simple conclusion, which I’m never sure I’m proud of, really. I’m sort of ashamed of it. But I remember thinking overtly something like, in the end, in a major research university--and this is actually false, but that’s how I saw it--if you’re not a member of the faculty, you will never have the intimate, ultimate ability to shape things, which is false. That is wrong now, I know, as an organizational theorist, because there were people who were not faculty who had enormous influence, way past what is even acknowledged, by changing how things are happening, writing rules, and helping people do things. At the time, I thought to myself, “I don’t want to be here if I’m not a member of the royalty. If I’m going to stay working, I have to either become a research person, a real one, or I’m going to go into some other kind of institution. Devaney: That’s really interesting, and I want to come back to that. But you basically stayed on the job. Miner: [01:28:09] Do you think this is shameful? Do you think it’s a shameful thought? Devaney: No. I think it’s completely honest, and it is your story, and it’s perfect because it explains why you left your job in June of 1978 to go back to graduate school in an entirely different field. But before we get into that, I 122 just want to kind of get a sense of the summary of what you felt were your biggest challenges, biggest successes, any kind of huge confrontations that you had, any things that made you really happy. When you look back on that six years, what stands out? Miner: [01:28:42] As I said before, oddly, the salary equity issues did, even though, they also fall on both sides of the ledger. What happened, I thought, was wonderful. On the other hand, in retrospect, it was a bare beginning, right? We probably maybe got rid of some terrible inequities, and, as everywhere else, it had to go on being re-addressed for decades, probably still now. I guess I feel sad that we were naïve and didn’t understand, but I don’t think I could have done it differently. If I had said, “Well, this really is a $20 million job, and we should hire the RAND Corporation to do this data,” I think it would not have happened. It’s not like I maybe could have changed it. Devaney: But don’t you think Stanford and you were at the same place everybody else was in society at that time, trying to figure out what the answers were? Miner: [01:29:37] Yes. A little ahead, and from the legal people’s point of view, one reason they liked doing it was, the Equal Pay Act says if you get caught legally, if you have a lawsuit and you’ve discriminated, you have to pay back pay. One advantage from their point of view to doing it voluntarily was you weren’t being forced to do it. Any lawyer would say that. In the world they lived in, there was an advantage to doing it the way we did. Because they felt that way, and they thought it was right and they thought it was smart, we did more on salary than many places. This is one where Stanford clearly did not resist. 123 Devaney: You see Stanford as having been a leader in salary equity? Miner: [01:30:24] Yes. Even though we didn’t do what I now wish we’d known how to do. It was a lot of learning, but yes. I feel good about that. Devaney: How well did Stanford do during the period that you were working in terms of increasing the numbers of women and minorities? Miner: [01:30:38] On the staff side, which I had much more direct influence over, although it’s always an indirect role, it was, you’d have to say, some progress, but not what you would hope at all. We would annually report these numbers, and one thing I discovered, which was a big shock, was how we were focused on recruiting, and we actually did recruit a lot of women and minorities in higher levels, and we definitely improved minority employment in the non-exempt areas, a lot of work on that and things like policemen. You may remember Marv Herrington. We had women and minority policemen way before most universities ever heard of doing this about policemen. Marv Herrington was fabulous on this topic. He was the chief of police, and he did things that no one was doing. Devaney: He was succeeded by a black chief of police, who then was succeeded by a Stanford graduate who was a woman, but that’s an aside. Miner: [01:31:43] Yes, but what we’re saying is “Was there headway?” There was symbolic headway, which you might put the police department in. That was very important. [01:31:50] Then there was numerical headway in a general sort. It was very good, it was right. It was not a comfortable world where you just might walk 124 into a room and staff with senior people but not be surprised to see a bunch of women and a bunch of minorities. It was still a little deviant to be either woman or minority at most senior levels--I’d have to ask you when this period was. The big flip that happened was many women who would not, in my view, have ever moved past some kind of secretary/administrative assistant or low-level staff, junior staff role, were elevated and became the men who hired them. That’s the Pat Devaney, Associate Dean of Research, and Kathy Ku who runs the Office of Technology Licensing. Previous to this era, I don’t believe she would ever become the head of Technology Licensing, but that was part of that same era, that the people who had power said, “Well, okay, I’ve got this great person.” I think Amy Blue, who became the associate vice president for facilities did come in that era. And Margaret Ann Fidler was associate dean of students. Carol Dressler was the associate director for development. [01:33:23] Out of that period, so it happened more with women who were sort of there, although they were relatively young. It wasn’t perfect. You did have people who ran the Placement Center--what was her name? [Ruth Schneider] Wonderful woman. There were other cases where the older woman who was there before didn’t get much reward, and then young bright males would come in and get more. Definitely headway was made, not large numbers, though, in terms of the management in higher levels. Devaney: But you are saying you felt good about salary equity having made some big progress. Some women got promoted from what was non-exempt clerical, 125 administrative positions into mid-management, higher-level management positions. And policy changes. What policy changes do you think were implemented during that time that actually, in retrospect, mattered a lot? Like childcare issues. Miner: [01:34:29] We didn’t get to the faculty one. Let’s do the faculty one and then we’ll do the policy. The faculty side I had less direct control over because an important thing to notice is that as with anything that is working, it pervades all parts of institutions. Whereas I had a list in 1971 of, I believed, every woman, every person--not just women--on the Stanford campus who was willing to say, “This is important. We should do something about this.” Every one. [01:34:59] It wasn’t a very long list but by this time, no one could have that list because we have hundreds and thousands of people. When you have a social movement and you succeed, then you no longer can control it, so to speak. There isn’t a little tiny cohort, because it’s now everybody. Then the diversity of the institution gets reflected in the “everybody.” Devaney: Your influence is felt in the fabric of the institution in so many ways, but you can’t necessarily pinpoint any particulars. Miner: [01:35:28] Or the movement’s, right. Then specialization starts to matter. The person like me could talk with women faculty about their problems saying we should fix the nepotism [policy]. I mean, we were all smooshed together. It didn’t matter. By the end, they had to organize and mostly as faculty, because it was their constituency. The women faculty understood the details of the 126 tenure policy. They needed to be advocates. I could come in periodically, but it becomes like it’s a medical field. At first everybody does everything, but eventually you’ve got an ear doctor that only does ears. That, too, happens. On the faculty side, I had less micro involvement, but in terms of numbers, as I look back, it looks to me like what happened--and I don’t remember being totally aware of this at the time, but it was big--(even though it was in the center reports, it was all big public and there were big fights over it, but basically there was a lot of success in the very beginning in the numbers game for women, and then it plateaued. Then there became many exchanges between how come there wasn’t a lot more progress. Or that was a big jump in the very first year or two, and then it didn’t happen. Similarly with minorities, it was pretty stable. [01:36:49] As I said the other day, that’s a great example of how you don’t always understand the system you’re in, and that’s what I do now. You have to understand. I love organizational systems and I find them interesting. This was a great example of we’re driving the car down the road, we think we know what the levers are that make things happen. Yet what we really underestimated was what you might call the demographics of affirmative action. You never get that base number up if you can’t stem people leaving, and that was true for faculty and staff. I mean, if you suppose there’s 28 percent women in a field who are candidates, and suppose they’re all equal, and you were hiring none, and then you say, “Great. Now we’re hiring 20 percent,” you’d think that would be 127 good, right? If you only have two openings a year, you could do that for twenty years and never get to 20 percent in the base. We knew about that and we were constantly educating about that, because Stanford’s very tenured. But what we didn’t know about, or what I didn’t understand, was if you’re hiring 20 percent women a year, or hiring 20 percent minorities, because this was a problem for us in minorities, even if you hired more than that, if you’re losing 15 percent every year, you never get anywhere. Devaney: You’re saying turnover had not been taken into account in affirmative action. You didn’t look at the fact they were going to leave, you just looked at incoming. Miner: [01:38:17] We didn’t really understand that, nor does the public, nor did anybody else in thinking about it, because it’s why aren’t there 20 percent people in the base, and we even practically didn’t realize that. That’s why if you ask me doing things again, I didn’t understand that until quite near the end because of something that David Hopkins did. He was with the Academic Planning Office, did a lot of work with Bienenstock, but also with me later. I would have done something different on minority hiring around that issue. We would not have lost Ruth Mogadon to Hewlett-Packard. We would have stopped that kind of thing, because that killed us. We never got the critical mass because we lost people. She was a Chicano woman in the Personnel Office who was [very] competent. We became like the supplier to 128 the local companies. We would hire people and then they [local companies] would come recruit them away. Devaney: You could say in broader social terms that’s good for society, not to just have them at Stanford but to have them, in fact, in all different employers. Miner: [01:39:19] Yes, it was. True. But it hurt the-Devaney: It hurt your numbers. Miner: [01:39:26] It hurt more than that, we really keep talking about the numbers, but the numbers are not the deepest issue and it doesn’t even help to fix the numbers if you don’t get the culture changed broader, and that’s why diversity is a better way to look at it. If you say, are we just trying to stop being bad people and having bad jobs for women and minorities, then that’s one thing. Or you say, no, we really believe it’s a better institution if we have these different groups who are part of the “in” group. So we couldn’t get that part of the “in” group done at that time, in my opinion. Devaney: Do you think it’s happened since? Miner: [01:40:03] I don’t know the culture at Stanford, but it looks from the outside like much more--even what you just told me, the police chief, coaches, and so on. But you’d have to actually look at who’s running the Accounting Office, and all that. It’s a whole different issue. But the thing I’m saying now, if I’d understood that then, I would have made it a policy issue. I would have gone to the vice president and said, “If we want to get what we want, which is the actual change for us, it’s one thing we want, we’re going to have to do something about retention.” That did nationally become understood about 129 women, but a long time afterward. We were on the question of what would I do different or how did it work. Devaney: Do you have any further reflections on the job you did or on what happened on Stanford while you were there, not just the job you did? Miner: [01:40:56] You and I have discussed the question of reversibility or not. I do believe that that period, ’71, ’72 through when I left, was a sea change. It was connected to a lot of other things in people’s minds, and I was part of that. I guess I’ll end with this. Part of what I did had nothing to do with me, or even when I did, I could have sat in my office, locked the door, and it would have had a certain amount of effect. There was a symbolic impact to Stanford giving legitimacy to all of these issues and to my going places, going to alumni groups and giving talks about this, that was part of the water on the stone of changing the whole culture. I think it worked. It didn’t penetrate the most inner core of society, obviously, because it still hasn’t, but it clearly did change Stanford’s culture in ways that were somewhat irreversible in general. The problem is for every one like that, there was a guy putting up a poster in the steam plant of a naked woman. This is all going on at the same time, right? [laughs] [01:42:10] You needed it. Lyman had a wonderful remark he made about that. I’d have to think, but the basic implication was it’s well and good to intend well and have many things in place, but it’s more like carpentry or hard work and it takes endless attention to detail and it will go on. That’s how I saw it. So, yes, I thought we made some great progress, and I was happy to be part of it. 130 Devaney: You left in June of 1978, and you said a little bit earlier about one of your motivations to go to graduate school, which you did at that time. You went back to graduate school to get your PhD, this time not in medicine but in business at Stanford. Was that experience as a university fellow instrumental in that decision? Miner: [01:43:02] Absolutely. Along with being part of the CROW seminar, it was. But the interesting thing is, to me, when you ask the question on the reason when I went to study, it was how do organizations work? The reason I studied was that as I’m watching all this go on, I realize the problems, many of the issues to do affirmative action for minorities and women weren’t really [only] about minorities and women. Some are, but more it was about “How does any organization like Stanford change?” period. I thought to myself, “They must know the answer to that.” Somebody who’s an academic. [laughter] I’m a little bit making fun of myself, but it’s not totally false, right? I said, “I’m going to go and learn. There must be a theory about [organizational] change in general,” which, of course, there is. There are hundreds of them. But I thought I should learn that. Where do they have that? In sociology, political science, and sort of psychology. I knew I wanted organizations, and I knew James March of the faculty, and I knew, I think, Dick Scott in sociology, for reasons I can’t recall. We ran seminars at the time on women. But so I said, “I need to be a social scientist where they study organizations.” I might have done sociology, but Dick Scott, the sociologist, said, “Don’t do sociology because there’s no jobs.” Where there will be jobs is 131 another demography question, right, in universities? “Where there will be jobs is business schools. If you got a PhD in business, you’ll get a job right away, and that will not be a problem.” So I did that, but I also did it because I knew in business I would have to take math and economics in ways where I could no longer be seen -- or actually be -- kind of a “hot-tub touchy-feely” woman who could do wonderful verbal things but couldn’t do the math. I knew as an academic that I wanted to be as powerful and credible as could be, and then I had to do the math. The business school allowed me to do all that, and it was a great program. Devaney: You eventually had a child and separated from your husband. How did it feel to become a student again, and a single mother? Miner: [01:45:29] It was exciting, it was eye-opening. I remember standing in line as a student and thinking, “Why is this happening to me?” That I didn’t know anything. Because I was working in employment all this time, I didn’t know anything about how graduate aid worked, and I would have all these struggles with how to survive as a student. I remember being in the graduate student lounge in the basement, and it was about 150 yards from my previous office in the business school, sitting down there having tea with these other business school students, and I’m not more than a football field away from my office, and they would be talking about something, and I’d go, “Did you notice that Encina Hall got a new roof? “ [The other students would say: “What a stupid roof,” or, “They don’t know what to do with that roof.” I would then say something like, “No, 132 actually, the roof policy is--,” [and fill in specifics about that policy]. [laughter] There were two things that happened. One is they’d go right on talking, and I would say, “No, you don’t understand. I actually am an important person, and I know things about the roof policy.” It was very illuminating, too, in that I realized some of what I was used to in the world at that time came from having a title called “assistant to the president.” When I walked in a room, if I said that about the roof to some unknown administrator that didn’t know anything about me, they would sort of say, “I don’t know. Maybe this person [Anne Miner] knows that. They’re from the President’s Office.” But in this context, I was an old woman. [01:47:04] I was thirty-eight. I was old. They don’t admit people--these are all twenty-three-year-old ex-physicists, and these are like little twentythree-year-old Scandinavian white male mathematicians. Devaney: How many women were in your first-year class? Miner: [01:47:19] Maybe two. That wasn’t too bad. We were sort of deviant, but they were determined that not be an issue. We only had four people in a cohort in our specific department. It’s a different world. It’s a tiny individual world. Devaney: No, I mean, in the total first year PhD program, how many were there? Miner: [01:47:39] In the management group, I say two or three, but in the total group maybe fifteen, smaller. There might have been four women. There were more in my group but it wasn’t too many spots. There were all kinds of illuminating things. 133 The mother part [of the experience] was probably more coherent in terms of what we’ve been talking about, because I had a child during my dissertation process. I’m trying to think when it was. I defended my dissertation proposal when I was eight months pregnant. It’s one of these things where if [I’d really] known anything about the world, I [might] never have done any of this. I knew nothing. I didn’t realize how crazy that was. That wasn’t really done, and I did it wearing this stupid gray top. [laughs] [01:48:31] And I remember the pants, and I remember there were forty people there [at the proposal defense]. I don’t know why we were doing that kind of defense, but I’m up there presenting my study and all this stuff. In retrospect, I would have to say it was a very welcoming environment, and the women staff treated me differently once I was pregnant. They would say, “Anne, come on in my office.” I’d say, “What is that?” I thought maybe they’d help me with my financial aid. They said, “No. I want to talk to you about breastfeeding.” [laughter] Shoot. Nobody ever did that in my whole life. It was very supportive in that sense. But what was harder, or sobering in a way, was the childcare issue, in that now I’m living in Escondido Village [separated from my husband] and, especially, I’m working on my dissertation six days a week. Six days a week and probably five nights a week I’m working on it. My child is in the Stanford Infant Center and, of course, I’m [helping] raise money [for the center], and I can’t not continue as an administrator, so I’m consulting with 134 the Center and raising money for the Center and facilitating retreats and stuff. Devaney: You’re just doing that because you can’t let go of being part of the Stanford administration? [laughs] You were more powerful in that position. You’re now back to being just a mere graduate student. Miner: [01:49:56] I’m used to that. I think that was a large part of it. It was way easier to write the [fundraising] pamphlet than to work on something on my dissertation where I was a complete infant. That’s the whole point of the dissertation is to force you to this ultimate pathway of independent original research, so it had to be mine. I mean, there’s no way you can get help. Then I remember looking back and thinking about what was Anne Miner doing, because the old Anne Miner thought she did a lot about childcare but they were so modest, relative to the actual impact of childcare on lives and people, that I felt I didn’t really understand it [childcare] at all when I was promoting it [in the years before]. It was an abstract thing for me [before]. Now it was my whole life. Everything that mattered to me depended on the quality. I had to know that my child was safe. For me it was also learning. I didn’t have a lot of grandparents, so I was learning how do you take care of a baby, for heaven’s sake. I remember just musing about how innocent I had been before, and I didn’t do anything wrong before, but I didn’t understand really how profound it was, and I became more of an advocate, probably for its importance to people being able to do both. There was another woman who had a child the same age, and we basically shared parenting. We both took care of two babies all the time, 135 because we were both doctoral students doing that. That was sort of seeing the same issue from another viewpoint. It made Stanford look good that we had the Infant Center and we had the Childcare Center. Devaney: You had actually put those things in place, and now you’re able to take advantage of them. How was the business school different from the medical school? I know there were many years’ difference between your experiences. What was the difference in the cultures? Miner: [01:51:59] That’s a great question. In some ways, not too different, very harddriving, smart, aggressive, ambitious people. I probably shouldn’t say, but I think as a person, as a student, each case, it’s the same issue. There were always men and women who had empathy. They weren’t just sort of generally for it, they actually understood. [In the Medical School world] there was a guy named Rudy Moos, who I worked for in the medical school [at the Veteran’s Administration building], who was doing work on twins with arthritis. And then Herb--I’m going to get them mixed up. Herb Leiderman, he was a psychiatrist doing infant research. They were wonderful people, and they were creative. They were supportive, so I was involved in psychiatry, and they were helpful. One guy [Joe Hanlon] tried to get me to go with him when he went to another institution to study organizations and stuff like that, and the same in the business school. There was also then an undercurrent of what we talked about before, that it was still primarily men, and in the Stanford business school there were still things, and this was hard. Like in the set theory class, very hard class, very math-oriented class, the guy would talk about women, numbers as 136 women. He’d say then the number she or something. It was very sexist. It was like it had something to do with genitalia. I would get stuck in this setting, thinking, “Now, if I had my affirmative action hat on, I would do something here, because this is ridiculous,” but nobody was paying me to do that, right, and I was worried about looking too outspoken. Sometimes I didn’t do anything, so I just let it go by. Sometimes I did [speak up]. Devaney: It didn’t matter that you had been Stanford’s first full-time affirmative action officer. You’re now a student, and you, in fact, were trying to minimize that role or at least not try to exploit it, because they didn’t care? Miner: [01:54:19] No, it’s more like it was still an era where there was mixed feelings. Some very sympathetic men who often were married to professional women who were for it. But there were other men who were still worried, and people who saw you as being too aggressive if you raised that problem, if you brought it up, went out of your way, they said. This is still a problem now, I think--”Just have a sense of humor. What’s the matter with you? This is just some dumb guy in a class that didn’t matter, so why are you so bent out of shape?” As people do now, I had to just walk a line and be careful about when I did or didn’t bring it up, and that was a surprise to me. Generally, they were like society. They were everything that had everything, some supportive, some not, and there were women when I was there. Devaney: What was the subject matter? What was the title of your dissertation? Miner: [01:55:16] My dissertation was called “The Strategy of Serendipity,” which is the strategy we’ve talked about a lot in terms of making change. A lot of the things we did were opportunistic, you know. The Committee on Women was 137 because the Student Union president happened to be on the committee so we could write this thing. That happens, and that was actually a style that I believed in, that you can’t do everything. It actually was a dissertation about creating jobs around people, idiosyncratic jobs. So the job was never there before, but there was Pat Devaney, and she had these talents, and we said, “Well, let’s just make up a job, which is what she does,” which, of course, I saw all the time, a big problem in affirmative action. [laughs] It’s how you handle that. I wrote a dissertation on that. I wrote it, but the final point I need to make is it really wasn’t a change in direction at all. It was more like I’m now permitted, encouraged to think about, without having to fix them, how these change processes are working or how process is going in terms of hiring people in organizations. [The] dissertation basic argument was something like [this]: organizations face all kinds of uncertainties that they actually cannot plan for. There’s a limit to what you can plan for. And one thing they do is they’re opportunistic in job creation. There never was a job position. Now, you can read the entire sociology literature, I’m not kidding you, at that time, and most management literature, and you would conclude if you were from Mars that all jobs were imagined in principle and then someone went out to find the person to put in that job. Really. Then there’s like this sort of secret. People laugh if you say, “Yes, but my mother, you know, in her case, they made up a job for her.” Everybody snickers, because it defies some icon we have, but everyone knows at some other level, don’t they? That let me write something that had an effect on the 138 sociology literature, because it said the whole literature is missing this piece that everybody knows, but it’s not in the scholarly work. Then theoretically my argument was that this may be a bad thing, but often it’s used as a way to adapt. For example, our Stanford computer support group. Because I did the research at Stanford, the computer guy would say, “If people can’t make up their own next job, then we don’t want them.” They had a system, which [was] “this [a] complicated world, too many things to do, so we expect the person to be able to figure out what is the most important problem, and then they propose that as a job.” My dissertation, basically, took that simple idea and said okay it’s a way of adaptation to uncertainty and ambiguity and so forth and power. That was the dissertation. Devaney: It was significant. It had an impact in the whole field. Miner: [01:58:17] [laughs] Less than it might have, because I didn’t follow up with further research on that so it might have had more, but it was published in the top sociology journal in the country, one paper like that, and one was published in the top management journal in the country. In that sense it did. Devaney: What year did you get your PhD? Miner: [01:58:40] Eighty-five. Then I went on the job market to get a job. We should mention one other thing here. The other thing I did as part of getting the PhD is I had watched some faculty and I said, “That’s the way. That’s the kind of thinking I want to do.” I talked to them. I said, “If I do this, will you be my dissertation adviser?” That was James March. Devaney: If I do this project? 139 Miner: [01:59:09] Get a PhD. No, if I go and become a doctoral student, because I didn’t want to be bad at this, and you could see that. The other was Richard Scott in the sociology department. They both said yes, and they both were on my committee. I had an idea of not just particular theories, but a way of being in the world. They were both people who did not teach about organizations as though they are a simple machine where you just have one person in charge and they design it and it happens, because all that interested me was the fact that’s not how it works, that it emerges in these very amazing ways, and that’s what I want to understand. Devaney: Hi. This is Pat Devaney interviewing Anne Miner. It’s the third session of our interview as part of Stanford’s Oral History Program. Today’s date is June 28, and we’re sitting in my kitchen today. Anne, in our previous two interview sessions, we talked about your education at Stanford and your work as an affirmative action officer and then your graduate training at the Stanford business school and your PhD. You left Stanford what year after you finished your PhD? And then where did you go? Miner: [00:00:34] I left in 1985 and went to University of Wisconsin, Madison. I started as an assistant professor at age forty-something, three or four. So that was an oddity too. I was very old compared to most assistant professors. Devaney: That’s interesting. How did that feel? Miner: [00:00:57] It felt fine, but you could tell the system was not set up for that. We haven’t talked about that, but that was another oddity in my career, very old to start as an assistant professor. Devaney: In your previous jobs at Stanford, you’d been senior staff, and now you’re going back as a forty-three-year-old as an assistant professor. How many 141 other women were on the faculty of the business school at that time in Wisconsin? Miner: [00:01:28] On the faculty of the business school at the University of Wisconsin, about seventy or eighty Academic Council tenure-track people, roughly, and there was one woman who’d been hired about two years before me. There had been a woman in the 1940s, but in terms of the modern era, there was one before me. Devaney: Do you think it actually helped to be a little bit older then, coming in as a junior faculty member? Miner: [00:01:50] It helped me survive, yes. We’ll get to this more, but all of my knowledge and theory about how this all worked was extremely helpful because it made sense of things that otherwise didn’t make sense. [00:02:14] But in general, it probably was not a big deal one way or the other, but it was definitely a period where it was different to be a woman. We’ll talk some more about that. Devaney: Did it feel any different being a woman in a predominantly male field as a faculty member than it did being a woman staff member in a predominantly male field? I mean, was the difference between faculty and staff? Miner: [00:02:35] That’s a really good question. I remember thinking that it was. The principal thing, to get this concrete, was that by the time I left Stanford, I was surrounded and I functioned in groups where they weren’t all men. I mean, I did know Myra Strober. I did know many women faculty and women students at Stanford. Also even the President’s Office culture by that time had worked through a lot of the little micro issues about, what is it, should 142 you tell a sexist joke at a staff meeting? The answer is no. But at Wisconsin, Wisconsin was a school that had been actually quite a bit ahead of some things at Stanford. They actually helped write the guidelines for women in higher education. They were very active, a lot of protests. As an institution, University of Wisconsin, Madison is a very progressive and radical place, so they had done a lot of things at the same time. But that doesn’t mean all parts of the institutions were on the cutting edge. The business school in particular, was like walking back twenty years. So many things that happened there when I’m arriving as a new assistant woman professor, they were exactly the same things that had come up in 1969 at Stanford. But they hadn’t happened there yet, so it was the first wave thing. I was the first wave, so then you get all these questions like, “Should I open the door for you or not?” More to the question you actually asked, I remember many things, almost laughing and thinking all that time I was studying faculty processes and cultures, and I would write about them and say, “Well, you can’t do this because the faculty department chairman doesn’t have that kind of power.” I mean, I knew these things in my mind, sort of like the daycare thing, but when I was actually in it, I would go home and laugh and think, “This is way more a different world than I ever really understood.” Especially the things like authority, that in a sense it’s like there’s somebody in charge. We had twelve people in our immediate department, in the Management Department at Wisconsin. You’d go to a meeting and grasp what the many features of the whole [faculty] world are because it’s not the same kind of formal authority 143 coming down from the top. It’s constant, the more political thing. And it’s both collegial and hierarchical. It looks like a hierarchy, but the actual power is more collegial. The upside of that is it’s wonderful if you believe in that, and it’s good, because everybody has to agree before you go forward. But the downside is that there are political problems that never get resolved, because no one could come in and say, “Stop it, children.” It’s not there. Things like that I had to really grasp how different it was, that it’s a very social process and very deliberative and things go on forever and ever. It was different. Devaney: Do you think that depends on the discipline? Miner: [00:05:40] Not too much, because, as I didn’t talk about before, but I remember giving a seminar at SLAC, the Stanford Linear Accelerator, here, and they were all scientists there, the whole seminar. This was when I was new to my Stanford job, and I just went home and sort of fell over because I couldn’t believe the degree of argumentative stuff. [laughs] Everybody challenged everything. Everybody was unbelievably rude, from my point of view. But I could see that had nothing to do with affirmative action anyway. It was just how they did things. How they interacted. That tone of challenge everything, question everything was something that I think pervades all academia, and should, but it’s different than the normal life. Devaney: What influence do you think that your years at Stanford in affirmative action had on your later career as a professor? Miner: [00:06:33] What it did was it was like there were many things I understood that were very helpful, like how these processes work, so in that sense it was good because it was like a preview. I was thinking about, what was the 144 situation, say, in the business school at that time, and it was like there were three different things going on. One was there were some people, as I said before, where it was back to the consciousness-raising era we talked about before--1969, 1970--where there were really questions about “should you open the door.” Or, for example, there was the other woman. I did talk about what is the climate like and what’s the story here about hiring, because there’s still a question how to encourage more hiring of women. We were back to that topic. I remember we were sitting in a little conference room having tea one day, and the door was open, and a perfectly nice friend of both of us walks by, sees the two of us talking, and says, “What are you two plotting? What are you plotting?” Because it was so weird, from his point of view, to have these two women, that if they were talking together--. We didn’t even have a sign up saying “Women’s Forum” or anything. We were just talking. We were probably talking about parking or something. But his immediate reaction was it was part of the bra burning, that we had to have some grievance, which we didn’t have.. All those things were just like the same type. By then, of course, we would laugh about that, both of us. We didn’t worry about it because we’d seen that before a hundred times, and that’s all going on. That was helpful to have been through that. There were also some surprising residual instances of what is clearly bad behavior and shouldn’t be tolerated. For example, in my own area, there was a very senior person who was very good, very important. He was really 145 important. A man who was an important coach for many people, and he presented this kind of puzzle where, on the one hand, he had on his desk where he met with students--I mean, it’s not like just the younger faculty had to deal with this--copulating pigs, a little statue. A little tiny statue of two pigs having sexual intercourse. Every time you went to see him about your progression analysis, you’re looking at the copulating pigs. [Devaney laughs.] But that’s not so bad for us, right? I mean, I was a grown woman, but I’m thinking in my head, I’m thinking somehow we also have-Devaney: It would be very off-putting for young students. Miner: [00:09:16] For undergraduate majors, this is ridiculous. He also had a poster that was similarly a joke, but it was clearly sexual. Devaney: Let’s just stop for a second and mention the fact that at the University of Wisconsin business school, you teach undergraduates as well as graduate students. Miner: [00:09:33] We do. Good point. Our largest program has hundreds and hundreds, maybe a thousand undergraduate students. We were more like Humanities and Sciences in that sense, a very big part of the undergraduate [curriculum]. There was that kind of thing going on, but at the same time, that same man had recruited more women graduate students into our field. It was this bizarre combination of sexist nonsense, but he actually was very good at mentoring women. One of his students later became, for example, the editor of the top journal in my field. You had to deal with it. But the good thing is the Stanford experience did help me have a framing for all that, to not take it too seriously, and to be able to focus or try 146 to focus on what does it have to do with my scholarly development, and to only interact or to deal with it without attempting to change the whole institution. But I would say that the final thing, the most common, were those two things. One was kind of everybody, including women, not knowing how should this be working. And there were [also a] few actual bad behaviors that should have been censored, and actually in that case he was. Eventually the dean of the school did not give him an award that he hoped to get because of that behavior. In a sense, the system worked. I didn’t fix all that. The dominant thing was, what I would say, everybody trying to learn “what did this mean to have women?” So that was the approach we took, and as it went on, more women were hired. We did repeat many of the things at Stanford, and I did use my experience. We had a faculty women’s group that met and talked about this question. There were really still, back to these family questions. A related one is sick children, sick family members, right, what is that about that? Devaney: What do you mean about that, you mean what kind of leave policy issue would there be? Miner: [00:11:31] Things like childcare. I did have that [the question of childcare and child health] in my family, but also other people did, and often, again, this could be a man who says, “My child has neurological something, so I want to get an extension of my tenure clock.” But it’s more often women. I saw that part, and when I was there, that was worked out, so it’s like the organization was learning. 147 My friend, who was a dean in another school, said to me, the old system was that it was an old-boys’ club in a way, but it was more based on scientific merit. But still they would say, “Well, Bob has a sick child, so we’ll find a way to send him off to somewhere else so he’s got a little more time to accrue publications, and that’ll help him get a record that’s tenure-able.” The tenure process, just to remind ourselves of that, is one that at most places is six years, and if you look at it as a game, you have six years to score some number of goals. In my field, it’s probably five goals. You have to have five A-journal publications--highest-level journal publications of different schools. But that would be similar to Stanford’s, not exactly the same. The point was that during that time, several cases came up and the school finally got, with pressure from the university, to say, “ Okay, really, that should be everyone’s right, that if you have that kind of demand on your time, then we should give you this extra time on the clock.” That did occur in my case. [It also] occurred in [the case of] a woman who had children. She got divorced, but the result was her children had psychiatric care and she was going every day to take these children to the psychiatrist. We wrote [a letter to the higher level body that approved tenure clock issues] and said that’s like a physical disability, you should extend her clock by six months, a year, and we did. Devaney: In other words, when you say “extend the clock,” what you mean is you’re extending the time before they get judged on their tenure position. At Wisconsin you said it’s six years. I think it’s seven at Stanford. 148 Miner: [00:13:47] You could look that up, but I believe that six years is the national. The national standard, as I understand it, which is set by the AAUP, the American Association of University Professors, is that you have seven years before you have to go, but the rule is you have to get the decision in six years, because the norm is you got the seventh year to look for a job. So you’re right. But the point is that there’s something going on if you’re competing. Suppose you had a car accident and you were in a coma for a year. You’d think that shouldn’t count on your clock, so to speak. This was codifying and getting a clearer picture, which had a very big effect on women, because women often did have more responsibility for sick children, sick family. I think that [policy shift from informal accommodation to formal extensions] was healthy, and, as I say, those sorts of things were going on. I was sometimes involved in them. But the main things happening were a lot of people were vaguely sympathetic trying to work through what does this mean, and in most cases it came out for the better. For me personally, those same things meant that by the time after I had tenure, [more things were worked out] (with tenure you can no longer be fired except for moral turpitude and felonies--just causes, but they have to be pretty big causes). By then, the school had come to having more women through more junior faculty, and then I was more in the mentoring role for women faculty. By the mid period, we vote for the members of the senior group in the school who makes sort of final recommendations on promotion to tenure, 149 which is the biggest issue in terms of running the school, because that determines who’s there forever. I was voted on that every time, and as many years as you could be on it, I was on it, because by then the whole school had not only accepted women but they saw me as a role model, and the other woman too. We were not only okay, we were in the central group. That was over a period of six or seven years, that transformation. By then, it was whatever state that is, it was definitely different from when I got there. Devaney: Would you talk a little bit about what your areas of teaching and research were? Miner: [00:16:04] Sure. I’m in the management department, called Management and Human Resources, and that includes theories about how individuals work in organizations, how small groups work in organizations, how whole organizations change and work and do things and then how industries or regions might change. There’s all those levels, and in that world I picked the organizational level or above. I’m called a macro researcher. I was convinced, because of the Stanford experience, that intuitively, the account people normally give about why something happens, for most of us, is [that] an [individual] person did it. Back when I was here [doing affirmative action] in the Stanford Hospital, they would hire a new director and the accounts of why there’d be problems in a hospital would be the director had screwed up or was good or whatever. But when I was affirmative action officer at Stanford, I’m watching at Stanford, it was very clear to me that some things had nothing to do with the individual, that we would just keep hiring new 150 hospital directors because it was a structural problem. There was an impossible design in what they were supposed to do, from my point of view. Devaney: So your research could differentiate between the person and the structure. Miner: [00:17:26] My research was about the structure, and it’s part of a whole field that looks at things that way, like a system. That was completely influenced by my affirmative action days. I thought that’s a hidden engine, a hidden lever why things happen, including gender patterns, right, and that we need to understand those structural things if we’re going to, in general, change them if you want to. That’s why I picked that level. If I was in the gender minority world, if you asked me to give a talk about that, I would talk about institutional discrimination, and that is things like childcare leave or the tenure clock. Those are all unintended--well, who knows what they meant to do. But they have the impact of one group. That’s why I studied macro theory. Then within that, there are many different theories. One set is about rational planning. The next set of theories have to do with organizations as political systems, like they’re not ever going to agree on one goal, so it’s all about understanding political processes. Another set is about symbols. It’s all about symbolic management, which is like if you were a person who said actually affirmative action is adopted by companies, not because they mean to do anything about this, but because symbolically they need to look like they care, that would be a symbolic theory of why they did that. They just did it to look like something, but it’s disconnected from what they’re really doing. 151 You need to think about that, and all of those things were revealed to me as I was the affirmative action officer. The last group of theories, which are the ones I committed to and I’m still committed to, is what you call emergent, or theories where sensible people are going along doing sensible things, but it all adds up to some pattern that nobody really had in mind, because nobody designed that pattern. That was the group I wanted to commit to, and that was totally coming from watching how Stanford worked. It’s like it’s a big system, it’s evolving, it’s like an evolutionary system, like a biological system. For a while I used that metaphor to talk about it. But in the end, I think of it as learning, so I study organizational learning, because the organizations try things, and then, that didn’t come out, never comes out. Devaney: You’ve been at Wisconsin now on the faculty almost thirty years, and you’ve become a Most Distinguished Professor with an endowed chair and many honors and distinctions. What do you think are your greatest contributions to your field? Miner: [00:20:07] I think it’s true in maybe more the social sciences. I’m not so sure about the humanities. But it does seem in some of the physical sciences, so to speak, you can say that you were the first person who discovered stem cells, and that’s really it, and that’s unambiguous. That’s harder to do in the social sciences. Not impossible; harder. In a way, it’s sort of like being a composer, you have to wait till twenty years from now to know what really mattered, because you don’t really know of the many things you did which will have what we call a path-dependent effect, 152 that it happened and then it spawned many other things. What I’m known for is organizational learning, and I have gotten an award for contributing to that, especially in technology-related things. Devaney: What do you see as your greatest contribution to your field? Miner: [00:21:15] The ones that I’ve done so far that other people would say, I think, is that when we study organizational learning, for the most part, most of the models were assuming the main thing was the way organizations learn is they look at what worked and then they do that again, that sort of thing. What I said was sometimes it doesn’t work, and they learn from that or they could and they don’t know. I have a whole body of work about learning from organizational failure, learning from watching others. You remember about benchmarking, where you’d go out and look at other places, what are they doing, to learn from that? They would go out and do that. They would go for best practices. My research is you don’t want to do that, because usually they would just go sample some very successful place, and you can learn something from that, but you may not learn the right things. Maybe it’s not the same as you. Devaney: Why wouldn’t studying best practices be useful? Miner: [00:22:11] Because usually people go to the most successful firms to do that. Devaney: Don’t they have the best practices? Miner: [00:22:15] Not necessarily. That’s what we know from many things. Many places that are successful are doing things that are really stupid and bad, so your problem is you need to tell which ones are which. If you really want to study other ones, you need to go look at both. It’s the same idea as an 153 experiment. You need to look at some schools that failed, then you see what are the things that are successful, did the failure and didn’t. But if you say, “I’m just going to look at Stanford and Northwestern,” which is what most schools do, they’re doomed. They’re doomed because if Stanford was assassinating the children, they would do that, too. Devaney: They’re attributing causal effects where they aren’t appropriate. Miner: [00:22:52] Where it’s not, that is right. Learning from failure is one, but the other one that I do that I suspect will be probably what I’ll be seen as contributing if I could finish what I’m doing now, is that most of our theories--whatever they are, political, all that stuff--are assuming that it’s intentional and in some sense you make up your mind in advance about what you’re going to do. It’s a choice model that says you think about what you want to do, then you do something. Devaney: You’re talking about professional behavior? Miner: [00:23:30] I’m talking about even the whole organization. In some sense, you have a plan or some dream or incentive. In the entire economic model, incentives drive everything. But it’s clearly not always the case, and sometimes people are doing things to follow rules. The other special case that I study is improvisation. My main thing is in organizational improvisation, and on purpose I tried to publish a paper in a major journal, because it’s just like the women’s thing. Initially, it was very marginal. Organizational improvisation sounds kind of like something a hot tub in California that only-Devaney: It’s sort of where you’re making it up as you go along? 154 Miner: [00:24:10] That’s right. But of course, when I was doing affirmative action, we were improvising a lot, but it was not legitimate. As the president of Coca-Cola, if the press asked you, “What are your strategic plans,” you couldn’t say, “We don’t do that anymore. We’re going to improvise as we go along.” You’d be fired, because it’s against an ideology that we have. But we all do it. It’s sort of like my dissertation. It’s something everybody knows about, but we don’t have any good theory, we don’t articulate it. That one, I suspect, if I can finish a couple more papers, will be the biggest impact I have. I hope to bring that in. It’s not that no one else agrees. Lots of people agree. Very few in the most influential journals do, [however] so that’s what I hope. Devaney: What influence do you think that women have made to the field of business, business training, business schools? Miner: [00:25:23] I just now have been talking about my research, which is slightly different from what I teach, which is a hidden aspect of business schools, I think. Faculty not in business schools usually assume what we’re teaching is how you would sell toothpaste to somebody. We have not done a good job of clarifying what social science in business schools is about, that it’s hard. It’s partly, I think, because there’s some distinction between what we teach and what are the research issues, like the research issues I’ve just spoken about. The research is more complex in business schools than what you can teach, because we’re teaching foundational issues. Take the improvisation. It’s a good example. In entrepreneurship, what has been taught in business schools is you should plan ahead--mostly the worst thing you do is don’t plan 155 at all. “Oh, my mother would like to buy one of these, so there must be a big market.” We say, “No, plan for the market.” This is something where I actually don’t know if I’ll be able to influence this, but I worked in that area, and then we found that our students who had been trained in entrepreneurship, so to speak, writing business plans and so on, would go out and start a company. [laughs] This isn’t funny. Then they would fall apart because, of course, nothing in the plan ever worked that way. Never worked that way. They had mistaken our emphasis on the importance of planning to mean that if you plan, nothing will go wrong, which is crazy. I think in that sense, we were almost--not irresponsible, but correct education of entrepreneurship students would include content about what they now call pivoting, how do you pivot, how do you improvise, because that’s something we could add. Devaney: Do you think that that’s a contribution that has been made primarily by women to the field? Miner: [00:27:24] No. You were talking about how teaching was different from research. My point is we don’t teach anything about improvisation now. I do a little bit. In my teaching activities, I’d still emphasize these unintended outcomes, and I felt that was a contribution to both men and women. Devaney: But if you look more broadly at the influence of women in business school training, do you think that there has been--? Miner: [00:27:59] It’s a very different question. Perfect point. I am a woman, though, so whatever I did counts as part of the influence. 156 I think the answer is yes, and there are two types. I have a colleague now, a young woman we just tenured, I’m very happy to say. She does research on sex discrimination in the workplace, and she’s not the only person. Men do research on that, too. It’s a field that has both men and women. She’s an ethnic minority, which is even more unusual. That is really unusual in a business school still. She brings to this perspective both the minority and the women’s agenda, and she’s fearless and relentless in the care in her research so you would never think that any result of hers was designed out of her own ideology. She’s very careful. But she’s there, slowly chipping away at understanding what’s going on in the workplace. Things like this phenomenon we know about in the group that many women report, but it’s anecdotal. They say, “I’m in this group, and there’s men. Then I say, ‘How about if we painted the room red? That’d be an idea.’ Then the meeting goes on and then Ralph says, ‘How about if we painted the room red?’ And the chair says, ‘What a great idea, Ralph.’” [laughs] Devaney: Does that still happen? Miner: [00:29:33] Yes. But she studies when it happens and why it happens and how much it happens and what are the conditions. It’s wonderful to see, because in a way, we’re finally getting hard evidence about what are these micro processes that influence things. It’s not only in business schools. I’m saying that doesn’t take women to do that. One of my colleagues is a man, and he studies unconscious bias, and they have hard evidence about stereotypes. Devaney: Are you saying that women are only bringing issues to bear on women’s issues? 157 Miner: [00:30:10] No, I’m not saying that. That’s one thing. No, that’s my first point. My first point was one type of research is like that. The points is that women increase the chances of that. Many women did more work on sexual harassment, but men do that work too. Separate from that is the biggest issue, which is the most fundamental issue in a hundred-year context, which is do women in any other way, do they change the nature of the general knowledge. You could still see that specifically. [00:30:37] And do they? That experiment is not clear. I think so, because women are socialized in certain ways and more inclined probably to do certain sorts of ethical things. We have some women doing work in marketing on the importance of touch. I do think that that will happen. But I don’t think we could assert that as a fact yet. Devaney: Do you think if there were more women than men teaching history, the history books would all be filled about military accomplishments with nothing about society? I’m talking about women in academia in general. The impact of women. Miner: [00:31:21] I felt that. Let’s go back. What is a field? A field can be the phenomenon, like war versus child-raising, or it can be history, which is where we’re going to take the past and we’re going to use certain methods versus economics is we’re going to talk about theories of economic activity. To the degree the fields are by phenomenon, then having women influence it is because of that. Because everybody studies what they care about. That’s basically it. 158 [00:32:02] That argument is a crucial argument about the importance of diversity in general. It’s also why you want a black American or Spanish surname or Native American. I do believe that’s true. On the other hand, I don’t think it’s enough. I mean, I think the bigger question is whether the diversity has value in addition to that. There are two values. One is you extend the phenomena that are being studied. The other is, but what about the whole approach we’re taking? What about the deep assumptions that we’re making about society? That one is a bigger one, and I think it will make an effect to have diverse people, but that we have some evidence to go on that. Devaney: Let’s spend a little bit of time on some numbers here. In January of 1971, according to your data, women represented 5 percent of Stanford’s faculty. Today, forty-three years later, women at Stanford in those same faculty ranks represent 25 percent of all the faculty. Among the faculty in 1971, only 2 percent of full professors were women. Today, 20 percent of the full professors are women. In 1971, women represented 8 percent of Stanford’s assistant professors, and today women constitute 35 percent of all assistant professors. One thing that struck me when we compared these data was the much higher proportion of women faculty at Stanford now in the assistant professor level than forty years ago. Do you think this trend is happening at other universities as well? Miner: [00:33:41] Yes, I think this huge movement that we described has been slowly diffusing across the whole society and continues to. 159 Devaney: Does this suggest that the pipeline of available women may be getting wider and that we should expect to see continuing increases in women faculty? Miner: Yes. If you want to get concrete, if you look back at the Stanford data in the first report, as I remember, the number of women faculty in the law school and the medical school, let’s say, was zero. Zero. [00:34:20] Both of those fields have even tipped, I would say. Maybe not tipped totally. They have in terms of their students but not faculty. But they’re serious, and it’s like it’s not half, but it’s a nontrivial presence. Devaney: Yes. In fact, in 1971 the only schools at Stanford that had women faculty were Education, Medicine, and Humanities and Sciences. That means that Earth Sciences, Law, Business, and Engineering had no women faculty at all. Now there are women faculty in all schools at Stanford, as well as at SLAC. So what this says is not only do we have more people within a field, but that it looks like we’ve got a lot more women in different fields. Miner: [00:35:05] Well, not a lot. One needs to distinguish between those, because the success in the sort of engineering/physics, computer science is completely unlike that in law schools and medical schools. Something tipped in the other professional schools that is not yet at the same order of magnitude in the STEM fields, as we call them--science, technology, mathematics, and engineering. Devaney: Math and engineering. But that is, of course, because so few women went into those fields. Miner: [00:35:34] In 1971, if you were going to make a bet, you had no reason to distinguish between law and medicine and engineering. They all looked 160 equally impossible, right? But, in fact, in certain areas change happened. In others, it was much harder, and that remains today. That’s still an issue. [00:36:02] To me, that’s why it’s the best way to look at it as learning. Whatever it was we thought it was, we weren’t quite right because the things that were designed to make a change in these other fields were also recruiting, being nice to women, flyers, childcare, all that stuff was done everywhere, so why isn’t the outcome the same in engineering and physics as it is in the law school? It can’t be that our early thoughts about what were the blockages were quite right, because it worked in these other places, but it didn’t yet work in the same way. That’s how I see that, and that’s why it does make me sad sometimes when people address the STEM field one as though nobody ever even tried anything, because I think that’s the wrong way to think. I think the way to think about it is, “Boy, this is really interesting,” because whatever these processes are, they’re ones we didn’t understand or figure out or understand yet enough to make it happen. Now, there’s always the theory that women intrinsically don’t want to do this. Or they’re too stupid, and those are both plausible theories. [laughs] I shouldn’t tell this story, but I will. Many of the people in engineering, because I work with them a lot, they have a lot of trouble with their hidden unconscious thought that people in the business school are people who weren’t bright enough to go into engineering, and they really have that in the back of their minds. So they have to readjust that, well, no, it’s not really just that, and similarly around gender. 161 Devaney: Didn’t the former president of Harvard [Larry Summers] lose his job because of what he said? Say more about what he said. Miner: [00:37:49] He went to a conference on these very questions where everybody actually was expert, and, I mean, it’s not like they were just sitting around the dining room table. These were people who studied these questions. I have to say a little bit about this because it’s really a very telling incident. What he did was he stood up and made off-the-cuff remarks, drawing on a couple of studies that his friends had done, and said, “Well, clearly, we have to accept the fact or that maybe the best way to look at this is that women cognitively are--we’re missing the really brilliant people. We’re missing the top 2 percent. They’re not ever going to do that. They don’t have the mathematical [ability] genetically. Genetically, they’re never going to be able to do that, so that we should be planning our remedies around that.” Now, he could have said that as a person, but he was standing there as the president of Harvard, which had just recently incorporated Radcliffe College and promised to care about all those women. [00:38:51] This is recently, but I have to say something, because it’s very important to understand. When he did that, the way he was acting, the way he said that in that provocative way and in sort of a bad-boy way was exactly how [most] economists interact. That’s how they do things. All he did was follow a routine from what helped him when he was a young, smart economist in his local environment, kind of a smart ass--pardon me--but, you know, technically clever and on purpose being provocative. He hadn’t 162 realized he was not a young guy showing himself. He had this moral responsibility to his constituency, and then he was gone in part because of it. Devaney: The outrage that happened among the faculty at Harvard and the resulting step down after that would probably not have happened forty years ago. That’s just the way it was, right? Miner: [00:39:48] You mean would that have happened? No, that would never have happened. No, that would have been considered as a reasonable argument. It is still an issue being contested…. Devaney: In 1971, Stanford had no women who were even deans. In the past ten years, we’ve had deans of all the schools at Stanford except medicine, as well as dean of research. In fall 2014-15, four of Stanford’s seven schools will have women as deans, plus a woman dean of research. By comparison, do you have a sense about the progression of women in academic leadership roles at other universities? Miner: [00:40:55] I think that’s fairly representative of what’s going on in general, certainly where I am--some more of us, more women deans. I don’t know if they’re in the majority. Our last two chancellors at Wisconsin have been women, and so I think there’s still a hope by many people, including senior men. I’ve been on the search committee for our chancellors, and there is a community of what I call the thought leaders. These are philanthropists, people who are on a lot of boards of higher education, and very sophisticated, and they talk to each other. Like our candidate for Wisconsin, we got from Cornell, and I think one reason she was wanted was one of our key people who knew the board member there, said, “You should get this 163 woman, and as a woman, it would be good to get a woman for the symbolic purposes at this time.” In fact, she was in humanities, which was also a good symbolic move, because everybody’s worried we’re about to destroy the humanities. Everybody’s worried about the fate of humanities in the major research universities, correctly, so that was another thing saying that would help symbolically to do. I’m just saying I think that that national group of people who influenced, who were on boards, the trustees, many of them come out of the business world or maybe the foundation world, they still believe this is an unfinished revolution that should happen, and so they support them. Devaney: An interesting point you made recently, Anne, was that when you’re talking about tenure and appointment decisions in your committees at Wisconsin, you’re now hearing men say, “No, that’s discriminatory,” or something like that, whereas it used to be just the women who were carrying that ball. Say more about that. Miner: [00:42:41] I have to believe this is true at Stanford as well, maybe not on every search committee, but turning to the personal, I now go to meetings-say it’s a search committee--there was one recently for the vice president for research. We have a $1 billion-a-year annual research budget. It’s a massive part of [the University of Wisconsin]. It’s one of the biggest in the country. So this is a big job. During the meetings in the old days, it would have gone as follows. I would have been expected to bring up women and minority candidates. That would have been my job to find them. 164 The other thing was my job to say, “That criterion right there--’we should have somebody who used to be a member of the Boy Scouts’--that’s not such a good idea, maybe we should get past [that and] not use a criterion that palpably will exclude all the women.” What I love is I go on these committees, and at least the last one I was on, the chair was very clearheaded. He was the one saying, “This is really important. We have to search for women and minorities.” He was the one telling the search committee we need to do that. Our current chancellor just came from Washington. She’s been a faculty member and run internal things, so she’s right. But she had wider experiences. She wasn’t like your standard candidate. That came partly from thinking we need to think broadly about who can do this. The last one is the chairmen will be the ones who say that would be a sexist way to look at it. To me, it’s this wonderful thing to sit there and watch this move from the advocate people doing it to the [other leadership by whoever is in charge, including white males who are very sophisticated on issues of bias and positive value of diversity]. There’s one other thing at Wisconsin I don’t know if you’re doing here, which is, I think, the next frontier, as long as we’re on this. When we were doing this work before--I’d cite the report in 1971--this question of unconscious bias. Is it there? There was a little evidence then. [00:45:20] They would send you CVs, résumés, of candidates for a job, and they’d be exactly the same in terms of how many publications they had and all they had done, and one was Sally Jones and one was Sam Jones. The only thing different was the gender of the person. 165 Devaney: That really is just gender bias. Those are research projects that have been done in a lot of different contexts. Miner: [00:45:49] Yes, but now, they actually have research about that it’s not just men doing that. It’s like this terrible thing that, in a sense, we all have tremendous bias by both race and sex, but they have that evidence now that’s much more concrete. This is a field of psychology and it’s a big topic. Now when you are on a search committee at the University of Wisconsin, the people who are the experts have come in to the search committee and say, “This is not advocacy. This is not affirmative action. This is what we have to deal with as members of the community who believe in diversity. So here is the evidence.” They cite the [current studies on unconscious bias]. Everybody in the room is thinking, “All human beings have bias,” and then they discuss this question of what do we do to overcome that bias in an affirmative way, which has nothing to do with justice or anything. [00:46:45] It doesn’t blame anybody, and it’s grounded in what is the central value in a research university, which is research-based knowledge, evidence-based knowledge. It has a value and integrity, a power nothing else could have. That’s another thing that makes me very happy, and I think we’ll see that more. Devaney: That’s very interesting. But on the other hand, according to an article written by Scott Jaschik in a 2010 issue of Inside Higher Education, women in 2009 actually earned more PhDs in all fields combined than did men in the United States, and if we just look at the field of education, women earned 67 percent 166 of the PhDs. They earned 60 percent of the PhDs in social sciences, and 53 percent in the humanities. By comparison, at Stanford, women currently constitute 42 percent of faculty in education, 27 percent in the social sciences, and 37 percent in the humanities. Do you think the proportion of women earning doctorates in the U.S. will ever be matched by the proportion of women faculty in American universities? Miner: [00:47:57] Wonderful question and one that presents a puzzle to the symbolic questions in this area. I used to have a joke that we could solve all this if we could--this is not going to sound too playful, but it was playful--that if this was a revolution, a political revolution, you would just kill all the people on the faculty now, which would leave enough jobs to be able to reach parity, and you could just hire enough women. That would solve it. [00:48:42] Before we get to this one here, the first question about what will drive that number, not of the hiring rate--suppose you’re hiring exactly the number and the percentage of women who are PhDs. If 90 percent of the people there are not diverse, then it might take-Devaney: You mean if the current base is not representative of the population. Miner: [00:49:04] Whatever it is. If the current base is all dogs, then you say, “No, we need cats and rabbits, too,” if you only had that little 5 percent gap to ever get there, and if just in your own head you think about, at the most you could ever do it might take you 50 or 100 years. Then the other thing, which I didn’t realize then and everyone knew then, and that’s a tough issue in explaining to people, sensible observers about why-- 167 Devaney: What you’re saying is that you’ve already got a base of x number faculty and that you hire very few faculty in any department in any given year. Much smaller than many people realize. You might not have any openings at all for faculty in a department for three years or whatever. Miner: [00:49:45] That’s right. Not that you can’t do anything, but it’s relatively small. Even if you were perfect--and certainly if you had nothing compensatory in your rate--it would take you a long time. You might need to hire slightly higher than the number of PhDs to get anywhere. The second issue about that question about what will determine the base rate, the total percentage, is that--continuing our example of the dogs and the rabbits--if you hire rabbits in at a good rate, but you lose them, too, then you really don’t get anywhere. [00:50:27] In this case, first, you lose some anyway. Normal attrition. Then in the question of rarer fields--and this is a big issue for Stanford--there aren’t too many women stars in some fields yet. There is a competition for them. They get stolen, I mean, everybody gets stolen. But if you’ve just spent five years trying to get a senior woman to come, which is sometimes what it takes, then someone else comes, then she’s gone, is that good for society? Probably, yes, because it’s good to keep them sprinkled around the country. But is it good for Stanford? Probably not. These numbers are a function of that, which is why, in the end, one comes to, among other things, over and over this question of the pipeline, the retention thing. That wouldn’t be such a problem if you could be a good pipeline. The answers, where it will end up, I don’t know, but I do think it’s a hundred-year problem. 168 I have to say one other thing. That point that I just made about the importance of the baseline doesn’t mean that there aren’t still issues of not doing enough to begin with, that you’re not getting enough hiring at all, even given the availability. There’s one phenomenon I did see a lot. When I first went up to HEW and looked at some data they had in 1972, roughly, and they had many, many schools, and they had zero women faculty in these departments. Then you looked about two years later, and they had one, and then they stopped. That’s a symbolic management question, the people felt it looked bad to have no women, so they hired one woman. To some degree, if I look at my own situation at Wisconsin, after I was hired, in my little twelveunit group, there was one other woman hired. It was not that no women were hired, but there’s sort of a relief that occurs. [00:52:37] We have a woman, because it doesn’t look so bad. Then the question is how do you mobilize and inspire and get things going? Just to finish that tale of my own twelve-unit department, we now have, plus me, two tenured women, and they just hired two assistant professors…. Devaney: What are your thoughts about the progress that has been made in the hiring of women faculty in academia over the last forty-three years? Miner: [00:53:44] Two points on that, and they’re related. One is the focus on hiring or on how many are there is important, but it was never the goal, in a sense. That wasn’t the ultimate goal. Why are we doing all this? It’s not a game, a political system where you say women want to get their share of something. I don’t think that was the point. Let me just say this. The automatic model we were all using then was 169 that there were really three things. One was the presence of women in these research roles. Backing up, research universities are about creating knowledge for society, and I know you know that. We are the only institution in the world where your full-time major role is to create knowledge for knowledge’s sake. Companies create knowledge all the time, but they stop it if it doesn’t have commercial value right away. They’re obliged to do that. If you go around the world, you’ll find people doing anything -- governments would do anything to get the higher educational system in the United States because of that research power, that underlying thing. That’s so crucial because everything that a university does, if we lose that--it’s much more fragile than people understand, in my opinion. It’s fragile because it’s so easy to say--and this is what Lyman would think I was doing--”I know, but we’re really rich and we’re powerful, so we should fix x,” whatever x was. We should fix the role of women, we should fix minorities, we should fix any social problem. We do want to do that. Applied knowledge is important. But I’m more sensitive to it in the business school because there are a lot of people there who in business will say, “Well, you shouldn’t--.” I actually had someone suggest to me that--two people. One said, “You should make every professor in the entire University of Wisconsin--.” We have 46,000 students. “Every professor should have to explain to the dean every semester what the professor’s done about product development, that they should be contributing to the development of new products in the United States for sale in companies.” That person saw nothing wrong with that. 170 Devaney: Wait. You have to talk about what you’re doing toward product development? Miner: [00:56:42] Yes, [this person was suggesting that all professors should link whatever they taught to product development] because this is, in our case, state money. What the heck are you doing if you’re not doing that? You should be sustaining economic development. We need more products. You laugh. [laughs] I want to note for the record, you’re making a face. Devaney: No. I just think the role of the university is to extend knowledge not to create products, but different argument. Miner: [00:57:01] Yes, but that’s because you are in that culture. My point is, you may ask why is it fragile? It’s fragile because what I just said to you is not laughable. I’ve met trustees who really are puzzled. Why isn’t that what we should do? That’s why I think it’s fragile. It’s a never-ending water on stone, and I keep reminding that and to verify that. Devaney: Plus, don’t you think that the proportion of research done at major research universities is increasingly funded by corporate sponsors, rather than the federal government? This raises, a question of having to create product, so that may lead to more applied research than what we would like to be doing. Miner: [00:57:38] Yes. And that’s why it’s fragile in the end because universities are mindfully [doing more applied research] and I’m involved in training doctoral students how to do product development, so I always am spending a lot of time on this. I go back to that just because that means the vision about women and minorities that, to me, in the end is the crucial one, is what these institutions 171 are, these research universities. Then the issue is, is the way things are working such that the talent, the vision, the contributions of women and minorities in there, in that mix, do we, (a) as a society have the benefit of what women and minorities have to offer in terms of knowledge creation, and, (b) are the people who have the calling to do that from those groups allowed to get in, into that incredible mission? Devaney: How many does it take to have enough? Miner: [00:58:39] Whatever it is now is probably not enough in most places, so we can’t answer that question. That’s the premise I start with, and I think in the beginning, which I saw then, too, the assumption was in the early ’70s that whatever the number is, it’s not right the way it is now. Then there was a justice question, that women had been unfairly excluded. This question of realizing our potential is latent. But the idea was implicitly that having women there wasn’t enough, because the second thing was you have to do something about the roles. Are there women in senior roles? Are they influencing the core ideas, as you said? Do you influence the nature of science? The third one, what is the climate in everyday life? Are you as a member of this department actually there or not? As I say in my own little department, I think now, forty years later, they will have a culture that will be genuinely diverse, and they will get the full merit of the different people there. The logic was then we can’t solve all the seniority problems, we can’t solve all the climate problems, but if you get enough women and minorities 172 in these senior roles, that will set in motion--it’ll be a beachhead, and that beachhead is irreversible, that once you’re there on the sand in Normandy, you know, you will take France and we will win World War II, and that was kind of the premise that we didn’t even know. Devaney: Do you think the progress women have made so far is irreversible? Miner: [01:00:12] I personally do, and I was conscious of that irreversibility problem long ago. It hadn’t dawned on me initially. I thought, it seems like, great, this is happening, Devaney: In the 1960s, ’70s, the Women’s Movement was the first time it ever happened. Miner: [01:00:38] Yes, absolutely. And it lasted. Things I saw as a child are becoming real. It’s like the toy Easter Bunny that’s now becoming real. About 1969, I was out leafletting in Palo Alto for a Women’s Liberation march of some sort. I went up to a house in one of these Palo Alto houses, big things with ivy and strange things growing out of the windows, and a little old lady comes to the door, opens the screen door, a tiny woman with white hair, and I give her the leaflet. She looks at the leaflet and read it. She says, “Oh, this is about women. This is about the role of women in society.” I said, “Yes, it’s very exciting. We’re talking about changing that.” And she said, “Oh, dear.” She didn’t pat me on the head, but it was approximately that. Devaney: Patronizing. Miner: [01:01:23] No, it was more like sympathetic. It was more like someone who’s tired and says, “Good luck on the journey,” to the next person. She says, “Well, that is wonderful, dear. I can’t come to your march, but I do hope this 173 time it works,” because she had been involved in the women’s--women didn’t vote in this country until the ‘20s. I can’t remember, but it was in that century. She’d been involved in at least two previous turns of the wheel of questioning and changes of women’s roles. That’s what she saw. She saw this is another trial, another experiment as a society. Devaney: And she said, “This time I hope it works”? Did she think that the Women’s Suffrage Movement did not work? Women got the vote. Miner: [01:02:07] They did, but what she assumed, as I did, that it wasn’t about a political gain, it wasn’t about any particular thing; it was about the underlying society and whether sex roles were such that it limited both men and women in some fundamental ways to express everything they have in them. Devaney: So the Suffrage Movement was a step. Getting more women in academia is another step, right? Miner: [01:02:38] Yes, but it doesn’t [fully] answer yet, and [does] it definitely prove?--would it be better now to be a Stanford faculty person in terms of the day-to-day interaction and realizing your potential? Of course, as a woman or minority, anybody, [it would be better than before 1970’s] because many things have worked. But is it what we would dream of in terms of a society in which every person’s potential was used and expressed and each person felt the ability to do that? In that sense, she was saying we’re not there yet. But the question you asked me was is this irreversible, and that, I think, at this point is completely a matter of personal belief. That’s a choice we’d have to make. As you know, there are many parts of the world where it’s very 174 reversible, I think, in other aspects of social--things like abortion in this country, you can see them go back and forth historically. Devaney: In fact, some people think this country’s gone backward with respect to things like reproductive rights. Miner: [01:03:43] Right. Then the question is whether you see that as an oscillating pattern, that it goes back, it goes forth, it goes back, it goes forth. Devaney: But the general trend goes up. Miner: [01:03:51] That’s right. Or whether you think it’s actually going back. The difficult thing for most people, including me, is that even if you think it’s a trend going up with bumps around it, with waves and troughs, if you don’t stand up, again, and say, “Stop”--so in my own life, I’ll tell you a story. Here I am, this is two years ago, in a prestigious group of colleagues in my field, macro organization theory. Macro organization research is national. I have a job offer from Northwestern and from Wharton, which are the top business schools in the country, so to a degree you should be safe. I think I was safe. So this is a group, they all care about women, they respect women, they have women friends, but they formed a group off the record where they could informally get together and talk about research, and they did it as where whoever was in it now would identify future potential members, which is a well-known dangerous kind of mechanism. They did that, and they invited people, the whole group, maybe fifty or forty people. I would go and I would be the only or one of two women, just like forty years ago. And they wanted to fix it. I didn’t do very well in that case. I sort of felt, “I’ve been doing this too long. I don’t really want to try to fix this, but I 175 will be sympathetic.” Another friend of mine did and recruited women and then some women came. The next year, we had maybe ten women out of sixty, which was great. This is my point about the endless saga. I sat down next to my friend who does research in organizational learning at one of the beginning seminars in the morning at a table. These are square tables in a U-shape, and I sat next to Christine because I wanted to talk to her in research. My friend Willie rushes over to me and--this is no irony, no joke here--he says, “Anne, you can’t sit there. Don’t do that. Don’t sit Next to Christine.” I said, “Why don’t you want--?” He says, “We’re trying to fix the women problem, so don’t you want to be out sitting among the men, so there are spaces between the women, so you can show the men that you’re capable?” I have to confess, I didn’t do it right, because at that point I should have said, “This is not irreversible, so we constantly have to do water--.” But at the time, I said, “I’m sorry, that is not my problem. I want to talk to Christine, because that’s what’s in the interest of women faculty today here, is for us to progress in our research.” I probably should have moved, but that was another case where we had to work on educating the men there about these nuances of a respectful diverse context, because they just had never thought of that. This was two years ago, among people who were uniformly pro women, including the top women in the field. [01:06:58] I’m just saying if you believe in the cyclical thing, the tough part, I think, is that everyone, including the men, still have to learn about 176 what does it mean to have everyone able to express what they have to say or to contribute, and how do we do that. Just because it’s actually better, doesn’t mean we can totally give up the alertness and the learning from the past. Does that make sense? Devaney: Yes, absolutely. If you had it to do over, would you choose an academic career? Miner: [01:07:31] I do feel like my destiny and my authentic self is an academic. Took me a long time. I was an assistant professor for four years before I was sure this is what I should be doing. It took me a long time to learn that I could do it and that I want to do this. But the question you asked is could I have decided that when I was thirty. I don’t know. Devaney: I just wonder if--you started out in medical school, then you had a senior staff position, you could have gone to Washington from here. Then you went to the business school. Then you decided, after all, that you wanted to be a faculty member. Would you do that all over again? Miner: [01:08:19] Yes. Devaney: It’s a long journey to make that decision. Miner: [01:08:21] Yes. I feel like, as I said before, it’s like your ice sculpture, and you start with this big block of ice. Some people have a piece of paper that has a picture of what’s supposed to be. It’s going to be an elephant, right? And they cut things out. That’s not the way everybody does things, and mine is the second path, where it had to be revealed to me through action in my own life. Through that process, I think I always was an academic completely, and 177 this is my authentic being, but it took all those experiences kind of carving different things away and leaving who I was--am. Devaney: I see a lot of young women at Stanford now who say things like, “I knew ever since I was seven I wanted to be an astronaut,” or scientist or whatever. It seems like in my generation, the choices for little girls were to marry well, be a good mother and, go into education because you could always get a job as a teacher in case your husband died. To what extent do you think the fact that we were not encouraged as youngsters to pursue our dreams kind of made it a more confusing and a slower journey for us to figure out what we wanted to do and be? Miner: [01:09:36] I think that’s unquestionably the case, and one of the wonderful things is that this is why role models matter--we used to do things like have to have pictures of women and minorities in these publications. People would say, “But we did that. It’s so ’70s.” But when the first quotation--you remember the first interview about women coming into the classroom and you don’t see a woman the whole time they’re there. Or a member of their ethnic group. I think your comment about what was imaginable for women in those days is completely correct, and that means every time there’s a woman dean or a woman athlete or a woman whatever, political figure, it has this ripple effect, and that’s why it matters. Some people will say, “Who cares about those women deans? That’s just symbolic.” Over at Stanford you’ve got the majority of women deans. So you say, “Big deal. It’s windowdressing,” la-di-da. Maybe it’s still nothing, but of course it does matter, right? 178 Devaney: In fact, we have a new dean coming into the School of Engineering who’s a woman who’s not even an engineer. She’s a physicist. Part of the rationale for that is we just have to get more women role models in these fields. Miner: [01:11:01] Exactly. I don’t think that’s a joke. I think it’s completely true, and it has a slow effect. We’ve got to wait for those little girls to grow up, partly. I completely agree that’s true, and I do think we did not have that in the same way. [01:11:14] In that sense, I’m glad my mother worked, because, I don’t know, I suspect that did affect me, outside the home. Devaney: But did your parents ever say, “Anne, why don’t you think about being a college professor when you grow up?” Miner: [01:11:23] They didn’t, although to be intellectually clean about it, they never said that to my brothers either. It wasn’t like they didn’t say that to me because I was a girl. They just didn’t say it to anybody. Devaney: Is there anything you’d have done differently in your professional life if you had it to do over? I mean, was the trajectory you took the right one? Miner: [01:11:44] Leaving aside the question of what we did or didn’t get done on the affirmative action front, this is a different question in terms of my personal career. This is going to sound strange, but probably the Stanford affirmative action officer experience prepared me in many ways for life as a faculty member. Even so, I underestimated the competitive nature of academia. I don’t think business school. I think even then I would have toughened myself up more. 179 Devaney: Do you think it’s more competitive than it was one or two or three decades ago? There are a lot more faculty, and proportionately less money out there. Miner: [01:12:45] I think in my field it probably is. I think you have to do way more. But it’s also collegial. The entire thing only works because we cooperate with each other, and my research only matters because it’s linked to other people’s research. But it’s also brutally competitive. You’re constantly thinking about those eight thousand citations. I have to think about how to get my work cited. I don’t do that. Some people do that. But how to get published. When I train doctoral students, they often have a very, very cynical view. They think it’s all who you know. That’s just nonsense. It’s not who you know. Really, ultimately, it’s how good it is. But to get it as good as it can be, you have to get the best people to read it and give you feedback, so in that sense it is political. You have to use social processes. I think I underestimated that, and I would probably have toughened myself up or just kind of been accepting of that a little more. Otherwise, I don’t know if I would change much. Devaney: Do you think, when you look back at your career in the ’70s in affirmative action at Stanford, do you think the issues you tackled then were the right issues? Miner: [01:13:52] To the degree that we had in mind these three things I said of the numbers and the roles of who’s senior or not, and then this climate of what I call micro process about encouraging women and minorities-Devaney: Could you go back a little bit of that? What are some of the big issues that you look at from that period that kind of were hallmarks of your career at Stanford? Did you have any confrontational issues, for example? 180 Miner: [01:14:29] I don’t think this was the hallmark of my career, in the sense I tended to be nonconfrontational. But when we did the management development program, some of the stuff we put in there were these techniques that don’t require you to confront. For example, we were doing something about staff affirmative action and we had these affirmative action coordinators--it may have been the goals and timetables. No, I think it was the first-in, last-out question. We were worried about that. [01:15:11] A well-known problem had to do with minority hiring. So you hire people in--this is in general in the world. An employer hires some group in that’s a new group that hasn’t been there before in times of wealth, and then there’s a budget cutback of some kind, so then what happens in many systems the people who were just hired are gone. It’s last in, first out. That was a big concern that when there were budget things, they would do that. I could have issued a memo to every department head at Stanford and had my coordinators go around and worry about that, but that was not a very efficient method and it would not have worked, because I didn’t have the direct power. I didn’t have a staff of five hundred people to do that. We agreed, and the provost did a good job on this when we put it--and I remember drafting letters in the annual budget request that everybody has to do, they have to answer certain questions about their planning. The last question was, “Will the cuts that you plan to make--,” because they had to put in a plan if you were cut by 15 percent or 5 percent or 0 percent, what would you do. The last question said, “If you did those things, what would be the impact on minority representation?” That was a case of not using 181 confrontation but what I called Aikido theory or a sheepdog theory. You take where is the power and momentum that’s already there, which was in the budget process, and you attach your thing to that. I always thought that was a good one. It didn’t work everywhere. The provost did a very good job of that. Now, did it do everything? I don’t think so, but I definitely saw places where that changed them, because it wasn’t separate from their main life and didn’t even matter. Devaney: That was an era we had a lot of budget cuts. Miner: [01:17:00] Huge. And if you think through a lot, they didn’t know for sure whether the provost would or would not do anything. [01:17:09] If I’m a department chairman. They didn’t know, but it didn’t matter if they knew because it was clear that they were at risk, that if he was trying not to give them money, that all he would have to do is say, “Oh, I’m so sorry. It looks like you’re going to lose all minorities. Can’t do it.” They just didn’t want to get in that, so it caused them--as I say, the policemen within, it created that. That was an example of a nonconfrontational intervention that was, I think, characteristic of the things I was looking for a lot of the time. Devaney: In fact, I think, Anne, that you were viewed as remarkably successful in your career, and you became a national spokesperson on affirmative action because you were balanced and thoughtful and you pushed things that would work and you let go of stuff that wasn’t going to work, and you listened to different views and you did not come across as having a single point of view. I think that men who were threatened by these issues could relax a little and 182 think they were dealing with a rational person, and I think that made a huge difference in those days. Miner: [01:18:12] I hope so. I’ve had people say that to me. But on the confrontation side, to continue that issue, and I appreciate that, because that was what I aspired to do, that there were two dark sides, or not so obvious sides of it. One was the job requires you sometimes to draw the line. That’s the point. There were times when a dean would do something, and I had data, direct knowledge from somebody else who was in the room, that what they proposed to do was completely [wrong]--they were going to hire somebody they knew. For faculty positions it would have been a different situation, but these would be maybe an associate dean or a senior staff person. They were proposing to hire someone, and I knew from other sources that they were going to hire someone who was a personal friend as I say, [and not hire] a minority male who was qualified and a very reasonable candidate. The dean, for personal social reasons, intended to hire not that person (the minority candidate) but someone else (the personal friend), and I knew that for a fact. In some cases I had a sort of ethical obligation. I had to do something about that. In some cases I didn’t. When I had that kind of information, I would have to call up the dean and say, “You know, let’s go over this hiring you’re doing,” and that would surprise them. A couple times, if what they were doing was clearly wrong enough, I’d say, “If you’re going to go forward with this, we’re going to have to talk to President Lyman. I can’t sign off on this.” 183 Devaney: Because you thought they were making preferential hiring decisions based on subjective factors that had nothing to do with the qualification of the applicants? Miner: [01:20:01] Correct. Which happened also to have an adverse impact on race, by race and sex. Now, someone suggested to me that I should look for cases like that because of the ripple effect, and a little bit I did that. But the key is it had to be one that was impeccably clear, because it wasn’t going to work if I failed. Then there was one in the med school that I think worked pretty well. It was just a hiring thing. [If you] intervene, and you could tell six months later that everybody knew that the Affirmative Action Office had blocked that hire, and they were surprised, and that then they didn’t want to go through that. So they did better. Now, this we haven’t talked about, but a self-doubt I had later was sometimes things people were doing wrong were way back in the early issues; they would say something out loud like, “I don’t want to hire this woman because she might have a baby.” Of course they would do that initially. The person who hired me, the first person, Bob Freelen, said, “I like to hire women because you can pay them less,” because that wasn’t a problem then. That was normal, and he saw that as a good thing because it helped the university, it helped the woman getting hired. Sometimes the reasons they were getting hired--and probably the Personnel Office stopped a lot of these too. They would be, “No, don’t say that. You can’t use that.” 184 I sometimes thought part of it what we did was we taught people how to discriminate better. I mean, we taught them, “If you want to do this you have to be much more careful.” For a long time that bothered me, and I thought, “I would rather they would go on doing it overtly, because then we can live in reality here.” I finally concluded that, in essence, hypocrisy’s not all bad, because obviously we’d rather they didn’t do that, but their subordinates--I can’t explain. They then couldn’t model that as legitimate. It became illegitimate to do those things, and it’s good that it was illegitimate. Then later, the next people sometimes weren’t actually doing that. I decided in the end, it wasn’t all bad. Devaney: Do you have any advice for young women starting out today in academic careers? Miner: [01:22:27] I would rather finish this other thing you said were the things that didn’t get done. Devaney: Oh, yes. When you were affirmative action officer. Miner: [01:22:37] Yes. This is not relating to me personally, but in terms of the institution, what did we get done and what did we not get done. Personally, I feel that, to go back to the beachhead image, and so in some cases we’d put a little flag saying, “This is not quite right here, and someone should do something about it.” So continuing with our faculty issues or not staff, anyway, academic staff in particular, in the report we talked about it says there should be review of the research associates and the lecturers in terms of the opportunity structure for women. I may be wrong, but my impression was that I was naïve. There wasn’t enough of a beachhead in some areas, that 185 I thought just sort of flagging it, and there were other parts of the university that thought there were problems, so leave the research associates as well alone. But I don’t think that I did enough or we did enough at that time to move those forward. Devaney: In other words, you’re talking about the report you wrote in 1971 about the status of women. You mentioned in that report something about research associates and lecturers who are people usually with Ph.D.’s in their field but they’re not faculty, so they have staff positions that don’t have the prestige or the role of a faculty member, and that they were overlooked. Your point is they were being overlooked in terms of equity issues and reviews of their salaries and hiring, is that what you’re saying? And you didn’t push hard enough on those issues? Miner: [01:24:10] Right. It’s not that I wasn’t the only one who saw it. Even the person who was in charge of the lecturers saw this issue. For example, they were like a flexible workforce in the university, and there were many--mostly women in the lectures, the language lectures, for example, and it was not a good situation. It was clearly gender-related because of the roles in society, of sex roles in society. Nobody understood, but in retrospect, I would have been more aggressive or maybe even at least before I left, before I went away, I would have taken a half year and gone back and said, “Here’s my--.” I would have attempted not to collude by my silence with our absence in the ability to solve some of those questions. 186 But let me be clear. I see now in some cases, like even in that one, some of those two, the lecturers and the research associates who have Ph.D.’s but are not in tenure-track faculty, some of that is structural and almost impossible to solve. They weren’t solvable in the sense that, we’ll just flip the job-title system. It’s not like it was bad will that caused it, but I would have put my own energy a little more into making sure that something happened that was good. Devaney: I think you are forgetting your success with respect to research associates, in fact, because of your recommendations, every research associate and senior research associate appointment and salary was reviewed every year and the regression analyses done, and we’d compare it, because that was my job at the time. Miner: [01:25:54] When did that start? Devaney: In the ’70s. We compared women and minority salaries, and to the extent that there was a statistically significant difference in their salaries. And there always was every year. We went back to the deans every year to say, “Either show us that they are not as good performers or raise their salaries,” and every year the salaries got raised. You made an impact that you don’t even remember. Miner: [01:26:20] My whole trip here has been worth this, because I can cross that off my guilt list. Seriously, I’m not kidding, that’s fabulous. I did not know that. The other one I was going to say was that the salary-equity one where we did do things, my impression is it maybe still never went far enough so 187 that probably later, at least on the fact we didn’t have to go redo that--that’s true. Again, it’s not that I think it wasn’t enough. It’s that I personally wish at the end I had kind of gone back and said, “Here are the ones that I suggest to you cannot be solved in a one-cycle solution.” Devaney: The problem is it didn’t get solved even then, because ten years later, we were still going back every year to the deans saying, “You’ve got to raise your salaries or show that they’re not as good.” Miner: [01:27:16] Back to this learning thing, I feel like my career perspective would have helped me then, I now grasp that there are many things like that in organizations, one being some things about strategic planning. They just forget and relearn, forget and relearn. In Wisconsin, which is in some ways very radical, same thing, they wake up one day and say, “Let’s look at gender and salary. Oh, wow, it’s amazing. It’s not the same.” [laughs] It’s important if people would come to a different framing, which is this is not like there’s a single action of evil that creates the patterns by gender or minorities. It’s like many micro processes in our society, and they just keep repeating, so that institutionally you would say, “We should go back to what we were doing then.” It’s like your health. You don’t say, “I ate breakfast. That’s the last time I’ll eat breakfast.” No, you eat breakfast every day. These processes for maybe another half a century, maybe a whole century, maybe forever, I don’t know, Devaney: It would be interesting to go back to see if they’re doing the progression analyses anymore on research associate salaries, and if not, why not?, I don’t know if they do such analyses for salaries of the faculty or lecturers. 188 Miner: [01:28:30] I don’t either. All I’m saying here is that I now fully understand that those were not doable in a single stroke, and I didn’t understand that then. Then I was too hopeful about the beachhead. Now I would have been more realistic and said, “Here’s my suggestion that you light an eternal flame to salary equity, and then every year you’re going to visit it again.” But I’m thrilled to hear that you were actually doing that. I didn’t know that. Devaney: Do you have any other reflections about your career that you would like to share here? Miner: [01:29:04] About my career. Well, only to repeat this. This is not quite the same thing. Not only are the research universities amazing institutions where knowledge creation and dissemination, sharing it is the point; what that means if you are a faculty member in a field that you like is that it’s the most amazing occupation in the world. I am paid to wake up in the morning and say, “I wonder if improvisation works like this.” That’s my job. I mean, can you imagine? That’s my job. It’s like every now and then you say, “Oh, no, this can’t be, that they’re actually letting me do this.” [01:30:00] And paying me to do it. [laughs] Then if you actually later get respect and prestige, and I’ll admit to this. It’s a funny one. After I had these job offers from Northwestern and Wharton at Wisconsin, which is itself a pretty good school, I came back, and people who before then--this includes faculty--were nice to me, this is the opposite of the women in the meeting story. 189 [01:30:32] I would be in a meeting and I would say, “I think we should do x,” and they would write it down. [laughs] Had nothing to do with me. Nothing, right? But it was a pleasure. That’s not really the deep joy, because that’s transient and it goes away, but it is fun, I will say that. Devaney: By the way, why did you turn those other job offers down? Miner: [01:30:49] I did because I had a son who was going to school about two hours from Madison, and I went and spent a year to decide. I visited those places and I seriously considered them. They looked better, let me put it that way. They looked better on the surface. But two things. One is we had a new dean coming in at Wisconsin who didn’t really understand how little money he had. [laughs] He’d come from a private school, and he just didn’t realize how resource-constrained he was. He matched what they did, and they were having a little bidding war, so the cost to me, in terms of resources, was almost zero. It was good what they offered. The other one was, given that, I visited an apartment in Philadelphia of a top faculty member there who’d come from Northwestern, and it was gorgeous. It was this beautiful old house. But there was a room that was his college-age son’s room, and I looked at the room, and I could see that the person had never been there. The reason was his son went back to where they lived before, because he’d just gotten out of high school, his friends were all in the old town. I thought, “Whoa. That’s what will happen to me. I’ll move to Chicago or Philadelphia, and my son will go back to Madison.” I didn’t like that. I thought it’d be more fun to be near. So it was a mixture of 190 personal plus UW, and I was very involved with these technology startups, and I knew everybody, and it looked like it’d be an easier path. Devaney: In retrospect, was it the right decision? Miner: [01:32:26] I think so. Devaney: Do you have any advice for young women who start out today in academic careers? Miner: [01:32:32] You mentioned you meet people who say they did want to do this, right, that you think there’s more women now who say, “I saw astronaut--.” Devaney: I see young women who seem to have had more clarity as children that they wanted to be in nontraditionally female jobs and somehow were encouraged by their parents to do it, unlike in our generation. Miner: [01:33:02] Right, or by role models or whatever. Assuming that there’s more like that, I guess the first piece of advice would be obvious, which is what’s in every women’s magazine, just don’t be discouraged, that you should heed the inner call. I do think for many people, I definitely think for me, participating in research universities is a calling. I don’t know if you’ve ever read this thing called A Scholar’s Quest, written by James March, who was my advisor at Stanford, when he was retiring, He has this paragraph that’s something like there’s more pressure on universities to see it as a business and the students as clients and all that. He says, “No, no.” It’s very hokey, but I read from this often at, like, a dinner event for technology startups. He says, “No, a university is more properly seen as a temple, and students are more properly seen as acolytes, and so the vision of what this all is about is 191 not all utilitarian.” It’s not just that the knowledge is useful. I don’t know, but it’s the human spirit that’s being honored here. And I believe that. I think I always had that impulse. So this young woman, or any person, I would say that may be a part of who you are, in which case you want to honor that, really. I do that a lot with doctoral students. In my own early phase at Wisconsin, my outside advisor, who was advising me when there was opposition to me, would always take me back and say, “Now remind me, why did you--?” He’d say to me, “Why did you get into this?” Because I was often into political analysis of how to win the struggle. And he’d say, “Why did you do this?” I’d say, to go back to that, “Because I want to find out and realize what in me has something to contribute to the creation of new knowledge. That’s why I’m doing this.” He’d say to me, my advisor, “My suggestion is go in every day, keep that in mind, and everything you do, make it aimed at that, not at the feeding, the tenure system, all that stuff.” I believe that’s true, so I think that’s important. It is a complex occupation, so for anybody who’s getting in it, if you’re going to advise them, on the one hand, you want to encourage them to keep that inner flame as the point. In the end, in my experience, that prevailed. That worked. I didn’t ever have to become somebody I wasn’t. In fact, I became more who I am. That’s one piece of advice. The other piece of advice, which might seem contradictory, is that it also has this not religious, but possibly spiritual element to it, which we don’t 192 talk about in public because in our culture it’s not a respectable thing. It isn’t like what we do in public institutions. We don’t talk about the spiritual aspect of doing administration. It doesn’t mean it’s not there, I’m just saying it’s not part of the acceptable discourse. In a way what I’m saying is it’s okay to do that, in the first piece of advice. The second piece of advice, even given that, especially given that, it is a brutal, competitive occupation, I said before--and this is a problem that I think is gender-specific, not only women. When I work with junior faculty, when I mentor junior faculty, part of what I work on is back with the staff, the Tooth Fairy syndrome. There’s a kind of belief that if you’re a good girl, you’ll be rewarded, and so to get rid of that. It’s not true. You will not get rewarded if you’re a good girl or boy. Then to get a sense of yourself that sees the organization as a political system, it’s neutral, it’s indifferent, it’s not bad, this is how it is, and I would encourage young women, if we’re talking women, but anybody who’s been marginal before--this applies to everything, handicapped, anybody that wasn’t the dominant core group has got to, in my opinion, accept the fact that it’s still a transition. I was joking the other day, and still to this day, it’ll happen. [laughs] Same thing with university presidents in some meeting or something. or very high-powered people, and a person will turn away from me, a man will turn away from me, or even a woman will turn away from me or ignore me, and there’s a little thought that goes through my mind saying, “Was that because I’m a woman or is that because I have a stupid hairdo? Was that because they’re sick and tired?” 193 What I finally saw is that ambiguity right there will not be gone maybe ever, but certainly not for another fifty years, so my joke was that we should give them combat pay, to all the deviants, whoever they are, because they have to go through that crap in their brains and manage that. But the other side of that is just to almost learn to enjoy it as a person who’s a member of any out group, but this is okay. You’ve been honored by the history of the world to have this job of being there and realizing yourself under these conditions, but you want to respect that you have to be up for it not always being fun. [01:38:43] Don’t take it personally, but be willing to fight. Be willing to kill, but don’t take it personally. That’s kind of the spirit. Those would be the two. And have hope. [laughs] Devaney: That’s great. This is kind of a strange question to ask somebody who’s relatively young, but when you look back over your career, how would you most like to be remembered? Miner: [01:39:02] I will try to answer, though I haven’t thought much about it. You left out one thing I thought you were going to ask me a little, which is what do we see as the future. Maybe we did talk about that. But I just want to comment more on that, what I see as happening. I think we did talk about Stanford’s future and whether things are happening, and clearly, I think they are getting better. The glass is not only half full, it’s getting fuller, although it’s not where anybody wants it. But it occurred to me recently being out here that an exciting thing that’s going to be fun to watch is I think the STEM [science, technology, 194 engineering, and math] fields are different. I think we have not solved that fundamental problem of women in these technology areas in a way that’s different from the social sciences. Devaney: But that goes back to elementary school. Miner: [01:39:45] That’s the point, we think so. So the question, will it ever get solved? We know that many--like we at Wisconsin have millions of dollars of grants, and Stanford’s determined to fix this. That’s all going on. But to me, an exciting, fun thing to watch is this very recent press out here in the Silicon Valley where you have--and I don’t know how real this is--suddenly Google or Facebook reporting exactly the kind of numbers we were talking about in ’71, and as they’re reporting publicly, we have this percent women, this percent minorities, and-Devaney: You mean employees at these computer science-related businesses. Miner: [01:40:24] Yes, from themselves. All of a sudden, the same picture, you know. It was kind of taken for granted. It wasn’t seen as a big problem. I mean, they accepted that women don’t go into--whatever it was, it wasn’t seen as a big problem, but all of a sudden it looks like it’s going to be defined as a problem, quote, “a problem,” for Google or Facebook or these companies. Devaney: Do you think, though, that’s because the heads of Google and Facebook, first of all, they’re all young, and, second of all, they’re socially conscious and they’re into empowerment of minorities of any kind and that they’re taking this as one of their core missions is to get women interested in coding? That was a headline in last week’s paper. 195 Miner: [01:41:03] Yes. But when you think that, get women interested in coding, it’s not only saying that. If that’s the case, if they mean that, which I assume they do, then you have something-Devaney: You now have business involved in making it happen. Miner: [01:41:16] It’s like back to the Aikido [the martial art that emphasizes using the energy of others] or, the sheepdog theory. You’d rather have big, powerful social companies. Any institution that has a lot of money and expertise and almost this very young kind of we don’t take for granted that the past is right. It’s back to the ‘60s. It’s back to what is here now may not be what should be. Typically, it’s corporations. They’re generally for that, and they’ve done way more on affirmative action around staffs than the university. But the thought that these very high-tech companies will tackle the STEM question, that’s what’s novel here. Many other corporations have already got women in HR and marketing. But this question of the technical core, they haven’t solved either. Nobody has solved it. I think it’s hilarious and wonderful and fun to think that now these people they’re all driven by numbers. They really love number games. If they’re not getting anywhere, they’re going to know they’re not getting anywhere. If there aren’t any women coders, they’re going to know that in five years. I think that’s going to be very interesting. Devaney: Yes. I think that in the past, I don’t remember of any industry leaders, you know, Ford Motor Company, caring about how many women assembly-line people they have. 196 Miner: [01:42:34] They actually did. Actually, the assembly line they do better, but they-Devaney: No, but I mean back in the ‘40s and ‘50s, we’re talking about now you’ve got the actual executives, the leaders themselves, who are making this something that they really passionately care about. Miner: [01:42:48] You have to be really careful, because they actually did care and did do it about minorities at the time, I mean, since the ‘60s. Also women in general. They have women in marketing. I just talked to a woman insurance person and they integrated all these professions, but where everybody failed, or relatively speaking, couldn’t crack that kind of critical-mass question that you’re talking about, however many women there are, they’re still tiny and it’s hard, it’s in the STEM fields. What’s different here is there’s a corporate--actually, the reason engineering schools have been able to do good things often is the companies say, “Help! Help! We need more women engineers,” so that everybody’s been together on that, but it hasn’t been cracked. It’s more like a new set of commercial players have decided to take it seriously, and that is one of the happy, happy ones. Another weird happy one, which maybe is not so good to end on, but it’s going to be interesting, I believe, is we didn’t talk a lot about this, but there’s the sexual harassment, sex issue, the climate of the relationships of men and women in terms of sexuality and saying yes or no and all that sort of thing. We talked about the steamfitters putting the naked picture up in the steam plant. But this current issue in higher education of the women students and they’re complaining about men, mostly undergraduates, right, what does 197 it mean to say no, and are the women students protected enough from the predatory male undergraduate, is a very tough problem. I think that it’s a sign of another turn of the wheel in terms of the level of sophistication we’ll finally get to about power and sex and these sex roles, and why was it this kind of a male who persists--so I find that hopeful, not because it will be a simple solution but to solve it, which I think will happen. I don’t think it was solved even back then. We didn’t even understand how bad it was, probably. I think that’ll be a good thing in terms of women’s power--I was involved in an undergraduate dorm for several years recently, and they did training, they did skits on what does it mean to say no. Devaney: You’re talking about student behavior. Miner: [01:45:17] Sex--with each other, just with each other. They run seminars in dorms, and we have very serious efforts to solve these things. They have a skit and it’s about if the woman says no, does she mean no, is that just a way to flirt. It’s good because the women are learning from this whole issue. It’s don’t blame the victim, but on the other hand, shouldn’t I have some role in taking care of myself. The men are learning. Some of these men are not coming from sophisticated environments, they really never have thought about the problem that a drunk woman saying nothing is not the same as yes. I think, actually, all that will replay and touch deeper on the link between gender and power in ways that will be healthy for everybody. Devaney: Let’s come back to how you would like to be remembered. Both in the world and at Stanford. 198 Miner: [01:46:19] [laughs] At Stanford I’d like to be remembered as a person, it was like you were there, you were there at a great time. You were part of a great time. And I’d like to be remembered as a person who was not only there and contributing, but I was part of this bigger fabulous era of once more attempting to remake the institution, take it to its higher level. Not one that solved everything but that did establish a beachhead, and that was done with some grace, in my opinion, and certainly a lot of joy. I mean, it doesn’t sound strange, but it was a joyful project because the vision was so positive, and it wasn’t just the justice vision. That was good, but it was more this idea we could have a place that would create better knowledge for everybody and students would reach their potential more. That would be fun to be remembered that way. Devaney: Indeed you did have a great positive influence on the fabric of Stanford’s history. No question. Miner: [01:47:25] I hope so. In general, I don’t know if I would have thought about it, but when I ran the Affirmative Action Office, one thing I did--I think it’s because of my imprinting in the Development Office of fundraising--was we had these parties. I would have parties, and a Hawaiian party, as I recall--I don’t know if that’s possible--for everybody. Someone said, “This is like going to a wedding. This is like nuts. What are you doing?” It was deliberate in the sense I wanted to take away the notion of affirmative action as the policeman and you don’t want to go near them because you’ll get in trouble. But also it was fun. I feel that I would hope that if people remember me in the world, some people think I’m very serious, but I hope they would 199 remember me as a person who did, in the end, join into the joy of all this stuff we can do as people and that it more or less worked. Devaney: I can say, for one, that I enjoyed your Hawaiian parties, and we did have a great time in those days. Thank you very much, Anne Miner...