 ﻿ Tahi Mottl: Ruth Temple: This is Tahi Mottl, interviewing Dr. Ruth Janetta Temple at 3500 West Manchester Avenue, #87, in Inglewood, California, on June 12, 1978, on a bright morning at about eleven o'clock. Dr. Temple, will you tell me something about your family origins? I have quite a mixed origin. My father was from direct stock that came from Africa. My mother was French and English and African. My father's grandfather, as I understand, was brought over to America as a slave and he felt that because of the fact that he was an African prince he could not bow to slavery. So he was tied to a tree and given the opportunity to change his mind, which he did not, and he allowed himself to be beaten to death before he would state that he could become a slave, because he felt that he was free, and would always have to have the opportunity of choosing death rather than slavery. Tahi Mottl: Ruth Temple: My mother's people were of African and French descent. My mother's grandmother was also a slave, and she loved liberty to the extent that she had worked and freed all of her children before slavery was abolished. And her master would not allow her to free herself because he said she was the best workman that he had. And then she had a young man from the North whose name was Montague, who came to Georgia, which was her home, fell in love with her, and they could not get married, but they lived as man and wife and they were the father and mother of my grandmother. That union gave my mother brothers and sisters and they lived as a wonderful family together until her own mother got married. Can you tell me about some of the family names, the names... On my father's side, I understand that they took the name Temple because of the fact that that was an English owner of the slaves. My mother's name, their family name was Montague, and that was the real name. Richard Montague was the name of my mother's grandfather. My mother's mother married a Morton, so she was Amy Montague Morton. Tahi Mottl: Ruth Temple: Can you tell me about your parents? My parents were really picturesque people, I think. They met each other in the North. Both of them were working their way through college, which was an unusual thing at that time for black people. My mother was in New York as a governess for a very wealthy southern family, and my father﻿2 RT: (cont.) was in school at Denison University working on his doctorate in divinity. They met, and my father asked my mother to marry him. She consented, but then he incidentally said that he felt he had the responsibility to go South as a missionary. My mother said, "Well, I'm sorry but you'll have to find someone else to marry, because I'll never rear my children in the South." My father said, "Well, I have news for you." He said, "There's no other woman in the world that I'll have for the mother of my six children, and so you just have to marry me." But he says, "Don't worry, Mamie." He said, "It'll be all right, because what we'll do, we'll get a house by the side of the road where the people pass by." And he said, "People will come into our house. All people, all kinds of people, of all races, all creeds, all colors, all educational backgrounds." And he said, "Our children will learn love before they learn hate, and then the rest won't matter." And he did just that. My father always won out in arguments. He's a tremendous person, humorous, precious. And so he got a house by the side of the road in Natchez, Mississippi, on Pine Ridge Road, which was a main street from the country to the city. Everybody came to our house. My father had a wonderful library—Greek and Hebrew— so the theologians of various denominations, including Catholic and Protestant and Jewish, would come to do research in his library, which he always made accessible to them. So we learned to have no religious prejudices. Then, people of all races were befriended by my mother and my father both. When on cold days, my mother would watch and see someone go by poorly clad, and then she would search around and get something which she always had—an extra coat on hand or something which she could go out and meet that person with. If a person seemed hungry, she had plenty of food to share with them, whatever we had. So we really had a house by the side of the road. There would be conventions and the people would come make our home their headquarters. Very simple wood, lumber house, but with room enough to accommodate strangers always. So, it was interesting. I didn't even have any idea there was such a thing as a race until I was quite old because my mother's people... Mother was rather, she looked like an Italian or something, but her sister was very fair, so exceedingly fair that as a dressmaker, when she would put her hands on the bodies of some of her wealthy clientele, they would say, "Oh, Miss Mary, your hands are whiter than my body is." So then, my father was brown, beautiful brown eyes and wonderful white teeth and I just said that...and then we youngsters were mixed all the way through. I said, "Well, people are like flowers. Some of them are white, like the next-door neighbors, all light-haired and light skin; some are brown, like the Buckners who were next to them, and some are mixed up just as we are, all shades and colors and so forth." I said, "It's just wonderful, it's just like the flowers." And so that was my solution to racial differences. And I didn't know until... We had a girl who worked with us named Nora. And Nora was very race conscious. And she was always trying to tell us about race, but I didn't understand her. So one day, Mama says I came in and my eyes were big as saucers. I said, "Oh, Mama, there's 'niggles' in this place, and one of them stole Mrs. Ross's﻿3 RT: (cont.) horse!" And so Mama was amused and she went out, but Nora said to me, "You old dumbbell." She said, "You don't mean 'niggles.' You mean Negroes. A Negro stole Mrs. Ross's horse." And she said, "And Negroes aren't anything." I thought that a "niggle" was something like an eagle or some kind of a queer beast and I expressed that thought to Nora. She said, "Negroes are... You're a Negro. Your whole family is Negro." I said, "But, Nora, we don't steal!" I knew that quite well because just recently my oldest brother had brought home some bottles from a neighbor's house. Mama said, "Where did you get these?" And he said, "I got them next door, from our neighbor." Mama said, "Did you ask her for them?" He said, "No, Mother, but they were just out there, she'd thrown them away." Mother says, "You go back and carry those bottles and you ask the neighbor if you may have them and never take anything from anybody that belongs to someone else unless you ask them." So I knew we didn't steal. So Nora looked at me. She says, "Oh, 'course all Negroes don't steal." And I said, "Well, what is a Negro?" She said, "A Negro is a person who's black, who has thick lips," and so forth and so on. I said, "But Nora, everybody in my family's not black, and everybody doesn't have thick lips and kinky hair." She said, "Oh, you're just too troublesome." And so she ran off. So just about this time my mother came up. No, two of our neighbors came, almost at the same time. One was the Whittems, the white group, white family, and the other was the Buckners, someone from the brown family, the Buckners. Both of them stated to my mother that they had sick children and they wanted her to help. And so Mother looked at both of them and smiled, and she tried to determine which child was the most ill, which was the sickest. And so she went down the pathway, between the two women, determined that she was going to go to the child that had the greatest need. So I said to myself, I said, "Well, Nora doesn't know what a Negro is, and my Mama doesn't care and neither do I." So that established my racial attitude. It didn't make any difference to me about race, and to this day, I can't see how people look at race as a measure of people. I loved my Aunt Mary not because her skin was so startlingly white but because she was a precious sweet person. I loved my father for the same reason because he was the most delightful, the finest, the most honest and honorable person in all the world as a man, to me as a child. And so, I think it's just as illogical to like people because they wear a number nine shoe or a number eleven shoe as it is to decide about their color, because it's so irrelevant to what they are, to what they can do and what they can contribute to the happiness of human beings. So in that kind of an atmosphere we were born and reared. My father died when I was ten years old. It was a catastrophe to me because he'd been my pal there in this place.. This house by the side of the road was on a thirteen-acre plot. We had trees, we had an old bayou, and my father and I would roam those places. He was away from home a great deal because he was appointed as the secretary of the American Baptist Association, the Southern Baptist Association. So he had to travel a lot, and speak a lot. Then he was a pastor of a church. So he was quite busy. But he spent time with his children. He was so indulgent. He would sit in a big chair to write his sermons, and then all of us children would come. Some would be on one knee and﻿4 RT: (cont.) and another on the other knee and some... We would comb his hair and braid his mustache, and he didn't seem to... It didn't interfere one bit with him, because he was just that kind of a person. So when he left us, I was heartbroken. It was the first real catastrophe I had ever had. But then I didn't have too much time to grieve hopelessly or in idleness because of the fact that Mother had my youngest brother, who was born the next day after my father died. Mother was so much disturbed by my father's death that she had very little energy or ability to take care of the baby, so he became my baby. That meant that I had two children, because previous to this I had had my little sister who was seven years younger than I. Mother told me about her birth before she came. She expected her. I had been my mother's nurse. So I had her, and then I had this new baby, and then I also had another baby who was four years younger than I and so my hands were rather full with my children, and I didn't have too much time to give expression to my deep grief about my father. So that changed things for us. My father's death actually made a complete change in our whole life because Mother never loved the South. She had spent some time in California as a governess when she was a younger woman, and she wanted to return. She'd always planned to rear her children in California, but she had conceded to my father's wish that they go as missionaries to the South. So after my father's death, Mother got her little brood together and made a short visit to Vicksburg, Mississippi, where we had my father's sister. We stayed there. She had us children go to her school for one term in Vicksburg, while was was making preparation to come to California. Mother had a very close friend, a Mrs. Jacobs, who had moved to California previously, so she corresponded with her and made arrangements for us to stay at J.P.'s house—we called her J.P.—until we could get located. So we moved then to Los Angeles, on the corner of Normandy and Tenth Street, it was then, and we stayed at J.P.'s until Mama was able to purchase a house. It was one of the smallest houses you ever saw, at 1038 El Molino Street, which is now Kenmore, but to us it was home. Mama planted beautiful flowers and we just enjoyed it. She struggled along to pay for it, because although my father had this property in the South, it netted very little and my mother and my father both had struggled since they were married to pay their college debts, because they had borrowed to go through college. So we had nothing in reserve when my father died. So persons told Mother after we had been in California for a suitable amount of time that she was eligible for charity. So they urged her to go down and apply, because with all these children and no income, she said that we were good candidates. So Mother went down and we children were very, very happy. We thought we'd be able to have a lot of things which we couldn't have. So Mother came back and she called all of us—family conference. We could tell by the look on her face, and especially by her eyes, because Mother had blue eyes, and when she got angry, or when she was very serious, her eyes would get just green, just turn. So her eyes were green, so we﻿5 RT: (cont.) knew that the conference hadn't been satisfactory to her. She said, "Children, we had the conference. But," she said, "we cannot take charity. What we get, we will have to earn." And she went into some detail. From that time on, we had that idea: that what we got, we would have to earn. My little brother, the one who was born after my father died, was by this time around five years old, and my other two brothers were older. One brother got work at the country club, and he came out of school. And then, my other brother went to the golf course and became a caddy. And it was decided that we, the women of the house, would keep house for the men while they worked. Mother, who had a teacher's degree from the University in Nashville, did not have a California teacher's license, but she had had a lot of experience in nursing, because she'd nursed all the families around us in Natchez, and so she went out as a practical nurse. She really left Los Angeles and would nurse out in outlying places. I was the mother of the family. And I was a real mother. People would say that those children would obey me much better than youngsters did their average mother. We had a family of six. My oldest brother didn't do much obeying because I didn't try to have him do, but the four younger youngsters were my children. I had to discipline them, sometimes physically, and often with other types of punishment. They never resented it at all. They were just as obedient and sweet and grateful as they could be. So that's the way we started our life in California. That, I think gives you the background. TM: Yes, thank you. I think what I'll do is ask some... I took notes as you were talking and I think I'll ask you some quick questions to fill in some specifics about your discussion. Tor example, what specifically was your father's full name? RT: Oh, Richard Jason Temple. TM: Okay. And specifically where was he born? RT: He was born in Mississippi, Yazoo, Mississippi. TM: Do you know what the date of his birth was? RT: No, I do not. I don't know. TM: And your mother's name was Amy... RT: Amy Morton, M-O-R-T-O-N. TM: Okay. And where was she born? RT: She was born in Georgia. Macon, Georgia, I think it was. TM: And you say that your mother went to school in New York? RT: No, my mother went to school in the South. She was a graduate of... I'm trying to think of the college. They called it a special college for teachers. It will come to my mind. That's where she had her schooling. My father went to school at Denison University which is near Chicago.﻿6 TM: And then where did your parents meet? RT: They met in New York. They were both working there. TM: Oh, I see. RT: They were both working there. They were working in the Hotel Astoria and my father had first of all come there as a waiter. Then one night the man who was the, I don't know what they called him but anyway, he interpreted the murals and so forth, but he had been away and he asked my father to do it. My father did such a wonderful job that this man said, well, he wouldn't even think of trying to take over after my father's very efficient performance. So they met there, under those circumstances, her as a nurse or as a... She was really considered a teacher for the children of this family with whom she traveled to New York. TM: Oh, I see. She had traveled to New York with the family, and also was that the same family with whom she came to California? RT: The same family to California, yes. They just adored her. TM: And was that family from Macon, Georgia, and did your mother... RT: Yes, so I understand. TM: I see. And can you tell me, you said that there were six members of your family. RT: Uh huh, there were six of us children. TM: ...and can you tell me the names of your family members and the order? You had an older brother and... RT: My older brother was Walter, Walter Temple, Walter Morton Temple. Then I was next in age of those who lived. We had two children who died. And 1 was next of those who lived. My next sister was Vivian Verona Temple. The next was a brother, Richard Jason Temple. He was a junior. And the next was Ethel Mae Temple. And the third was Lanier D. Temple. TM: How do you spell... RT: L-A—N-I-E-R. He became a sheriff in Alameda County. TM: And so was he the youngest? RT: Yes, he was the youngest member of the family. TM: Oh, and what was the name of your father's sister with whom you stayed for a while and went to school? RT: Mrs. Mary Bell. She had quite a large private school there in Vicksburg, Mississippi.﻿7 TM: What was the name of that school? RT: I have no idea, unless it was the Mary Bell School. TM: Was that the school that you attended briefly? RT: Yeah, we attended for one semester. TM: And what was the year in which your father passed away, when you were ten? RT: Let me see, I was ten. That was probably 1902, because I was born in '92. TM: And then was it a year later or so when you moved to California? RT": No, it was several years later, because we spent some time in Natchez getting things straight and then some time in Vicksburg. TM: Did your family sell the property in Natchez? RT: Yes, we did, for a very small amount. I think of that wonderful place there, all these trees and everything, just delightful. I wish I could have brought it to California, but we couldn't. TM: Well, then about when was it that you moved to California? RT: It was about 1904, I think. TM: And what was Mrs. Jacobs's first name? RT: Eliza, I think. She was a Canadian, she and her sister. They revolted against the things in the South, which they felt very resentful of, the South. And one of the things that made them move was the fact that streetcars were started in Natchez, and they had segregated seats and so forth. My father had gone around and gotten... He started really the first, at least he tried to start, the first boycott in the South. He had gone around and gotten the people to say they would not ride the streetcars, the black people. Then some politicians paid a black minister and he took a cigar, put a cigar in his mouth, and rode all day long on the streetcars to show how he disregarded the boycott. So Mrs. Jacobs and others felt that they didn't want to stay in a place where segregation was felt. Early in our days in Natchez, we felt very little segregation, partially because of my father's and mother's influence, because they were among the few people who were well educated. They were so pleasant and sweet and helpful that people needed them, and they respected them and treated them as people because of their need, and because of the fact that my father and mother both demanded respect. So the whole town just naturally was a place where people were valued for what they were worth. It was very pleasant. The streetcar, the advent of the streetcar, brought a different kind of an atmosphere and so Mrs. Jacobs and many other people who loved freedom just left. TM: Well, was Mrs. Jacobs a member of your father's church?﻿8 RT: No, she was not. She had another religion. I don't know what it was. Wasn't Baptist. Eut she just changed to be a special friend of my mother's. TM: I'm fascinated by the... RT: They were, she and her sister both were Canadians by birth. They were very fair, and they were usually considered as white. When they weren't, Mrs. Jacobs's sister, Miss Lizzie, said that she would get on a railroad train and that they would tell her, look at her, think she was black, because she mixed and it showed. She said that she would then take the arm of the conductor and walk down the aisle with him. She said immediately they said, "Oh, she can't be black, she wouldn't dare to do that." So that's the way that they went on. TM: This was the trains or... RT: In the South. TM: On the railroad trains? RT: On the railroad trains. So, again as I say, they never would agree, nor be submissive to the rules of the South. They just went straight along as though they didn't exist. But then when the streetcars came, they thought it was time to leave. TM: I'm fascinated by your statement that your father organized some kind of protest about the streetcars, or was involved in that. RT: Well, that was among... It was very quickly done because... TM: Do you remember that? RT: I don't know. I just understood, the chief thing that I knew about it was that this black minister had made my father very unhappy because of the fact that he did not go along with the rest of them in boycotting. He was paid, and that represented a very unfortunate class of Negroes who existed at that time. Many of the people in Natchez were wonderful black people. Dr. Charles Diggs, who was here in Los Angeles and did such an excellent work in pioneering there in the medical field, was one of my father's boys in Natchez. He said that one of the unforgettable experiences of his life was his association with my father, because he had given them such high ideals. He said the thing which all of them said, "He lives what he preaches." So, there was a very fine group there. TM: What was the name of your father's church? RT: The First Baptist Church of Natchez, Mississippi. TM; Do you have any other memories about Natchez before you moved to California?﻿9 RT: Nothing that's too important, except that we felt perfect freedom until the streetcars came. Then from that time on, my parents had us walk to school if they couldn't carry us in their buggy or in their dray or something. We had to walk because we were never supposed to get on the streetcars. TM: Were you born in Natchez? RT: All of us were born in Natchez except two; one sister was born in Winona, Mississippi, and my brother, the junior Richard Temple, was born in Florida, Pensacola, Florida, where my grandmother lived at that time. TM: Oh, well, tell me about that. Did your family travel to Florida or did your... RT: No, we just visited. We visited my grandmother, my family traveled there and visited my grandmother. TM: Did you do that very often? RT: No. Just one time that I know of. That's when... TM' Then your brother was born there? RT: ... was born there. TM: Well, tell me about ... RT: Well, there's one other experience in Mississippi that I think is significant, too, in fact. My mother's sister, the one that I said was so fair, had cancer, and she was in Pensacola. We were living in Mississippi at that time, and Mother felt that she had to go and nurse her sister. I was eight years old then. She left the children with us. My father was away often, as I said. She had a girl named Sally she was supposed to be our housekeeper and help with the children, but I didn't think much of Sally's knowledge. I felt I was the mother at eight years old. I had a baby sister six months old, and one day she got, she was sick, I thought, and I told Sally about it and Sally didn't pay any attention to it. I said, "Well, I'm going to take this baby to Mrs. Sanford." Mrs. Sanford was our nearest neighbor that I relied on. But she lived across a cotton field. The cotton was high, and I was scared to death of snakes, but I said, "Well, I've got to get this baby to Mrs. Sanford." So I took her on my back and walked through the cotton field, every step fearing I'd step on a snake, and finally got towards Mrs. Sanford's. Then I was afraid of dogs. She had a whole yard full of dogs, terrible dogs. I started calling her. "Mrs. Sanford, Mrs. Sanford." She came out so the dogs didn't get us, and the snakes didn't get us. I said, "Well, my baby's sick, and Sally doesn't know anything, so I brought her over for you to look at." She put her hand on her head. She said, "Yes, she does have a fever," and she gave me some suggestions what to do for her. Then they put me in one of their buggies and rode me back home so I didn't have go through that wilderness of cotton and all those imaginary snakes and bears and so forth, so I got home all right. The baby used to sleep﻿10 RT: (cont.) on my stomach at night, and I'd carry her on my back in the day. So in that way we passed the whole month that my mother was away. Then there was another experience which had a deciding factor on my life. That was, one day my oldest brother, who was very much given to experimenting, was out making gun... he was supposed to make gunpowder, or work with gunpowder, make some capsules or something. He had some gunpowder, I think, in a hose, and he lighted it, and the thing blew up and blew in his eye. My mother and I were out there at the time. Mama did the... only time I've ever seen her run away from a duty or anything. She ran away screaming, "Oh, he's blinded himself, he's blinded himself!" So I ran to him, and I tried to help him. I found his eyes were not damaged, just the outside, singed hair and so forth. So I said, "Well now, I really would like to be a nurse so I would know what to do." So that's when I determined to enter the medical field. At that time I thought that women were nurses. I didn't know they were doctors. It's fortunate I did not become a nurse because I would have hated it. I admire nurses, I respect them, I work beautifully with them, need them all the time, but I would make a horrible nurse because I don't work under restraint. I'm very wild, just wild like little creatures in Africa, just wild. And so I wouldn't have made a good nurse. So when I learned that women were doctors, I said, "Ah, that's what I want to be." So I made up my mind that I would be a doctor. And that, of course, seemed very visionary because of the fact that medicine costs so much and Mother was left with six children and no funds. But I had told, say, here and there, that I wanted to be a doctor. There was a wonderful man who heard me make that statement, Mr. T. W. Troy. He was one of the pioneer builders and community workers in Los Angeles. He gave a thousand dollars to the YWCA, and he tried to establish several Negro communities. So he heard me say that I wanted to be a doctor. So he invited me and my sister to come to the Los Angeles Forum, which was an organization, really unique. The black people would congregate, black leaders would congregate, week after week, this Los Angeles Forum. Mr. Troy was a member of... [small gap] ...student, in college of any family. And it was that kind of family. So Mr. Troy was very rebellious against discrimination of all kinds, and so he bought some land in lower California and tried to establish a colony there where blacks would be free, and he'd done other things. He invited my sister and me to come to the Forum and talk there. By the way, that's the same sister who's still with me. One of my sisters, my sister Ethel, died in 1974. My sister Vivian is still here, we're together here in the home. Well, she and I went to the Forum to talk. We talked about the black man's deficiencies. I was about sixteen, and she was four years younger than I. I never will forget the vehemence with which we spoke. Well, when we got through, Mr. Troy got up and he says, "I understand that Ruth Temple wants to be a doctor." And he said, "I move that..." Well, first of all, they gave what they called a Chautauqua salute. They'd take their handkerchiefs out and salute you. It was very picturesque. They would give you an expression of appreciation and so forth. It was very warm. And so he said, "I move that we give them a Chautauqua salute and I understand that Ruth Temple wants to be a doctor, so I move that we, the Forum, would pay﻿11 RT: (cont.) her tuition for her to take medicine." Well, they did. I had been so anxious to take medicine, so they paid my tuition. Five-year medical course and they paid tuition for the five years. Some of them dropped out, but T. W. Troy, who was a remarkable person, stayed with the whole thing. He was the father of 0. N. A. Troy, one of our leading ministers, who took his doctorate in theology from USC, and made quite a mark. He also has passed. So that's the way I got into medicine. TM: Let's see. Oh, I have some questions about what you've just told me. You told me a story about your family, and it sounded as though your family lived in the country, out in the country. RT: In Natchez? TM: Yes. RT: Oh yes, it was really, it was really in the country. It was not into the city. That's where my father... I don't know. There's some historical records of the Concord estate. It was a large estate in Natchez, and our place was right across from Concord. That was outside of the city. TM: Yeah, that's what I wondered about. RT: Oh, I loved, that's where I learned to love trees and natural places, TM: Also, when your family visited your grandmother, and your mother went to visit your grandmother, how did you travel there? Did you travel by train, or did your mother go by train? RT: Oh, we traveled by train to Pensacola, we traveled by train. TM: Also you said that you had thought of becoming a nurse, but then when you heard that women were doctors, you decided that you could become a doctor. Now how did you hear that women were doctors? Did you know of a woman doctor? RT: What did you say? TM: How did you hear that women were doctors? RT: Oh, oh. TM: This must have been when you were quite young. RT: Yes, it was, it was when I was quite young. Oh. We had in our church, we had a nurse from Battle Creek who was very active in teaching us, and she spoke about a woman doctor, and I think she came to our church to talk to us. TM: The doctor did? RT: Uh huh. So then I thought that I would like to be a woman doctor.﻿12 TM: Then when you were in Los Angeles, you mentioned, you talked about the Los Angeles Forum. Was that a men's organization? RT: Yes, it was strictly a men's organization, but their wives frequently attended with them. TM: I see, and was it a discussion group? RT: Yeah, there's a discussion group and a decision group and an action group. They took action on political questions, on civic matters, and educational matters. It was a very fine group. It's an interesting thing, one of their... The granddaughter of one of the leaders is a person who is one of my best helpers. There was a John Scott who also helped with my scholarship, and his daughter, Fostina Scott, became quite a civic worker in Los Angeles. Her daughter, Dolores Scott Tomlin, is now one of my best volunteers. She has worked with me till midnight, she's brought her heavy typewriter and come over to this house and worked, and she's just carrying on the same kind of work which her father, her grandfather, and her mother used to do. So she's a part of the Forum stock. TM: Okay. Well, tell me about your schooling, about your education. You began school in Natchez. RT: Yes. In Natchez, my mother taught us until we were quite old because she didn't want us to know anything about segregation, so we were rather old. See, the fact that she had finished normal school, what they call normal, which is the teachers' course, she taught us until we were quite large. Then I entered Natchez Grammar School, I guess it was, and there I remained until we went to Vicksburg with my aunt. When we came to California, I went to Berendo High School, Berendo Elementary School, on the corner of Berendo, near Pico Boulevard. From there I went to L.A. High School, and was there until I went to San Fernando Academy, a Seventh-Day Adventist School, San Fernando Academy. From there I went to Loma Linda University for medicine. And from there, after I finished Loma Linda University, after I'd practiced for quite a while, I had the opportunity — I was working for the Los Angeles City Health Department — they paid my scholarship to Yale University School of Public Health. I got my degree in public health from Yale University. TM: Going back to your primary and secondary school experience, can you tell me first about being female and being black, and getting your primary education? RT: Now what is your first question about? TM: About being female and being black. What I wonder about is whether... you were a double minority member, and what that experience... RT: Well, actually, no, I never was. It is an interesting thing. As a minority member, I never had any problems in my whole life anywhere except, I think, one instance, after I'd finished medicine or when I﻿13 RT: (cont.) was in medical school. But most of the time, if there was something I wanted to do, I just would pray about it and go on and do it without any inhibition whatever because I was black or because I was a woman. In grammar school, at Berendo Street School, my closest friend was Rosalyn Frye, who was not black. We had black friends, but we didn't consider that people were separated because of their color again. We just chose our friends, and our friends chose us. And then in medicine, actually, there were three of us women in our medical class, and we were more or less petted. Some of the men — I was the only black woman in our class — the men would say, "Oh, I like to go to parties with Ruth 'cause she doesn't eat her ice cream and I get to eat it, and she doesn't eat her pies and I..." [laughter] So really, God just prepared the way for me in places. It didn't seem to make any difference. And when I was with the city health department, first I started as an intern... excuse me, that's the telephone. That illustrates the kind of thing I have. I had a caller from a California hospital where an administrative assistant is determined that he's going to work with me, or I'm going to work with him, on a community program for the California hospital. I have done a lot of that before, which we could get into if we wanted. But this is about the fifth time he has called me to try to set an appointment for it, 'cause things just are so hectic. But anyway, go ahead. TM: You were talking about experiences that you had in going through school, and you were about to say something about, you talked about your medical school experience, and then you were going to say something about working in public health in Los Angeles. RT: Oh yes. I started with the Los Angeles City Health Department. When I first finished, soon after I finished medicine, I wanted to go into obstetrics, because I loved it, and I went to the director of the Los Angeles City Health Department's maternity.,service. Now this was a voluntary service that was set up by USC^ for... The city health department conducted it but it was funded by USC. They delivered all of the babies that were born in homes in the whole of Los Angeles. I told this doctor that I wanted to work in his service, and he looked at me. I weighed around 110 then, just about as I do now. I've been weighing ninety pounds for the last few years but anyway... He said, "I don't think you're suited for this." He said, "It's a man's job." He said, "You have to work... twenty-four hours a day you're on call, and then you have one day off, and then you may be called on that time." He said, "You have to go to all kinds of places." So he said, "I don't think this is a woman's work." So I said, "Well,' Dr. MacNeil, let me try it." I said, "I'll just ask God to help me and let me try it." He says, "If you want to try it, it's all right with me." So he assigned me. The first case, I went out with Joe Farrell, Dr. Joe Farrell, and he was a character. He had just left DeLee's Clinic in Chicago. DeLee at that time had the very finest OB2 clinic in all the world, I guess it was, and Joe said to me, he said, "Do you want to go out with me on a rather exciting case?" He said, "We've got a case that seems to be a 'chin posterior' and it can't deliver. It's going to be an operative case. Do you want to go?" I said, "'"University of Southern California 2 , obstetrics﻿14 RT: (cont.) "Oh, sure." So we got out, and we got there and we found a Mexican mother who did have a baby that was coming chin posterior. Well, with a chin posterior, you can never deliver, the mother can never deliver because instead of the head's flexing and coming out with the occiput first or the top of the head first, it just extends more and more, and the mother dies, and baby dies and the mother dies, because it's just absolutely impossible to deliver. So Joe let me examine it. Oh, that was so exciting. Then he proceeded to give complete and minute detailed description of everything he did. First of all he had to dislodge the little head, and then he had to do what is called a podalic version and extraction. That means you have to get hold of the little feet and turn the baby around, and deliver it as though it were a breech delivery. Well, that sounds very simple but it's not, because in the first place, to tell the difference between hands and feet in the uterus when they're both all slick and everything, it's not too easy. But anyway, find the little feet and then deliver the baby. And so that was my first exciting experience, because podalic versions are very rare. Very few people know how to do them, and they do Caesarians which is quicker, and not nearly as good for the mother, but quicker. And so from that time on, I knew I was in obstetrics in a big way. I stayed my first six months. Dr. MacNeil got a report from the girl who gave us our calls. She says, "She never missed a call. A lot of times my men will, if it's a hard place, my men will turn over in bed and say they can't find the place, but she'd always go." So he was quite delighted with me. So then he gave me another six months. And at the end of that six months, I was promoted to the senior intern, and I had to give consultation to all the other interns on difficult cases. At the end of that time, they thought I was really interested, so they promoted me to the attending staff of the city maternity service, which was a real, real honor, because noted obstetricians of seasoned experience were the ones who were on that attending staff of seven members or eight members. People like Sterling Pierce of the Pierce Brothers Mortuary was a very renowned obstetrician. Dr. MacNeil himself was written up in DeLee's book and so I was in that company. The interesting thing was that because these men had had so much experience, they weren't interested or excited to go out at night on pathological cases, but I was. So I got practically all the pathology of the whole city of Los Angeles. God was so good to me; he just gave me success after success. I earned quite a reputation as an obstetrician on this service because we carried our — we did our minor operations, or the operations that could be done in the home, we did, but the others we carried to the General. One night I was on the West Side and I had a mother in labor and I had just examined her and I went back to examine her again. The whole picture had changed as far as the abdomen was concerned. I could feel the fetal parts very very distinctly. I said, "Got a ruptured uterus." Then I took her pulse, and I took her blood pressure, it was normal. I said, "Go back and examine her again." I said, "Yes, it's a ruptured uterus." So I called an ambulance and rushed her into the hospital. When we got to the hospital, the resident there came in to examine her,﻿15 RT: (cont.) and he again found the pulse normal, the blood pressure normal, and he called the attending man, because they have to report all of the pathology, you know, to the attending man. The attending man lived way down in Long Beach — no, in Santa Monica. So he said, "What's your diagnosis?" And he said, "Ruptured uterus." And he said, "What's her blood pressure?" Told him. He said, "What's her pulse?" Told him. He says, "Well, I'll watch the case." So then as an afterthought, he said, "Who sent her in?" And he says, "Dr. Temple." He said, "Ruth Temple?" Said,"Set up the operating room right away, and I'll be there as quick as I can get there." So he came as fast as he could possibly come, and by the time he arrived, the operating room was set up. See, it costs hundreds of dollars to set up the operating room at the county hospital. So, by the time he arrived, the patient's pulse was so fast that you could hardly count it, and so weak, and the blood pressure was so low that it didn't register, that is, it registered only faintly. So he went in, fast as he could, and our baby had already died. But we got a live mother. So that, they wrote that case up and oh, they made a lot of it because it was so phenomenal. The thing which had happened, as I believe, was that the little part that had ruptured the uterus was acting as a tampon so that the mother was not bleeding, you see. She was all right until after she got in the hospital and I guess that little creature moved his little arm and that caused her to start the hemorrhaging ferociously and he died soon, but we got her alive. So, that's the kind of... I loved obstetrics. Oh, I do love it now. We had so many babies because we had about three hundred deliveries a month and I had my share of them. Then I thought, "Never anything but OB," but then when I was ready to take my boards, this opportunity to go to Yale and study public health came. I was really thrilled at that because public health gives you an overall view. See, I just am so constituted that everything in medicine fascinates me. All I need to do is be exposed to it. So, I loved surgery, I loved everything about it. I loved psychiatry, I loved every, every area. When I got to Yale, again, God had something very special for me. There was this Dr. C. E. A. Winslow, who at that time was eighty-five years old, and he was the emeritus dean of the School of Public Health. He is the one who formulated the definition which is now in the World Health Organization, stating what health is. He also is quoted by Harvard in their public health journal, and he was a co-worker with Parke Davis, when they established public health in the United States and in England. So Dr. Winslow, I admired him so much and he had all of us, our whole class, come over to his house in New Haven, but then he took three of us as his special pets. We would go over to his house and literally sit at his feet. He was a tall man, very stately, white hair, white beard, and he would sit down, and we would sit at his feet in front of his great fireplace there in New Haven, and absorb everything that we could in public health. So, I had a little bit extra, in addition to what...Yale is an excellent public health school, but I had Dr. Winslow. While I was at Yale, I tried to take advantage of everything. We spent﻿16 RT: (cont.) quite a bit of time going around to various clinics in Harlem, and we went all over the state getting acquainted with the things which they were doing in public health. Delightful experience. So that, I think gives you most of my background. Loma Linda is an exceptional school. They had a five-year course in medicine when I took medicine. The one thing about Loma Linda that stands out in my mind: I had one teacher, a Dr. A. W. Truman who taught us from a book called The Ministry of Healing, and it was through this book that I got the concept of a truly large program for community work in public health because it gave the life of Christ and the work that He did. So I formulated the total health program on His work, and developed it with its relationship to health and modern medicine. So Dr. Truman did a remarkable job of bringing to us a practical work in the spirit in which the Master Physician Himself did it. TM: Well, I have some more questions about what you've told me so far. RT: Yeah. Oh, my mother's university was Shaw University. TM: Oh, Shaw. RT: Not that it makes so much difference, but Shaw University was a very good university. She was a graduate there, which was an unusual thing for a black woman, you know, to be a university graduate at that time. TM: Okay, going back, just some mundane questions. You went to Berendo Grammar School. How do you spell the name of your grammar school? RT: Oh. Berendo, B-E-R-E-N-D-O. It's still existing now. It's a junior high, I think. TM: And, let's see. How old were you when you began at Loma Linda? RT: Began at Loma Linda? Eighteen years old. TM: So, let's see, that would have been in about... RT: 1913. TM: When you talked about doing the obstetrics and about doing the operations at home and in hospitals, what years were those? RT: I finished in 19... I'll tell you, in 1913, I went to Loma Linda. In 1918, I finished, and then I came, I started practicing in southeast Los Angeles as my mission field, like my father went South. I joined City Maternity in 1923, I think it was, and from then on, until 1928 about, I was associated with the Los Angeles City Maternity Service. As part-time, I was in private practice, too. TM: Oh, you were. RT: Oh yeah. Twenty-four hours on the maternity service, and private practice.﻿17 TM: Were you a general practitioner or were you doing obstetrics? RT: Yes, I was doing general practice at that time. But soon after '23, I mean from '18 to '23 I was doing general practice, and then from '23 on, I rather specialized in obstetrics and gynecology. TM: And then, what years were you at Yale? RT: At Yale? Oh, that was a long time ago, before you were born, 1941-42. I graduated there. TM: '42. That was during the outbreak of World War II. You mentioned that there were three special pets of Dean Winslow. Who were the other favorite students? RT: One was Eric Wood, and another was a fellow who went into public health service. I'll have to think of his name. TM: Okay. Well, going back to the time prior to your medical school experience at Loma Linda. I'm wondering about your preparation, because you were interested from a fairly early age in health and nursing and medicine, and I'm wondering how you prepared for that career, for your career, in grammar school and at L.A. High School, and what subjects you took, and what may have been your favorite things to do in school, and also whether you had any teachers who influenced you. RT: Well, one experience I had which confirmed me in my determination to be a doctor was, in our own neighborhood there at 1038 in this little house that I tell you in which we lived, we had a neighbor. They were German people, I think, and one of the boys fell in what we called an oil ditch. The oil ditch was a stream of water which represented the overflow from some place, I never did know from where, that ran near our house. Ernie, one of the little youngsters, the Fennell youngsters fell in the oil ditch, and he was carried under two streets and finally pulled out, I guess a quarter of a mile downstream. But when they brought him in — he was a very fair youngster, complete blonde — and he was really black, he was so much affected by his, traumatized by his experience. Everybody was standing around, "Call the doctor, call the ambulance!" Well, I got in and gave him first aid, and by the time the doctor got there, he was breathing and so they said that I had saved his life. So then I said,"Well, just what I want to be, I want to really know how to do..." So that was another experience that I had before I took medicine. I took science all the way through. Chemistry I had all together in college and in academy. In college I had about five years of chemistry One of the chief things, I had some physics. Chemistry was real easy for me, I found it no problem, but physics, I was so dumb. Anything that was like physics, my mind just froze up, I couldn't, I just couldn't see. I stumbled through and got along, but it's an interesting thing to me today how simple chemistry seems and they are related, there's a place where they come... and how electricity and physics were two subjects which were just beyond me. As I say, I could get through by hard, hard study, but I couldn't see any light﻿18 RT: (cont.) in them, and so, those were the chief things, the chemistry and the physics. We had a little physiology and that kind of thing. TM: This was in high school? RT: Mm hmm. TM: You told me that you were the mother to your younger siblings? RT: Mm hmm. TM: So you were a mother, and you were in high school, too. RT: Yes, I was in high school. TM: ... preparing for a medical career? How did you manage that? RT: Well, the children were very wonderful youngsters. Each had his work, and each did it, and they were so honest and honorable that you didn't have to really... you didn't have to spy on them. So we would have our conferences and decide what we were going to do, and they'd go on and do it. TM: So you had family conferences? RT: Mm hmm. TM: This was when you were — what — teenagers? RT: Yeah, when we were teenagers. We even made a language called... Oh, we had a whole, quite a private language. We had good things to amuse ourselves, and making this language was one of our interesting things. And we kept that language until, oh, till we separated almost. So, but then we had all kinds of jokes, and my little brother was supposed to clean the yard, back yard, and when he was supposed to clean up, he'd go out and spend all his time making him a wagon to haul his things in, and he'd never get around to doing his yard. So we had a lot of interesting experiences. TM: While you were deciding to, and preparing for, medical school, which you began fairly early, when you were eighteen, you trained for medicine. What kinds of career choices or plans did your siblings make? Your younger brothers and sisters and your older brother, what kinds of career choices did they make? RT: My older brother died when he was rather young before he had finished school; and then my other brother, one of them started dentistry, but he was interrupted by the war, and then he became an expert automobile painter; and my baby, younger brother, as I mentioned before, went into the law enforcement, and he became captain of the Alameda County service, sheriff's service. TM: And your sisters?﻿19 RT: My sisters, both of them took nursing, did excellent job at the General Hospital till they retired. TM: Do you remember any teachers in primary and secondary school who had a particular impact on your experience? Either positively or negatively? RT: We had... I remember one of our teachers in fifth grade who used to say that we were never going to have any wars, another war, because of the fact that we were too intelligent, and she used to impress that on us. She spent a great deal of time reading Horatio Algier's books to us, and she didn't teach us too much. She was more interested in impressing upon us the high status of civilization which we had reached so that never again would it be possible for us to degenerate sufficiently to have another war. TM: Did you believe her at that time? Did you agree or disagree with her at that time? RT: Oh, I believed her, because I thought she knew more than I did. But I've often thought of her with World War I, and II, present condition, wars everywhere. TM: What about church experiences or religious... RT: We were born, as it were, into the Baptist church, because of the fact that my father was a Baptist minister. Then when we came to California, my mother was very much dissatisfied with formal churches. She realized that they did not meet her need, and she felt they didn't meet the need of anyone. So she searched around and she was introduced to a lady who gave what they called Bible readings, and who was interested in the health message, too, in health home treatments for sick people, and so she took these Bible readings from her, and this is Estelle Hendricks. And this is T. W. Troy again, coming back to this T. W. Troy name, the wife of this Mr. Troy. And she came home, she told me about this, these, the fact that they were interested in health, and I said, "Mmm," and they gave home treatments and so forth. I said, "Well, I like that kind of idea." So we started attending the Seventh-Day Adventist Church, and I became very deeply interested in their health message. And so I've been a Seventh-Day Adventist since then. TM: Well, was it the final years of your high school education which you attended a Seventh-Day Adventist academy? RT: Mm hmm. That's right. TM: Was that a day school? RT: It was a boarding school, San Fernando Academy. In San Fernando Valley. TM: And how many years did you attend that school? RT: I think it was about three years. TM: Do you remember any particular experiences at San Fernando Academy?﻿20 RT: No, not any particular ones. I had a good time, I enjoyed it, and again, I was one of the teacher's pets. I was always a teacher's pet. We had to work part of the time at San Fernando. We did at Loma Linda, too, in order to make ends meet, and at San Fernando, she gave me the easiest job in the whole place, that was distributing the mail and so forth. And she thought that because she was so partial to me, I would be a good spy, and so when I told her, I said that was one thing, with all my faults, "I cannot stand to do anything which resembles the work of a spy." So I told her, I said, "If you want to know anything about these girls, you're going to have to find it out some other way, because I just refuse to report on my associates or my peers." So we had a good time. There were about five of us there, and I was the only black one most of the time at the school, and in the women's dormitory. So there were about five of us there, and I, who formed a group. We called ourselves a family, and we had all kinds of privileges. They would allow us, when we went on picnics, they would allow us to go out for a private picnic of our own, we could do almost anything we wanted to, so I've always had privileges. I've been spoiled all my life. And we had the nicest group, and others were girls, some of them were quite... [interruption] TM: Well, I wanted to ask you, you use the words, "life's work," and I wanted to ask you about your life's work. RT: Actually, I think my life's work started in the basement of an old building at Loma Linda when this Dr. A. W. Truman talked to, told us about this book, Ministry of Healing and the Work of Christ. I saw what a real physician could be for a community, and I was inspired. But it didn't take much active development until I started practicing in southeast Los Angeles. There I saw needs that were so appalling, and I began to look around and evaluate the situation and determine that in the whole area with its 250,000 people, there was not a single clinic that was available. They had a baby welfare feeding station here or there, but no clinic. And so I started asking the city health department to develop and establish a clinic, and they said, "The need is there. There's no question about that, but we don't have any funds for it." So then, after I had continued to try to get the people lined up, PTA's and women's clubs and all those groups behind, and they still pressed, and we got nowhere, I said, "Well, an ounce of example is worth ten thousand pounds of argument." So my husband and I, who indulged me in all my whims, we bought a cottage at 49th and Central, and there we established what the state made me call the Temple Health Institute. It was a licensed clinic, and it very soon got too small for us. And we purchased a building and moved it next door, and there we had sufficient room to operate the clinic in. But before we got the second building, there was no room for my husband and me... See, our family had built a very nice stucco house on the west side of Los Angeles, and we had moved from there over to the east side there, to be nearer the clinic, and I thought I would live in this house, this five-room cottage. But by the time I got through putting in the equipment that I needed, which included an x-ray and also a kind of little hydrotherapy room, and beside the offices, there wasn't any room for my husband and me. So I said,﻿21 RT: (cont.) "That's all right, honey." I said, "There's a chicken coop in the back and we can sleep in that." And so, there was a chicken coop out there. It was about seven by nine, big enough to hold a bed, and it had a floor that had great big cracks in it, and just made out of real, real rough plank. And the sides were made of the same thing, and it had holes this big in the side, you know, where the lumber wasn't even. And then for windows it had the best ventilation you ever heard of — it had chicken wire with, just stretched across the windows — two of them, one on each side. And then for a door it had some rough, irregular boards that were just put together, and with big barn hinges, and a little hatch that you pulled over a hook. And so that was our bedroom. For two solid years we slept out there. And when the rain came down, it was all right, just so it came down straight. But when the wind blew, then we'd have to move our bed over to the other side of the room because it would come in those cracks, you see, and then the windows. And I delighted in it because I never was much about housekeeping, didn't like and don't like it, and this suited me because you could take the hose and wash your floor, and your house was clean. We didn't have to have anything out there because I could do all my bathing inside. We had all this hydrotherapy setup, and take your showers and your baths, and just put on your robe and go on out and get in the bed. And so I thoroughly enjoyed this. And it was up on stilts so that you got excellent ventilation, this chicken coop. So we stayed there for two years. Then we had what we called the Third Sunday Community Health Day that was open to the community. People from around the neighborhood that was at 49th, 4920 Central, and people came from all over the city, and finally from different areas of the county because we had there in the barn which we whitewashed inside, nice and clean, we had an exhibit called "From the Village of Misery up to the Land of Health and Happiness And there we had the old giant in the Village of Misery keeping these people down with their preventable diseases and their heavy tax loads. And we had three steps that went up to the Land of Health and Happiness. And people were fascinated by it, and janitors would come and look, we had college professors who would come and look, and we had little children and grown people, and so finally... And they came from every area, from Hollywood, Beverly Hills, and from your President Nixon's home, Whittier, and every place. So finally my sister Vivian suggested that community health week. So we thought that that would be fine. Now previous to this time that we got into this program, the Third Sunday Community Health Day, I had had an experience which really started this whole program in a definite way. I had a call one night — I was still on the west side then, before we'd moved to the chicken coop and a lady said in Spanish, "My baby's..." or in a Spanish tone or accent "My baby's breathing, hurts him to breathe. Come quick." So I thought of pneumonia right away. So I backed my little Chevrolet out of the driveway, I was there by her side in a little while, and I found the mother in a damp tenement house with the baby, and she's holding the baby closely in her arms, and looking at him and examining him, well, my fears were confirmed. So I rushed out without saying anything to her, hoping I could find a telephone, and I did, in a liquor store. So liquor stores are good for something. And so I came back and I said,﻿22 RT: (cont.) "Mother, your baby is very ill with pneumonia, but I have a bed in a county hospital, and I can take him. Wrap the baby up and take him right in, right now." And she looked at me as though I'd suddenly become an enemy. Previous to this she thought the doctor was fine, and so friendly and glad to have. She says, "I love my baby, and when he's sick, I can't let him go among strangers." So then I said, "Mother, look at your baby. See how he's breathing." [makes sounds of someone breathing with difficulty] I said, "Every breath is like a dagger in his little lungs." I said, "If we get him to the hospital, we'll give him oxygen and we'll relieve him so that he can be, that pain won't be there constantly." She just held him closer. So then I said, well, she's in panic and I'm not getting anywhere, so I'll change, and I said, "All right, Mother, we'll keep the baby here at home, and I know how to give hydrotherapy treatments, I know how to give hot and cold water to his chest, applications, and he'll be much more comfortable, and it'll help to cure him." "When my baby's sick, I can't let anybody put water on him." So I had to just stand by, see the baby die without the benefit of available hospital bed or some treatment that might have saved his life. So I said, "Well, here I am, actually working my finger tips off, and working myself to death to get health facilities when there's a priority." I said, "The thing that's most necessary is to have parents, or to have people, learn how, be motivated to use available resources." So from that time on I started to, I thought about the Health Study Club, and I said, "That's something I can do." And so a few doors from the home, in which this baby died, we started our first unit of a total health program, which was a Health Study Club in the YWCA, the Twelfth Street YWCA. And just yesterday I saw one of the girls who worked with me in that first Health Study Club in 1928, and she's still working with me in this total health program. That shows the kind of hold the program gets on you. So in these Health Study Clubs, we tried to tell the people to take the three steps to health, and I tell, right what they are, and we try to start a chain reaction, seeking for prevention and for positive health. And this worked quite well. We got a lot of parents. We got the city health department to send its nurses down to help us. And we had the cooperation of the leaders of the community. So then I thought, "If this works so well among parents, we could try it among young people." And at that time, the police officers in southeast Los Angeles were having a terrible time with a young gang there, giving them just all kinds of disorderly conduct and violence and violation of laws. So my sister, the sister who was here, who was very imaginative and kind of a good leader, she went out in the alley... Oh, I told you, my husband I got these two places. Well, my sister's husband was very good, he was interested in landscaping the place, so he... It had been a parking place, parking lot previously, and the ground was hard and sterile, so he dug that whole backyard, great big backyard, he dug it up twice, three times, and fertilized it, and finally got a beautiful green lawn. Then all around the edge he put flowers that were just as fine as could be, same kind of flowers they had out at Santa Anita. He saw them there and he felt they were so pretty, and we could afford at least to buy, put enough money to get nice flowers. So youngsters would come by and look over the fence — oh, and he had a white fence all around it, a white picket fence. And they would look over the fence. So one day my sister asked one of the boys, who was﻿23 RT: (cont.) the leader of this gang that had been so unpopular with the police officers, said, told him about our Health Study Clubs, and said, "Would you like to have a Health Club?" He says, "When do we start?" And so we said to him, "Start right away," and said, "we will furnish health speakers to you, but the rest of it's yours." So we told them they could have our barn, a room in the barn, and the table, and gave them a great long table, and we gave them a gavel, and he assembled his group. They were youngsters from about twelve to about thirteen, fourteen, and he hit the table so hard with that gavel, I thought he'd break it. And he says, "Men, we are going to have a club. It's going to be our club. We are going to make the rules, and we are going to keep the rules." They worked with us for three years that we were still there, and the officers reported that from the day they started the Health Study Club to the end of the time that we left, they did not have one law infraction of any kind. He said, "Those boys became the best allies that the police officers ever had." And the youngsters themselves said, "This program took us off the street, redirected our whole lives." Well, that was so consoling, because we knew it had worked with the parents, we found it worked with the youngsters, and then we said, "If it worked in southeast, we're going to try it in other areas." So we had Health Study Clubs out in San Fernando Valley, in Beverly Hills, in San Marino, where they wouldn't allow Marian Anderson — I mean, among the Daughters of the American Revolution — where they wouldn't allow Marian Anderson to sing in the Constitutional Hall in Washington. And everywhere people were, there the Health Study Clubs proved that they could grow. We had about nine thousand sessions, Health Study Club sessions at schools and PTA's, in Protestant, Catholic, and Jewish groups, and then in this youth gang, and then the theaters and then as health officers, district health officer. I was having a very hard... I was district health officer in southeast, from 1941 to about 1946, and I was having a time with venereal disease, and a large part of it seemed to be stemming from a certain group that attended one of the night clubs. So I said, "Well, be kind of fun if I could have a Health Study Club in a night club." So I went to Curtis Moseby, who vas the manager of two of the most notorious night clubs in Central Avenue, talked with him, and he said, "Why not?" So then I came down to the night club. As I told you, I'm a minister's daughter, and I had not been in the habit of frequenting night clubs, and especially of that group. So Curtis Moseby asked me to go up on the stage. And then he turned the spotlight on me. Here are these people sitting around, smoking, drinking, some of them gambling, and honestly, I was scared to death. I had been doing a great deal of public speaking, and always been perfectly at ease, and the thought came to me, "Well, people are just people," and that's what I believe anyway, you know. It's one of my basic beliefs. So I said, "People are just people. Start with these people as you did with the First Baptist Church last Sunday, and talk to them as you did the women in Boulevard, USC Boulevard Auditorium, a thousand club women there. People are just people." So I started with diphtheria, and from one communicable disease to another, I was soon in V.D. over my head and over their heads, and I told them, I said, "I'm the health officer here, and I need help." And they said that they would help me. So we organized﻿24 (cont.) a Health Study Club there in Club Alabam' and I have pictures of Dr. Yuell, who was the city health officer, and me, sitting here, in this night club, with these people all around us, and it was lots of fun. We would go there, I didn't suggest it, I didn't necessarily approve of the tactics that some of my Health Study Club members used, but I did approve of the results they got. One of them went out on the street one day, he got a prostitute, and he said, "Do you want to come in and have a drink?" She says, "Sure." So when she came in, she saw us there in our white coats, gowns, all that paraphernalia for taking Wasserman tests, and she, she was a good sport. She took a Wasserman test and didn't get her drink, and so we found a whole lot of syphilis and gonorrhea, got it under treatment, and that's one of the most... They had a band there, just a fellow named Otis, Johnny Otis, who used to lead that band, and he'd play the band, and we had our Health Study Club, and oh, it was great. So we've been everywhere, I mean everywhere. We went to the theater, one of the theaters, two of the theaters, to have Health Study Clubs there, and then we wanted to try other areas, but as I say, we went out, the other areas, and everywhere people came... One of our largest Health Study Clubs was in San Fernando Valley, with some actors' wives, and people of that character. And then we wanted to try different ages. Again, and I went out when I was health officer in southeast, I went out one day and there were five little youngsters who were playing on the sidewalk, and the youngest one was so little that when he got inside, eventually I had to lift him up to the, hold him up to the fountain to drink, and the others ranged around, from three to five to seven... I mean, four or five to seven years old. So I said to these kids, I said, "Would you like to have a club?" They said, "Sure." I said, "Go home and ask your mothers if you can come to the health center here and with Dr. Temple, and have a club." So they ran, raced home, came back saying, "Mother said yes." So they sat down. I said, "Now I've called you because I have a problem," and I said, "and I need some help with this problem. We have babies all around this neighborhood, they're dying of diphtheria." And I told them how diphtheria was the enemy that would choke the children, and didn't give them a chance, and it didn't deserve to exist. And I said, "Right here in this building we have medicine that will keep diphtheria from hurting any child." And I said, "How do you think the mothers let their babies die of diphtheria?" "Nobody never did tell the mamas." I said, "Well, what are you going to do?" "We're going to tell the mamas." They did. They went out, and the next time they assembled, they had added, let me see, twelve to their number — there were seventeen of them. Most of them parents. They continued to increase that Health Study Club until we had about eighty-five. And they went to a school and asked, with my assistance, to have the children attend. So we organized that Health Study Club to a total health team of prevention workers, and we got that community conscious of the need for immunizations and for early examinations. They did marvelous work. So that's with that. Then another interesting Health Study Club was a series that I did with the Los Angeles City schools. I started at USC, and they gave me a room, a large room in the library, and we taught there for years. And then I had Health Study Clubs for teachers in some other places. And then the last three that I held were at the California Hospital, and that's the reason that man called me this morning is because of the interesting﻿25 RT: (cont.) work we did there, California Hospital. And we had teachers, Los Angeles City schoolteachers and nurses, and the board of education cooperated with the community health association and gave part credit to the teachers who took the course. And I would set it up in this way: we'd have three nights — I mean, we'd have three hours a week for five weeks or more. And we had practically every private practice, every volunteer organization and all the public service groups that worked with us as our Health Study Club faculty. And we took these teachers through what we call the total health course, and in prevention and maximum total health attainment. And we did it as a regular Health Study Club, and in the Health Study Clubs you take three steps, and the three steps are really quite interesting, and they are steps which you can apply all through life. Matters not what your goal is, it matters not what your objective is. You'll do your most to reach it by taking these three steps. And I call them the ABC steps. You, first of all, you acquire essential basic health knowledge. That's your "A" step. And your "B" step, you bring your essential health knowledge into practice. And the "C" step, you communicate to persons who should be involved your own basic health knowledge and positive health actions. And that's all. It matters not... Now we had bubonic plague break out when I was a resident on city maternity service when I was one of the interns there, and it broke out in my district. See, I had most of the excitement wherever I was. So this bubonic plague broke out in my district. Everybody was scared to death. But what did we do? We applied these three steps: we acquired essential health knowledge, we brought our knowledge into practice, and we communicated to all who needed to have the knowledge, and got them into the practice. So that ... And it was so effective that we've never had any other outbreaks of bubonic plague in Los Angeles. So it really works. And so we got these teachers, who, instead of having them register just their names and address each night, we'd have them...they had a blank and it was... Their three steps, the information for the three steps was there. "What have you learned? What have you done with that which you have learned? And to whom and to how many have you given that which you are learning and living?" And over the five weeks, we had 243 (our classes were very popular), 243 would be what we'd average for our class, and schoolteachers and nurses. And guess how many they communicated to during these five weeks? TM: I don't know. If they took the information back to their children, their classes? RT: Mm hmm. TM: Must be thousands. RT: Over eleven thousand people during the five weeks. See, they said that they themselves had learned valuable things, because we had the very most able instructors from the health department, from County Medical, and from Loma Linda University, and USC and other places, who came and brought us the latest and best in prevention and health attainment. So they said they had learned a tremendous amount. Said it was the best in-service training course they'd ever had in their whole experience.﻿26 RT: (cont.) Then they said that they had brought into practice what they'd learned by changing their own habits of living, eating, drinking, sleeping, and so forth. And then they had given to their students, to their families first, and to their students and to other contacts, the principles that they had been learning and living through this exchange ...to the eleven thousand. So it's really quite an interesting program. It consists... it's very simple. It's idealistic, because it holds up the high ideal that is involved in good practice of medicine and in good public health. And in good healthful living. It tried to help people to aim for the three-dimensional total health goal, which is: one, preventing all forms of preventable disease and all forms of preventable disease-related problems — alcoholism, drug abuse, nutritional problems, et cetera, right down the line — and thereby preventing all cases of heart disease or cancer, or anything else that can be prevented. Then, the second dimension in that goal is to practice economy and meet basic needs, using your own total resources to help yourself to do what you can for yourself. The third is to go forward together under God, as a community united total health team to gain your maximum mutual benefits and to reach your highest realizable goals in health, in happiness, and prosperity. And to be made every whit whole in body, in mind, in soul, in your creator and with your fellow men. So those are the objectives. And then the program is simple because it gives these three, and only three steps for reaching your goal __ acquiring your knowledge, bringing the practice and communicating to others. And then the program is practical because it provides within itself four media through which anybody, any individual, any family, any group, any community anywhere, can take steps and reach the goal. And the four media are: your annual community health weeks; your follow-up Health Study Clubs; your strategically placed health information centers, which recruit passers-by and bring them into the total health program; and your block-to-block plans of continuing community health work, which operate among them,to operate to help reach the hard-to-reach who wouldn't come to your Health Study Clubs, nor your...to your community health week programs. Usually those in overcrowded, disadvantaged areas. And there you try to reach, teach, and love the youth and the adults and the little children into all phases of the total health program. So those are your four media through which you work. And the program is powerful because it does inspire people to unite their weak people, how with infinite power and come in and take the steps and reach the goals. TM: Okay. Thank you for explaining that to me. I have some specific questions about some of the things that you were talking about. For example, you mentioned... Oh, first of all, have any of the material about the three steps to health and the four media and about total health care, has any of that been written up? Have you written it up, or has anyone else written it up? RT: It has, it was written up one year in the medical journal of the California Congress of Parents and Teachers, and then I'm writing it up now as a manual for the Total Health Program. And we have had, as I mentioned before, approximately nine thousand health study club sessions. We've also had thirty-four annual community health weeks in Los Angeles County, and some in other areas. And our California Community﻿27 RT: (cont.) Health Week is proclaimed each year by the California legislature. I'll show you the copy of their proclamation. And it's been made a permanent institution in California. And government agencies at all levels are called upon to cooperate with the Community Health Association in developing Community Health Week, Then the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors proclaims it. I'll show you their proclamations. And the local mayors proclaim it. I'll show you the Inglewood mayor's proclamation and the Los Angeles City proclamation. And we've had block-to-block plans. Really remarkable one, one in Burrow Heights. We took the area around... I don't know, do you know Burrow Heights very well? TM: No. RT: It's the northeast area, where the Spanish-speaking people are congregated around the White Memorial Hospital, and there we took nine blocks and I went down to the city and got from the planning commission the addresses on each street, you see, and all the buildings. Then we had White Memorial Hospital nurses and medical students who worked with us in the faculty, and we visited every house in those nine blocks. And had a questionnaire, so we could get the health baseline, what their practices were, what their experiences had been, and what their present health status was now, as far as they knew. And we worked from there to see how much we could elevate it. It was quite remarkable. We had them develop seventeen Health Study Clubs in their own nine-block area, and take the three steps and they went to the White Memorial for immunizations and for examinations, and to some of their own private doctors, and then they helped others to do the same. And so that was a very rewarding experience. We had health...block-to-block plans with the Lafayette Junior High School. We had a terrific Health Study Club in this Lafayette Junior High School. It's right in the middle of Los Angeles's poor area, at 12th... near 12th Street and Central. And there the kids had been having all kinds of problems. So we worked with the nurse—or she was the health coordinator of the high school __and we had, for five years, we conducted this Health Study Club. And we didn't pull any punches. We would answer all the kids' questions, and I remember we studied V.D. and sex education. And one day I noticed, there was a rather... little fatter and a little older Health Study Club member, and I immediately thought, "Well, this is a parent, and I wonder why she's here?" So she asked to speak, and of course we had to say yes—trembling. She said, "I'm here today because I want to thank you." And that relieved us right away." She said, "I've always wanted to talk with my son about sex education and," she said, "but I didn't have any words, we had no common vocabulary." She said, "But since he's been taking these Health Study Clubs, he has been able to give me words, and now," she says, "we freely discuss everything that pertains to our life and living." And she said, "I just think there's a value." Well, this group was interesting, and I have some pictures of this club, and they were interested in everything except nutrition. They had cleaned up some of the walls in the bathrooms, and cleaned up the papers off the grounds, and they were interested in all those things, but nutrition, you couldn't get anywhere. So I said, "Well, a lot of ways to reach kids." So we had a sanitarian in﻿28 RT: (cont.) the neighborhood, and his wife was going to have a baby, and I know kids love babies. They just love 'em. And so I said to the kids, "Would you like to adopt a baby?" And they said, "Oh yes, we'd love it." So I talked with the sanitarian and his wife, he said, yes, they would let them adopt their baby. So when the baby came, when the baby was brand new, as soon as it could get out of the house, a couple of weeks, I had them bring the baby down, but I had them stay far enough away from the class so that they wouldn't get their germs. But we had a formal adoption of that baby. And so I said, "Now you have to know what your baby eats, you have to know when it needs its bath, you have to know all about it." So we got a mannequin as a stand-in of the baby, and got a tub, and the nurses from the White Memorial came down and showed them how to bathe the baby, how to diaper the baby. And then we started on this nutrition program, which was our objective. Baby had to have so much... We would weigh the baby and we would estimate its... We watched the real baby and its growth. We would determine whether it had its meals with regularity. And it did. Then we saw how it grew. So by the time we got through, oh, the boys were more interested in this little girl... They had to bathe that mannequin and dress it and so forth. So by the time we got through with this baby, and the baby was a cute little old baby, and they just responded beautifully, they had decided that the baby had to eat right. The baby must not miss its meals, and so forth. So they thought nutrition had a place. So they took their paper and their pads and they went down to the dining room, to the cafeteria. The problem had been that the kids would take all the sweet things and they would leave their other foods, basic foods, and wouldn't touch them. So they took a... the kids themselves, took a paper and pencil and made a note of what these youngsters were taking. Now, had we done that, there'd have been great resentment, but they had to tolerate it from their own peers. So they took that record, and they came back. They said, "It's absolutely terrible the way they're eating down there. We've got to do something about it." So the class decided that they'd like to take up nutrition as a special project. So they said they didn't want us in it. They wanted to do this themselves. So they started working. They organized a group. They got from us what the basic foods should be, and then they organized themselves and they worked with the music department to get some rhymes and some words to them, and they worked with the art department to get someone to decorate the auditorium. They decided to have an "aud call" [audition] and put on this nutrition program. So they invited me to come, and there I saw a great big streamer across the front of it, "Living it up healthfully at Lafayette." And we watched, and those kids came out with cowboy hats and a tray strung around their neck on which they had lettuce, tomatoes, and everything, just—celery—everything, just mouth-watering vegetables... and they'd choose them, and they no longer had to throw them away, so therefore the cafeteria came out of the red. So the Lafayette Junior High School Health Study Club was terrific. TM: I have questions about, what years this was. When was this you were working at Lafayette? RT: I have a whole scrapbook on that. As I remember it, I'm not too sure, but as I remember it, that was about 1947 or 1948, and it was for five years on.﻿29 TM: When did you first develop the Total Health course? RT: Program. Well actually, it evolved. The first thing was that Health Study Club that came out of the 12th Street baby's death, and then we did, the next thing, we had this Third Sunday Community Health Day, and then we thought of Community Health Week. And then after we got Community Health Week, we thought of the Health Information Centers and the block-to-block plan. So it just evolved, starting in 1928, with our first Health Study Club. And we had our first health week in 1945. That was proclaimed by the mayor and the county board of supervisors, and carried out in cooperation with Los Angeles City Schools and the county medical association, all the voluntary agencies taking part. TM: And can you tell me, what is the Community Health Association? RT: Yes. TM: Something that you helped to organize? RT: The Community Health Association is a voluntary incorporated nonprofit agency that works with other groups in the community to develop the four media for basic health education—that is, your community health week, your health study clubs, health information centers, block-to-block plans—which are sponsored by the Community Health Association. TM: And is that a citywide group? RT: It has operated in all areas of Los Angeles, as I said. Now, Health Week, I will show you this morning the reports from some of the county, all areas of the county of Los Angeles. You see, the county board of supervisors proclaimed it as well as the mayors. Then Community Health Week and other phases of the program have extended to other areas. Ventura County put on beautiful community health week, and Alabama, Huntsville, Alabama, has done a magnificent job of developing health week, in which they've involved not only Alabama but Mississippi and Tennessee. TM: How did Huntsville hear about this? RT: Huntsville, Alabama. TM: How did Huntsville hear about the Community Health Week? RT: Oh in a very natural way. We had, we have a Community Health Association Board, and one of our board members, executive board members, went to Huntsville, Alabama, as the pastor of the Huntsville college church, the college church, and as religious leader in the school. So he just started the program there. And then, Dallas, Texas, did a beautiful job in Community Health Week. We had a president of the American Medical Association who came to learn about our program, and he was so much interested that he came for two years as our speaker. We have had about five presidents of AMA speak at our Community Health Week luncheons. And so this president came, and he was fascinated. I'll show you his whole report on the thing. And he said that this program is the most practical and outstanding program for using﻿30 RT: (cont.) the total resources of a community as any program he's ever seen any place in the world. I have that in writing from him, which I'll show to you. And so he went back to... He came out to my home and just spent time studying the program, and went back to Dallas and did what he could to set it up. Now we have in Washington, D.C., a person who is the associate medical director of the Community Health Association. See, I'm the medical director and the founder and general chairman of the Community Health Week Total Health Program International, but this person is my associate medical director, and he is terrific. He has his master's in public health and his M.D, from Loma Linda, and then he's had experience in Africa for ten years in working with the natives both in Africa, and sending them over here to America. And now he is the medical director of the worldwide work of Seventh-Day Adventists. He's working with people in 200 countries. He just came back from India recently, and he is a Total Health Plan enthusiast. He says, when I thanked him for doing, he says, "Don't thank me. I'm interested in this program. I think it's great." So he's working with us to carry it all over the world. TM: What is his name? RT: Samuel DeShay. Oh, he's a terrific person. He was with us in March. See, we've had these...health week here in Los Angeles, consists of three phases. It's the district program, which is carried out all throughout the entire county of Los Angeles. And I'll show some of , the reports on that for this last year. And then... And from some other years. Then we have Pershing Square. Los Angeles City gives us downtown Pershing Square. That's the park downtown, do you know? Anyway, it's at 6th and, between 5th and 6th and Hill and Olive. Right across from the Biltmore Hotel there. We have the park for the week and we put on various screening processes and health education films and so forth. And then we have the conference and luncheon all day. And we've had it at the Biltmore for thirty-three years, and we had it at the Statler one year, and it was too small, and so we had it at the Biltmore. And there we have a whole day of study and a workshop type of thing. And we have had, as I said before, five presidents of the American Medical Association who've come to speak to us. And we've had the surgeon general of the United States Public Health Service. We're not a bit modest. We ask anybody. And interestingly, you know, I called, when I wanted the surgeon general, I called, and he didn't send his secretary to the phone. He came to talk with me personally. And this year we had the head of the California Health Department, Mario Obledo to some, and he was one of our speakers. And then this Dr. Samuel DeShay came out from Washington. Had a great day. And then we're working for a bigger day next year, because it will be our thirty-fifth annual, and we think we ought to really put on a program. Then by that time Dr. DeShay will expect to have a lot of the countries that will be working with us. In 1975, we had a special recognition. We've had recognition from local and national and international groups all along. Five presidents of the... No, four presidents of the United States have written to us and commended us. First, President Kennedy, then Johnson, and then your President Nixon, and President Carter sent us a letter, and it wasn't as personalized﻿31 RT: (cont.) as those others were, because he was in the midst of some heavy campaigning, but the others really spoke about our program in a very commendable way. And your Governor Reagan was my honorary chairman of Health Week for four years, and he wrote me a beautiful letter about it. And Pat Brown, father of the present governor, was my first honorary chairman. I have his picture, I'll show the picture, with me planning Health Week, and the present governor wrote us a beautiful letter for Health Week, which I don't have. Somebody, I think, borrowed that during Health Week. So we've had a lot of comments. Then in 1975, the general conference had a worldwide meeting in Vienna, Austria, and they had two hundred nations that were represented. And there they gave me an award, International Woman's Year, and.so I thought that was very nice of them. That was a recognition of work done. And so we've had some good recognition. And Smithsonian Institution, sent a photographer from Washington to take my picture, and they did' a portrait, and they hung that in the Institute for a special occasion, and displayed the program that I'm carrying on, especially for young people. And then I've gotten a lot of recognition from County Medical, and our Los Angeles City Council, and various and many other California women's clubs and other groups. So I think that rather TM: covers. You said that for... Well, you mentioned that in the beginning, when you first started your health clubs and you had a women's meeting in a barn, or a display in the barn, that your husband was a supporter of yours and worked with you in a lot of the things that you did. And so I'd like to ask you about your marriage and about how you met your husband and about your life together. RT: Well, it was rather interesting. I had no idea of getting married because I was interested in my career, and I didn't... I was scared to get married. I was just scared to death because I didn't like to follow failures in marriage, and I didn't see anybody that I could live with forever, so I, as I said, I had this motto not to get married unless I found someone I'd be more miserable without than I could possibly be with. And so I had a little friend, a very close friend. She's still a friend of mine, Hazel Scott. And Hazel had an uncle. She kept telling me about her uncle who was a real estate man, and very well known because he did some interesting subdivisions. And so she said she wanted me to meet him. So she brought him over one night, and I met him, and I liked him, and... just I liked him. But I had had so many proposals recently, so I just had a lot of those. You see, I didn't push them away. I would, I was always accessible to men's attention, because I liked them. And so I just, so we said when we met, we both were so busy, my husband was busy then—future husband—was busy with subdivision, very important subdivision, and then I was busy with work as usual. And so we knew we wouldn't have time to see each other for...again. We wanted to see each other, we decided that, but not again for a month or so. Anyway, he was calling me the next day and making an appointment and so I remarked to him that I was really wild and I loved outdoor places, and he said, "Well, I know a place that's wild." He said, "I'd love to take you there." So I said to myself, "Well, he means some place like Elysian Park or something like that, like most of these guys." So then I said yes.﻿32 RT: (cont.) So then he invited me and my sister, who lives here, and my other sister and his niece, and their company, and we had a couple of cars, and we were going to take the day off and go to this wild place. So we started out, and went, things went very smoothly, ordinarily, down San Fernando Road, and went up a canyon and the road got narrow and narrower and higher and higher. I've always been scared about narrow roads, mountain roads, and this was wild enough to suit me, sure enough. So, but he kept on going just as nonchalantly. So finally we got to way up in the canyon and way up high, and it opened up into a beautiful little plateau, and there there was a little cabin in which a man and his wife stayed. And then that wasn't enough. We got out there and then my husband said we were going hiking. So we hiked higher and higher and higher and finally found a little swimming pool, way up in the top of the mountains, and we stayed up there for a while. Then we walked... He says, "Time for lunch." And so we went back, and my family always fixes elaborate lunches, so we had a nice luncheon, all spread out. And while we were eating the sky clouded a little and I didn't think anything of it, and my husband said, "We'd better get out of here because," he says, "when it rains up here, it's bad." So I still thought that was an exaggeration. We had such a good lunch and we wanted to finish it with ease, and leisure. But he hurried us through. So we threw things in the car, and before we could get packed up, the rain started coming down, and my husband and I crossed one of the streams and by the time we got across the stream the water just rushed down. And my sister and their car could not come across. So I said to my husband, I said, "We'll..." He said, "Well, we're just stuck." I said, "Well, I have to get word to Mama," because Mother, if we went to the store and stayed too long, that was too bad, because... so I said, "We have to get word to Mama." I said, "I don't mind if we can't get out, but I've got to reach her." So I said, "We just have to get down the highway." He says, "You see this stream here?" Pointing back to... "Can your sister, can you come across that, or can her car come to us?" I said no. It was just swift and heavy. I said no. He said, "We have seventeen of those between us and the road." And he said, "It's out of the question." So I felt so silly because usually I could get my way, too. I was like my father, you know. I usually... and I felt real hemmed in. I felt like pushing and fighting and everything, but I said that... My husband had a most marvelous disposition. He just laughed at me in a good-natured way, and he said, "There's nothing you can do," he said, "the sooner you resign yourself the better. But there's one thing we can do. We don't have to stay in this car all night." He said, "We can go over the mountain and get back down to the house," where these people lived. And that house was just, it was a very plain house. It kind of reminded me of the chicken coop. But the floor was scrubbed as clean as it could be, and everything was nice and clean, and you were under shelter. Oh, I didn't tell you, the chicken coop had a good roof, and that's why we could stay in that. It had a roof that hung over the eaves to that, unless the rain beat in from the side, it couldn't get us. Well anyway, this house was nice and clean. So he, we fixed things, closed the car up, took what we had to take and started over the mountains, and I mean to tell you, you talk about a trip! And the rain! Over the mountains. And by the time we got down to the house, I was subdued. I didn't talk any more about Mama nor anybody else. I was so tired, so wet. And all I﻿33 RT: (cont.) wanted to do was to try to find some place that was dry and clean. And so I thought that my sister and the rest of the ladies in the party would sleep on the floor in the kitchen because it was so clean and nice, but my husband said, "Oh no, we have something better than that fixed for you. We fellows will sleep on the floor in here. We have nice couches, or nice little beds out here in the garage." And so they had an old barn, and they had out there, they had these army cots, three of them, and that meant two people had to sleep on the ridges between because there were five of us women, and they had the dirtiest, these horse quilts, the things... and they were worse than horses. It was the one thing I can't stand to think of even now. But to men, that was all right. So they fixed these nice "beds" for us out there, and I had to sleep on the ridge because I was one of the littlest. And so that was a night. I said, "I'll never forget the first night that my husband and I were out together," or the first day that we went out. So they, the guys slept well on their clean floor in the kitchen. They were warm and everything. We were out here with this horrible bedding, and no sheets, you know, not even a... I guess we could have gotten a towel if I'd have thought of it, out of our lunch kit, to have covered up some of that dirt. But anyway, that's the way we spent that first night. So I never, whenever I think of being wild and think of loving wild places, I never need to tell him any more about that. But that was a lovely place. We went there many, many times after we were married. We loved it. And it's still a nice place, way up in the mountains in Castaic, Los Angeles. Then that's the way we started as our introduction. We went together for about a couple of years, and my husband said that when he first saw me he knew he was going to marry me. And I certainly didn't know it, because as I tell you, I had no idea of really getting married. I just felt that I didn't... I've known some girls who felt they were kind of dishonored to be old maids, but I was proud of the fact that I was an old maid, and my mother never gave us the idea that we had to get married. She was very happy... She thought maybe somewhere there might be somebody who was good enough to marry her daughters, but she still hadn't found him. But anyway, we had that contented, we were contented at home, all of us. So then when we decided to get married, we... Well, first of all, I was very, very tired, so my husband gave me and my sister a vacation of a month in Salinas, in that area, the north of California area. And we came up... we had so much fun. And we weren't going to tell anybody we were going to get married, so he came up and he brought my mother, though. And so my mother and my sister knew. My mother went with us and we got married in a courthouse, and the... in Salinas. Then we stayed on our honeymoon for a while there and went to one of the nearby areas. What is that place where they have all the white sand? Anyway, it's one of the prettiest beaches in the whole state, and we found a nice hotel, and the man was so nice, he said he knew we were honeymooners and so he gave us one of his cottages on the seashore and we spent our honeymoon there. And that's the way we got started. Then afterward, my husband, he didn't even try to keep me from doing my work. Anything I was doing, he helped me if he could, and otherwise he encouraged me, thought I was kind of foolish to put all of myself into work, but he was very beautiful about it.﻿34 TM: Did he maintain his work, and what field was he in? RT: Oh yes, he maintained his work. See, he was really busy himself. That was one of the things he did. One of the joys that he had, luxuries, was the ride, after his hours, and after our dinner, we'd go for a ride. And oh, those rides! I never will forget. He loved to drive, and good driver, so I would just lie out there and get me good, good rest, and so... TM: What was your husband's full name? RT: Otis L. Banks, B-A-N-K-S. I tried to take his name for a while, but it was so confusing that I got my name legalized with the state board, and my maiden name, retained it. Went back to it. TM: So, did you have any children? RT: No, we didn't because, you see, I have a one-track mind. I just can't do a lot of things. I had some wonderful friends. I had one friend, and she had one child, then she adopted another child, and she wrote books and she practiced medicine, and she was a marvelous, marvelous mother. But I just couldn't do that. I mean, I don't know how. I go overboard with the thing that I'm into. And so I could never... And I always feel that a mother should be able to give children everything they need. Now she could, and yet give attention to her practice of medicine, to her writing of her books and to community work. But it wasn't in me. So I always said that, when my husband and I retired, we would adopt a house full of children and give them our full attention, but of course we didn't have that opportunity of doing that together. TM: And so, how long was it that you were married, you and your husband? RT: Thirty-two years. 1928. So... TM: So it was in the thirty-second year... Did your husband pass away? RT: Mm hmm. TM: I'm curious about the last period of your career. That is, do you see yourself as being in retirement or... RT: Oh, no. I work twenty-four hours many... I've worked right here in this house, I've worked all night long without even taking any break except to, not to lie down even, just take a break, take my shower, my shower breaks. I've done that for sometimes two or three nights at a time, going for three days without any break whatever, except to just shower. TM: What kind of work are you doing? Are you still practicing medicine? RT: The Community Health Week is very demanding, and then the health study clubs; but Community Health Week especially, and keeping up with the follow-up, the Total Health Programs. For instance, now I am working﻿35 RT: (cont.) with the group in Watts and they've adopted me as their consultant. They have a very fine health educator who worked with me previously, and he was in San Gabriel then, and he is following through on the Total Health Program and wants me to set their whole health center program, and especially the community outreach up in a Total Health Program setting, so I'm working on that very diligently with them. The Los Angeles County health services each year has worked with me. The health services director, Mr. Chamberlain, who resigned two or three months ago, was greatly impressed with Community Health Week. He'd known about it previously because the county health department has always cooperated in it. He had me come down to speak to his top staff and executive staff members about Community Health Week, and he encouraged them to cooperate with me in developing it. See, we have five health regions in Los Angeles, and in each of those regions there are districts. There are twenty-three districts altogether throughout the county, and in each district he wanted health programs to be developed, and I will show you the reports, some of the excellent things that were done during Health Week. So in all of this... TM: So this is ongoing work? RT: It's definitely ongoing. Community Health Week is followed by Health Study Clubs, Health Information Centers, block-to-block plans, and so forth. TM: Okay. Well, tell me, since this is ongoing, can you look back and tell me about the dynamics between having a career and a home life, family and a career, marriage and career. RT: Yes. Well, the dynamics don't amount to much because, actually, most of my life has been spent with a career. Home life, everyone has accused me, including my husband and my sisters, and her husband, of letting the career be the thing which dominated my life. TM: So you carried on at home? You said that you've worked sometimes twenty-four hours at a time, at home? RT: Well, most of the time that was with the Community Health Association and its various programs. TM: When did you start practicing medicine, individual clients? What you're doing is more public health and community health oriented by then. RT: See, I was appointed as an assistant city health officer in 1946, with the responsibility of organizing the entire Los Angeles City and developing a health program, community health program throughout the city, which we did in the pattern of the Total Health Program, with the Health Study Clubs and so forth. TM: So you've been working on programming...﻿36 RT: Mm hmm. TM: ...pretty much since then? Okay, I want to ask you some questions about your community activities—that is, church activities. RT: Well, in the church, again, it seems that I bring the Total Health Program into everything, and in the church we've brought the Total Health Program in the church. We have a Health Study Club, a home-based Health Study Club, and through that home-based Health Study Club we carry out all the health activities of the church. We do block-to-block plans, we do our Community Health Week, we put on Health Information Centers and that type of thing. And we have a Health Study Club which meets once a week in which we study basic health principles and practices. And then, financially I support my church very faithfully. We, Seventh-Day Adventists give tithes, and I also do special offerings, month by month. TM: Would you say that your religion faith has played an important role in your life or... RT: Oh, it's a dominant thing because I feel this way, that God is our creator and without him we can't do anything. With him we can do anything that's right for ourselves or for others. So religion is really my life. TM: Was your husband a member of the Seventh~Day Adventists? RT: Yes, he was. He wasn't when I first met him, but he became a Seventh-Day Adventist. TM: What about community organizations? RT: Community organizations, memberships. I'm a member of the Women's University Club and some of the voluntary agencies, voluntary agencies, and of course I'm a member of the American Medical Association, California Medical, the AMA, and life member of the California Congress of Parents and Teachers. I've done a lot of work with the PTA since 1934, I've worked with the parents and children in schools. And then with the Catholic women, I've done some interesting things. We had one Catholic lady who came to our Community Health Week luncheon, and she heard about the Health Study Clubs, became interested, went back to her own parish and organized a Health Study Club in cooperation with the Community Health Association, and then she got a number of other parishes to join it. Altogether she got 800 women who took the Health Study Club course which was developed by me, and they got their certificates, so forth. And so we've had Health Study Clubs... My community health work has consisted chiefly... I mean my community work has conisted chiefly of health work. TM: Do you belong to any sororities? RT: Yeah, I am an AKA, but I'm a fallen black sheep that isn't active at all. You're a member in a sorority? TM: No, I'm not. Well, tell me about your membership. When were you active?﻿37 RT: In AKA? TM: Yeah. When were you last active? RT: Oh, let me see. It was so long ago I hardly remember, and it was for such a short while. You see, I couldn't keep up with the social pace of the club because... Well, I like social things. For instance, my sister has several important clubs, I think, the Allied Arts and the Teacup Club, beautiful clubs. And I frequently attend with her and all of her club members are mutual friends of ours. But I can't tie myself down to a social regime because I don't have time for it. Not that I think it's important, but I just don't... it doesn't... I just don't have time for it. With me again, as I say, I have a one-tracked mind, and it's either or. TM: Well, how about political party membership? You mentioned presidents and governors, and I wonder, have you participated in political parties? RT: No, I never have, not to any extent, for the simple reason that I believe that whoever's in power, that we should be loyal to them and try to get them interested. I've always tried to work on them to get them interested in our health program. For instance, take Governor Reagan, I didn't believe in a lot of the things that he believed in, but I thought that he could contribute to our health program, so we asked him to be our honorary Community Health Week person, and we needed someone for a speaker, and we asked Governor Brown to come, but he was tied up, so he sent Mario Obledo to speak for him. So I try to keep free from any political activity that would keep me from having any access to help which a governmental employee or an elected person could give to us. TM: Well, what about the passage of public health legislation? Have you taken part in that? And I wonder whether any lobbying or... RT: Not to a great extent. The thing I'm anxious for, I would like to have a resolution passed making Community Health Week a national program. You know, we do have, the state has already passed it, as I'll show you, with a resolution. But that's my chief burden there. And if there are measures that seem important, I try to take the right side. TM: Well, there are a number of health issues which are very controversial, such as "socialized medicine" or national health care policy. What do you think about that? RT: Well, my position is very simple. I think that people who can give themselves health care, should do it. I think that a person should go as far as he or she can in using his own total talents and abilities and his available resources in securing for himself the health which he or she needs. I think that of individuals and of families and of groups in the communities. And then I think that where persons cannot, with their best efforts, do the things they need to have done, I think it should be done for them, beautifully, graciously, and without giving them a feeling of accepting charity.﻿38 TM: Well, there was some legislation in Congress that would have proposed a national health care policy. Do you know about that and were you at all in favor of it? RT: I have never found any legislation in Congress that seemed to me to meet the best needs. What I'd like to see Congress do, is to Dut its full force behind a voluntary program, such as the Total Health Program, and encourage individuals, families and groups, to study their total resources, and use those resources to help themselves. I think that's the best use of funds that a Congress could possibly make. TM: You were interested initially in obstetrics, and I'm wondering about the issue of abortion and birth control. RT: I'm very definitely in favor of seeing women space their children so that they can give the best care to them and the best health to them, and so I believe that intelligent birth control methods are really very good from the children's standpoint, and then I think as far as husbands and wives, I think husbands and wives can be happier if they can have intercourse without the fear of having unwanted children. So I believe that properly applied and used birth control methods are intelligent and legitimate. TM: What about abortion? Now it's very controversial because money for abortions, particularly for poor women has been eliminated. RT: As far as abortions are concerned, I think there's, I think that when a fetus has been... After conception, I think that a fetus is alive. I think that it is a human being, and I think that women have a right to terminate a life, if the life of the mother is in jeopardy or if it is proved that the child would not be a normal child. So for those, within those limited... I think that the thing to do, if you find that you're pregnant and you don't want your pregnancy, go on through with it, and then have someone adopt your baby or do something else, because after all, with the exception of rape... [gap] ... And the joy that she's had from that child is just... It's impossible to know. So I think that more happiness can come from having the youngsters, that you think at first you don't want, than you originally thought. I believe that you should have help, I think that the state should help you to rear any child when you're not able to rear it. I think that no child should have to suffer because its parents don't have enough with which to rear it. TM: Well, you would be in support of eliminating government money for abortions? RT: Well, not necessarily. If an abortion is necessary... For instance, I've done abortions myself, and I would do them again, and if a mother... if a person didn't have money to pay for it, I think the government should pay for it. But I think that those abortions should be done only when they are justifiable and under the terms which I've just spoken of, and not just indiscriminately. I think that if promoting indiscriminate abortions increased the chance for promiscuity, which I think is a very unfortunate kind of situation, I think that the degree﻿39 RT: (cont.) to which we allow love to be free from its sacredness is a harmful thing. Then I think that any kind of intimate relationship, such as intercourse without love, is actually very degrading and it certainly holds little in pleasure for either party, either in pleasure, as a means of promoting respect, admiration. TM: Now, issues such as this are very controversial for women's liberation, or feminist movement. I'm wondering what you think about women's lib. RT: Well, actually, I don't know whether I'm a good one to talk about women's lib because of the fact that I don't know anything about women's bondage, and I feel it's so thoroughly unnecessary, I think that women are highly privileged to be as beautiful, as useful, and as progressive as they're capable of being. I don't feel any bondage. I've never seen the bondage. And I certainly don't think, I don't think women should be in bondage at all, and I'm very much opposed to a man who feels that he has to keep women in their places and that type of thing, because it seems to me that he's very much out of his place to assume a position of that type. But I think that women and men are physically, mentally, socially, and spiritually suited to hold places which are uniquely theirs, and I don't think that you need the rivalry and controversy nor anything. I think that each be his or her best in his or her place, and that's all there is to it. And they can be mutually helpful and delightful. For instance, you take my husband, now he in no sense tried to boss nor dominate me. In the first place, he knew he couldn't, he knew I was wild before we got married, and I knew that I couldn't boss him, because he again was an independent person who had a will of his own, and a way of his own, so I rather enjoyed the fact that he did, and he didn't resent the fact that I did. So that to me is the way that people should get along. TM: So your statement about the women's lib movement would be that you support it, but... Do you support the women's... RT: It just depends. I seldom agree in all things, with any kind of movement, and there are certainly things about women's lib that I don't think are becoming nor helpful, and so I couldn't say that, without qualification, that I support the women's lib. But I can say that I support women's liberty. Definitely. TM: When you mention not supporting, not ever supporting across the board particular movements—and I am wondering, I'm wondering about the civil rights movement, which you lived through. You probably witnessed its emergence and its development. I'm wondering about... RT: There were certain parts of it which I could not support without qualification. But other parts I certainly did. For instance, I thought Martin Luther King did a beautiful job of attacking basic problems and going about them in a nonviolent way, but I don't believe in some of the things that people do in the name of civil rights. TM: Such as?﻿40 RT: Well, such as being destructive in any way, and being prejudiced and biased toward another group. I don't believe in that type of thing. TM: Well, what aspects of the civil rights movement would you say were the most constructive and what were the least constructive? RT: Well, actually, I don't know that I'm well enough informed to speak with any authority on that. One of the things I can say is that I think in anything, the desire to get an education, the pursuit of an education, the determination to seek excellence in everything for yourself, and not to oppress anyone else, I think those things are the most important. I think that before... I think that precedence should be given to being prepared to do a job rather than demanding the opportunity to do it when you're not prepared. I think that is a disservice to any cause. TM: Well, how would you say that race relations have changed as you... RT: Well, I think in some ways they're better, in some ways they're worse. So I think that it is certain that you see more black people and a few more Mexican people now who are in positions of management than you did formerly, and so I think that's all to the good. And yet there are some things, like in employment or education, in which we haven't made much progress, or probably even gone a little backwards, so I think that there we need to be sure we don't lose the gains which we have made. You mentioned that you were...just mentioned gains, and when I spoke with you on the phone, you talked about involvement in Proposition 13 ...impact. Oh, yes. Personally, I'm not a real good politician, and I don't in any sense set myself up as an authority, but as I see Proposition 13, it has the possibility of doing a great deal of harm to our health program. For instance, I was told that the south center might be closed entirely, and there they have men and women who are dedicated, as few people are, to carrying good public health out to the grass roots to the community. So I feel that any measure which would have those people cut off, have that closed, would be a great disservice to humanity. TM: And what does it look like? Does it look as though this will probably happen? RT: Well, thus far, they have nothing to the contrary, so... TM: Okay. Proposition 13 looks as though it will probably hurt poor people quite a bit, and I'm wondering, I want to ask you about being a doctor, which is an advantage. It means being advantaged. And I'm wondering about that, working, because much of your life has been dedicated to public health and work in the cities and with poor people, and I'm wondering about being a doctor and being advantaged and those social class differences. TM: RT:﻿41 RT: I'm not sure that I understand your question. TM: Well, I wonder if you'd just reflect on any tensions or any feelings you might have about social distinctions. RT: Oh. Well, I feel this way, I feel that every human being who lives should do, as I said before, do the most that he can to improve himself, and then I think he should have the opportunity of selecting those with whom he wishes to associate, I don't care who it is, I think that's an individual matter, and it should be done on the basis of preference by the individual. Even the little children, I think that parents should encourage them to select friends with whom they're comfortable. And I think that's beautiful. Yesterday, for instance, I was at the Allied Arts annual meeting, and it's such an example, to my mind, of a group that has had the liberty to select its own associates, and they have done a magnificent job. They meet once a month, and they collect funds, they give funds, to support worthy artists of various kinds, and then they have a good time with each other. Most of them well-educated women, and they have a spirit of sweetness among themselves, love, it's just a joy to associate with them. It's my sister's club. As I say, I don't belong to any social clubs. But you wouldn't want to spend a nicer time. They encourage family unity and patriotism to our country, and service to those who need help. And the things that bind them together are their ideals and their goal, mutual goals. TM: What I'm wondering about is, what's it like to be a rich doctor working with poor people? RT: Well, I don't know anything... I couldn't answer that at all, because as everybody who knows me knows, even the funds which I could have accumulated, I haven't accumulated because it's just like my husband used to say about me, he was so cute. He says, "I never saw anybody like her." He said, "She goes in to patients, and most of the time, doctors go in with the ir pockets empty and come out with them full." He said, "She goes in with her pockets full, and she comes out with hers empty, and then comes to me to supply what she didn't have." And so I've always seen so many needs as I've gone along. And take the Community Health Association, thus far we've never put on any fund raising drives, which I hope we will do in the future, because the program needs a budget of at least $400,000 a year in order to support a full-time medical director, a secretary, a health educator, and a public health nurse, and a field man to develop some of the interesting programs that we could do out in the field if we had him. Then the association needs headquarters from which to operate it, sruch as my husband and I did way back when we first started the program, with our little health center. We now need headquarters from which to carry on a community outreach program, and where we'd do our teaching and our Health Study Clubs and demonstrate what a good block-to-block plan is, and promote our community health weeks, and so forth. So the program needs all of those things, and it has never had it, so it's always been able to use every dime that I could﻿42 RT: (cont.) put out. For instance, telephone bills are sometimes very high, and the association doesn't have the money to pay them, then the nearest person, the medical director is the one who knows about it first, and surely she wouldn't let the telephone be cut off, even if it's a hundred dollars, a hundred-and-something dollars, as it quite often is, because we call Washington and all around, for that. So I don't know what a rich doctor would feel like working among poor people. I know what a doctor feels like who has something to share, even though it's a very modest amount, with some people who need it.' For instance, I was out in Watts last week, and there's one of the community workers, and she's a very dedicated person. She's not a professional, but she has...those community workers have taken special courses, and she's very efficient in her work, and working as a go-between between the center and the community. She has a little girl, and I met her at one of the meetings there, this little girl sat near me, and I saw her sparkling little eyes and everything—she's five years old—so I love all children, honestly, you know I just love 'em. Some of these days they'll have me in jail, you may have to come to bail me out, because I will succumb to my desire to just pick up all children, physically, and bring 'em together some place where I have for them. And so, anyway, she was there, and she's sitting near me, and I couldn't resist her, and so I got acquainted with her and found out • that her name is Lynette, and she was five years old. And the next thing I had to know was whether she would be willing to be captain for my first children's health study club in Watts, and she said yes. So she was going to graduate, and her class was putting on...she was going to graduate from kindergarten, I think. Her class was putting on something, so I had the pleasure of making a little contribution to her, to Lynette, so that she would have something to give, and her mother was so thrilled, because she has the two children, and she's alone, and she was struggling along to support them. Well, I know I can tell you of the joy of a person who has very little herself, has in sharing. It's just lots of fun to give a dime or so here, or a dollar or so there. Then in our church, we have a regular system of tithing, and also offering, so we give a tenth of what our income is, in addition to a free will offering, and there, through that, I'm able to give what amounts to quite a bit during a year, for various charitable purposes. TM: You mentioned public speaking, and I was wondering whether you have an organized schedule for public speaking or whether... RT: No, I don't. I have been subject to call and that schedule depends on two things—on how much time I have to spend, and then how available I make myself. Most of my times of speaking have been special occasions. For instance, like the women's federated clubs, they've wanted to know about the Total Health Program, and I always go, and then other clubs have had the same thing, and we've... But most of my work for the public is on the basis of the health, through the Health Study Club. For instance, the tenth district PTA and the first district, we did a﻿43 RT: (cont.) a beautiful, beautiful thing with the first district PTA —we would teach the leaders, and then encourage them to develop Health Study Clubs and carry it on down to grass roots, and we put on courses of five weeks or six weeks or eight-week courses, so that's been the largest part of the work which I have done. Then of course, during Community Health Week I usually speak at, I allow myself a few minutes on the program. TM: I'm wondering about your leisure time activities. [laughter] It sounds as though you're busy... RT: Uh huh. I am. TM: ...doing your work, and pretty committed to that, and I'm wondering whether you had time for travel or...and you say you like doing wild things. What kinds of wild things do you like to do? RT: Well actually, my wildness has had to be caged up most of my life, because with the exception of the time when I was married... Now,' when I was married, my husband loved... so we would just run off and do things. And then before I was married, I had a little friend who, for instance, would come up to my office on Central Avenue and say, "Well, come on. Let's go to Mexico," with a company. And my parents and his parents were sometimes going down or some of our friends, and so I'd put on a pair of jeans and a blue shirt and a cap and they'd take me for a little boy a lot of the times. And oh, I just felt so released. Here I'm leaving. I was working on city maternity with those heavy, heavy cases. I was working on a heavy private practice schedule, and here I slip out of it all, I leave somebody else in charge, and run off with these kids to Mexico and get down there and shoot birds. I only did one shooting. I've always been interested in guns. My first experience was when I was about, oh, I guess, ten, about ten years old. My brother bought a gun, and it was a great big double-barrelled gun, and I wanted to shoot it, and everything my brother did, I had to do. I was a regular tomboy. And everything he did I had to do, and he told me, he says, "Honey, you can't shoot that." He called me Honey. "Honey, you can't shoot that gun. It'll knock you down." Well, the more he told me about it, the more I had to shoot it, so one night he finally said, "Okay, go out and shoot." And I pulled, and I thought I was going to be knocked over, and dead the next minute, but he had put in a blank cartridge, so it did nothing. But eventually, I did take the gun and shoot it, and it would knock me down. When I would get up and keep on until I finally got so I could shoot. But anyway, down south in Mexico, this friend, a darling person—we are good friends still—he'd been married two or three times.. TM: Who's this? What is his name?﻿44 RT: Well, I didn't name him because of the fact that he is married, you see, and it might be embarrassing to his family. But anyway, he was a good marksman, and so he gave me a gun, and I shot, and the first thing I did was to kill a bird, and I said, "No, I'm not going to shoot any more at anything live. I'll take these targets and shoot at 'em." 'Cause I didn't want to kill a bird when I didn't need it, or didn't want it. But I just loved guns, and I was always...all those wild things I would do. But I felt so free down there because down in Mexico, you see, you were talking with a different group entirely, and they have... Mr. Troy was the one, and I went down there, his wife had this house down there, at that time they had cows and a ranch, and I'd just run around, just like I was perfectly, didn't know, had never been to medical school, didn't know a thing; I wanted to go out under the stars, there were no electric lights... So those are some of the wild things that I did. TM: Well, what other... RT: But I haven't had time, my sister and her husband have decided I've got to get away from things, so they are going to take me to Hawaii in July for the first... it'll be the first vacation I've had in, I don't know when. TM: In how long? Have you gone on any others? RT: Just about two weeks. TM: No, but how long has it been since you've had a real vacation? RT: Actually, I don't believe since my husband died, I had a real vacation. TM: Well, when I first came into this lovely little room, you showed me your music setup. RT: Yes. TM: You showed me your speakers. What about music and... RT: Well, music is my one hobby. I mean, it's my one release. Now, for instance, I can turn those speakers on, and I can be anywhere, because it takes all kinds of music, and... this is a world traveler who is himself a professional musician, who makes electronic equipment, and he tunes pianos—he has such a good ear—he came and he put one of his records that he himself had composed and had recorded, put it on my equipment, and he stood still. He says, "It's all there." He says, "Every note in my two Steinway pianos is there." He said, "Every single syllable that my singers have produced, it's all there." And so he says, "This is the best reproduction I've ever heard any place in the whole world, of my music." And he'd just finished touring Europe and going over there. So I know nothing about music, absolutely nothing, but I passionately love it. So that's one of my releases. TM: Well, what kind of music do you particularly enjoy?﻿45 : Well actually, I like spiritual music best. For instance, now, you take the Tuskegee choir, their hundred voices, they sound just like a beautiful instrument. Oh, it's simply magnificent to hear them come out of this, behind these...and the soft melodious tones. And so, I enjoy that. Then I love Hawaiian music, and my sister's husband has a lot of excellent... I've bought him a lot of Hawaiian music, too, because he loves it, and I love country music—almost anything that expresses people's feelings, is precious to me. What music do you like best? TM: Mmm, I'm not sure. I like all kinds. You have a beautiful setup. Now you were telling me, one thing we didn't talk about was the fact that you have recently moved to this house. And you didn't talk about where you used to live. RT: In Pasadena. We had a house which was exactly a block and a half from the Wrigley home in Pasadena. That's where they, the headquarters of the Rose [Bowl] Parade is. It's right in those, among those, it's one of those great big houses there that was formerly a rich person's mansion, and it had almost an acre of ground, right there in the heart of that residential area. And I had loved it. I found it for the family, and we took it, and the same man who made all of our furniture —see, he makes... You notice that stuff? This stuff? He carves it up at the seminary. Look at the kind of work he does. TM: Oh, beautiful. RT: He's made all of our furniture. So he made... And he made the drapes here, and he finished my chest. My husband bought this for me. It's a hope chest. Beautiful cedar chest. This man finished it. Well, anyway, he did all of our furniture in 601. And this is the third' house he's done for us. We've had three houses. TM: That was 601? RT: 601 South Organe Grove Avenue. That's right, a few houses from Wrigley's house. TM: You can smell the cedar. RT: Oh, it's delightful. And so first of all, we had a house in Berkeley Square. Do you know about Berkeley Square? Well, it was seventeen houses on a private street which had a cul-de-sac at the end. It had gates, barred gates at both ends, the street. And multimillionaires built it, and so then after the multimillionaires moved out, we poor people could move in, and we had one of the largest houses there, and it was quite classy. It was an exact replica of an English manor, and the wood in it was just exquisite. A quarter solid oak. that they sold by the square inch, rather than a... and all of that paneling and so forth. And so he decorated that house for us, and then he decorated 601 in Pasadena, and now he's doing, he's in the process of doing this. He made the drapes in there, and he made all of the furniture in the bedroom. Before you go you can look at the dresser in that bedroom and see the carving. Oh, it's just simply marvelous. Anyway, he helps us with these things. So we've had these three houses, and this house is﻿46 RT: (cont.) to be the last house. I don't expect to do any more moving. And so, we're making this house serve for twenty rooms, in the other house, you see? And one of the things which we did since we've been here, we put in this window, and it's a picture window, as you notice, goes all the way across that room, that wall, that closed wall, and it -just opens up the world to us. And I'm an outdoor person. As I say, I'm wild, and I can live with those flowers and the trees and everything that close. TM: Now, throughout our discussion you've mentioned scrapbooks and photographs, and resolutions... RT: Suppose we look at some of those documents. TM: ...and awards, and I'm just wondering, yes, whether we could look... RT: Just a moment and I'll bring them in. Just wait for me. I wanted to assemble some of my things. This is the kind of work that this secretary does, this daughter of the Forum and she does the most beautiful things for me. Comes over and works with me. She's worked with me until one o'clock, two o'clock in the morning. And one of the reasons I wanted this to wait was because so much of my material is inaccessible. TM: Oh, it's beautiful. RT: This is from my health department, and... TM: City of Los Angeles Health Department. This was presented to you. It says, "is retiring as an assistant health officer." This was presented to you when you retired? Now let's see, I'm looking for a date on this. RT: It was in '62 anyway. "Whereas she's gained for the city of Los Angeles in the Health Department national and international recognition for imaginative leadership and lasting contributions in public health practices." And this is from the city council. TM: That is beautiful. "Resolution: Community Health Week." Which talks about Community Health Week and the Community Health Association, Incorporated, under the leadership of Dr. Ruth Temple. "Be it resolved that Los Angeles, the Los Angeles City Council does hereby proclaim the week of March 17th through 23rd, 1974, as Los Angeles Community Health Week, and it extends to the Community Health Association, Incorporated, and its director, Dr. Ruth Temple, best wishes for many more years of continuing success in their health programs." RT: Then, the Los Angeles County Medical Association. Now I'm very happy about that because so many times... TM: Oh, my. RT: That is all hand tooled leather. TM: Just beautiful.﻿47 RT: And so many times the county medical doesn't cooperate, you know, with public health, as you probably well know. TM: "Founder and general chairman of the Community Health Association, Incorporated. Token of appreciation for her services in behalf of the public health; her vision and foresight; her personal dedication and devotion are to be highly commended." This is from the Los Angeles County Medical Association. Beautiful. What was the date on which was presented? RT: I don't know. It doesn't tell. TM: Will you display these? Will you put these... RT: No, I never have... But that was probably in around '73 or '74. Then I'll show you some recent things. This is this year, from Inglewood mayor. TM: Oh, I see. These are... RT: Yeah, they are from what we are doing out there. Oh, I'm so happy to be a part of that Watts program. TM: This is a proclamation. RT: Now this is a proclamation. It's for 1978, here in Inglewood. TM: Proclamation... RT: Community Health Week. TM: Community Health Association. "Traditionally focused public attention during the month of March toward the prevention of disease and promotion of health." And it ends, "Now therefore I, Merle Mergell, mayor of the city of Inglewood, do hereby proclaim the week beginning March 12, 1978" — this is this year's — "Community Health Week, and urge all citizens to cooperate in this move to advance the welfare of our community." Community Health Week this year. RT: This is Mayor Bradley. TM: This also is March, 1978. Proclamation of Community Health Week, 1978, Mayor Tom Bradley. Oh, my goodness. This is beautiful. Community Health Week, County of Los Angeles. This is a proclamation on the 12th day of March, 1978. Kenneth Klein, supervisor, second district. RT: Now, I'll go back and show you the president's, of the United States, later. But this here, in California, this is of Pat Brown, and I have this picture. This is a Community Health Association resolution, and here I am, and this is Dr. Quinn of our association. I have this picture, the original of that. TM: And this, Dr. William Quinn and Governor Brown and Dr. Ruth Temple.﻿48 RT: And this is the California resolution. I have a great big beautiful one of this, but that's what I told you, I haven't all of my things assembled. TM: This is the 1962... RT: Mrnrn hmm. You read that and then you'11...bring you up-to-date. TM: ...the California legislature, relating to Community Health Week. This is a state resolution. "WHEREAS" — I'm reading the second one — "an ever larger number of communities are observing Community Health Week, sponsored by the Community Health Association, Incorporated, under the leadership of Dr. Ruth J. Temple of Los Angeles." Moving down, it talks... RT: Moving down, let's come down to the resolution. "Resolved by the state that the legislature of the state of California shall hereby proclaim the period of March 18 to 24, 1962, be Community Health Week in California, and thus designate the week in which the third Wednesday in March occurs to be Community Health Week in California And each year thereafter be it further resolved that the legislature hereby calls upon public health agencies at all levels, as well as private organizations and citizens to cooperate with the Community Health Association to observe such a week in educational efforts and other appropriate activities, to encourage faith in God, in our county, foster self-help, good health practices, towards sound economy, physical fitness, total health or wholeness, happiness and service through our state, our country. And be it further resolved that," et cetera. TM: And it's signed by Jesse M. Unruh, speaker of the Assembly, and Glenn Anderson, M. Anderson, president of the Senate, and the clerks and secretary of the Senate. So March, the third week in March, or third Wednesday in March was permanently... RT: It's the Wednesday, the week in which the third Wednesday of March occurs, you see? That throws it always around a Wednesday. And then this is just one of the letters I have from your Governor Reagan, [laughs] TM: This is, "Dear Dr. Temple, I am pleased to once again accept the honorary chairmanship for Community Health Week and for your program to further involve the people of California in prevention of venereal disease, drug abuse, alcoholism, and many other destroyers of human health and dignity. Your efforts to encourage each person to assume personal responsibility for attaining the goal of total health and prosperity are most commendable, and I support them enthusiastically. I wish you unprecedented success in this most worthwhile undertaking, and hope you will keep me informed as the program progresses. Sincerely, Ronald Reagan, governor. [laughter] RT: So it goes. I would like for you to read... Oh, here's one. Report, Congressional Record, report from the Health, Education and Welfare. But there's one I want you to see. This is from President Nixon.﻿49 TM: RT: TM: TM: RT: I see this is from the White House. This was for March 12, 1970. "In honor of the quarter century of Community Health Week in Los Angeles," and it's signed Richard Nixon. So much of my material with which I've worked constantly is out of place because of... TM: Do you have any extra copies of some of your health program literature? Three steps? RT: I have some programs for the last Health Week luncheon, which you can have. These are some reports in various parts of...these give... Those are some older things that have been done. Each year...I have it done for this year. They are complete on Health Week. TM: I'm looking at clippings about Health Week in a number of communities. So Community Health Week was established in a number of communities... RT: Oh, throughout the whole of... TM: All over California. The whole metropolitan area? RT: Throughout the whole of Los Angeles County, in every one of the five districts. I have them in alphabetical order. Claremont, Compton, Downey, Pico, Rivera... Herald American... alphabetically. TM: ...Glendale News Press. I see these are clipped from all the area newspapers. Hollywood Citizen News... RT: Some of the groups cooperate with us. Here's a press release from the automobile club. This is a weekly calendar the news media compile. "St. Patrick's Day parade and Community Health Week in downtown Los Angeles highlights the list of things to see and to do during this week." TM: The Whittier Review... Florence Messigner. Huntington Park Signal. Angeles-_ News Advertiser. That's all. RT: Picture of our... That's... TM: Oh, my. This was during Community Health Week? RT: That's on our day, the luncheon. A photograph... Lakewood, Monterey Park. Monterey Park, what? Progress? Norwalk Herald-American. South Bay Daily Breeze. Articles in all of these papers. '65, Community Health Week. 1965. Los Angeles City schools cooperate with us, beautifully. They send this kind of thing out to the schools regarding Community Health Week.﻿50 TM: Is this an extra: Do you have an extra copy? RT: Mm hmm. TM: Let's see. The Health Study Club and block-to-block plan. "The health of the community is every citizen's responsibility. Without the cooperation of every citizen, the health officer is handicapped in achieving the best results. The Health Study Club provides the opportunity for us to learn the techniques of disease prevention and health promotion. Block-to-block plan is a grass roots approach to putting into practice the lessons we have learned about health." This is by John L. C. Gotham. Gotham? And did you mention Dr. Gotham? What is his role in the organization? RT: He's a, I have a lot of large pictures of the... TM: Who's Mr. Gotham? RT: Oh, who is Mr. Gotham? Oh, he is the assistant, or he was the assistant director of the health department. TM: I see. RT: Picture... TM: Pictures? Mayor Bradley... RT: Oh, this is... I have the original. This is a nightclub scene. This is'the health officer, Dr. Yuell. There I am, and here's our nightclub, the Health Study Club. I'm so proud of that. TM Photograph of the nightclub Health Study Club. Xerox of a photograph. RT: This was with one of the supervisors. TM: "Award of merit, from Warren M. Dorn, chairman of the board and supervisor, fifth district." This was December 12, 1962. "Director of the Division of Public Health Services, City of Los Angeles since 1948, and one of the most widely known and respected physicians in southern California who, during her 39 years in Los Angeles City Health Department, became a recognized authority on obstetrics, helped establish the Southeast District Health Center, becoming its first district health officer in 1942, whose name is included in Who's Who in Medicine in the USA and Canada, whose honors include a life membership irTthe Women's University Club, was selected for the Look Magazine Applause Award, received the Eleanor Roosevelt Award as Woman of the Month..." Tell me about the Eleanor Roosevelt Award as Woman of the Month. RT: She gave me a silver tray as a woman of the month. TM: When was this? RT: I don't remember the year. I have the tray someplace, but I don't know.﻿51 TM: And I'm continuing to read from the citation, "And the Leading Citizen of the Community Award of Southeast Business and Professional Men and Women, who has received special recognition for her endeavors from President Kennedy, Governor Brown, the California State Legislature, the City Council and the County Board of Supervisors, and whose fame and wide renown rests principally on her significant accomplishments in the field of organized local health study clubs resulting in the wide observance of Community Health Week in America." And these other things are from other ones? rT: Los Angeles County Medical Association Bulletin on the outside. TM: I see. Community Health Week, March 16 through 22, 1969. This is the Los Angeles County Medical Association Bulletin, advertising Community Health Week. TM: RT: This is a photograph of your receiving an award, announcement of Community Health Week from the Junior — is that Junior Chamber of RT: And Junior Chamber of Commerce. TM: Communit Commerce? RT: Yeah, Junior Chamber of Commerce. TM: Oh, I see. This is an award. Plaque. RT: This was President Kennedy. "Endorsement of the 17th annual observance of Community Health Week, Los Angeles, from President Kennedy." This is from the White House, March 7th, 1961. "Look Applauds," they gave me a heading and a cartoon. TM: This is in Look magazine. "Dr. Ruth J. Temple, one of the most foward-looking public health officers of any U. S. city," This is "Look Applauds." RT: This is that worldwide recognition, International Woman of the Year. TM: Oh, this is International Women's Year certificats of honor in recognition of outstanding service, "the 52nd world session of the Seventh-Day Adventist Church expresses appreciation to Ruth Temple." And this is July 15, 1975, RT: This is a quotation from the president of the American Medical Association. He states, "Dear Dr. Temple, In all sincerity you have launched and have carried on, and will continue to carry on, the most practical plan of total health for the community that I have ever heard of, and I will count it a privilege to carry the word as I go over the country." Then, in another letter, he states, this is March 19, 1968, "I trust you will pardon my intense interest in the Community Health Association, but frankly, I think it is the most practical and outstanding example of the utilization of all the﻿52 RT: (cont.) resources of the community toward total health to be found anywhere in the world, and I'm anxious to see your program expand greatly. Cordially yours, Melford 0. Rouse, M.D., President of American Medical Association." I think that's a real find tribute. And it's especially important because of the fact that Dr. Rouse, as president of AMA at that time, was close to the world medical association, meeting with all the doctors, throughout the entire world, comparing programs, and that he says ours is the best that he's ever heard of any place in the world, it's very commendable. And I think it is true, because it's the most simple, most practical and the most powerful way to help people to help themselves know and use their total resources to prevent the preventable problems and meet the highest goals in total health and happiness and prosperity. ... From the Beverly Hills mayor. TM: Proclamation from the city of Beverly Hills. And, let's see, I think I see... Oh, this is March — how is it? — one week in March of 1958. So this is in 1958. And here's a photograph of... RT: This was one of the, the nightclub situation. Well, this is interesting. TM: This one is from 1950. RT: No, that wasn't what I thought it was. TM: Disease prevention. RT: I have one from the Los Angeles County Museum, in which it speaks of an exhibit that we had there, in which over a hundred thousand people had viewed the exhibit, but I don't have that. TM: Now, is this one of the clubs? RT: Southeast Health Study Club. TM: Let's see. Is there a date on this? RT: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Here, here. This is that famous... TM: This is Lafayette... RT: Lafayette Junior High School group. I have a group where they're reaching out their hands to their baby. Boys and girls. This is Mrs. Bushkins there, health coordinator, who's such a splendid person. I have a great big scrapbook that they sent to me. This was a resolution that was introduced in Congress. TM: Joint Resolution, House and Senate. This is November 3, 1977, Mrs. Burke, about the national Community Health Week. RT: Excuse me, let me see if I have anything more. See, I have been using different things for different groups, and things are all honest and thoroughly unassembled, and... But I think we've gotten the essential things that you need, don't you?﻿53 RT: (cont.) ...a dollar placque from the medical association. Now I'll show you something I prize. TM: "Welcome, Dr. Temple, to South Health Center." RT: That's in Watts. Isn't that the sweetest thing? TM: This is done in paste and little... RT: Sequins. TM: ...sequins, yes. RT: Isn't that precious? I wouldn't take anything for that. That was this year, March. This was during their Community Health Week celebration. They had an open house, and I was the guest of honor. Oh, I was happy about that. Those little kids down there... I delivered them. Lot of the babies, and a lot of men and women in this audience of... I was the speaker, one of the speakers for that day. There was a gray-haired man, "I'm one of your babies you delivered." [laughter] TM: You delivered generation of family members. RT: So that's the way it goes...