 Story_ID: 16631 Speaker 1: I want you to state your name and spell it for us and give us the date of your birth and today's date. Speaker 2: Today's date is what? The twenty-first? Speaker 1: The twenty-third. Speaker 2: The twenty-third. Okay. So just tell me when you're ready? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right now? Speaker 1: Right now. Speaker 2: All right. I'm Yvonne Brathwaite Burke. I was born October 5, 1932. Today's date is July 23rd, 2001. Speaker 1: And your career? Speaker 2: My career is one of, where I was a lawyer. I practiced law for quite some time. And then in 1967 I ran for the California State legislature. I was the first African American woman to be elected to the California legislature. And, actually, when I was elected there were only three women in the legislature; I was the third woman in the legislature. I then served in Congress after that for six years and ran for Attorney General of California in 1978, I was not successful. I was then appointed to be a supervisor of Los Angeles County [Calif.] and, in a district that was not really the greatest district for me, I served as an appointee for eighteen months, I was not elected to the Board of Supervisors. I went back and practiced law with major law firms as a public finance lawyer until 1972 and I ran for office in 1973, I came to the [County of Los Angeles] Board of Supervisors and I've now been here for eight years. Speaker 1: So would you describe yourself as a public servant now, or lawyer, public servant *(inaudible)? Speaker 2: I think I am a lawyer-legislator is how I like to refer to myself, even though the job I have now is not legislating, it's legislative but mostly administrative. The county of Los Angeles is made up of about 11 million people, I represent two million of those people, there're five of us who are administrators and who supervise the operations of the County of Los Angeles. Speaker 1: So it's mostly administrative. We have responsibility for eight hospitals, for welfare, for children's services, for corrections, the sheriff, for the jails, for probation, for taxes, and all those things that in other places are within the cities. Speaker 2: And I also then want to know, give us the location, the address of where we are right now. Speaker 1: We're at room eight six six, the Kenneth Hahn Hall of Administration, Los Angeles, 90012. Story_ID: 16632 Speaker 1: And I ask five questions of everyone, they're sort of People-magazine-ish that, you know, I ask of everyone; I'd like to know what your favorite color is. Speaker 2: My favorite color is green. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Grapefruit. Speaker 1: Favorite--. That's a good one! [laughter] Sorry. Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Mexico. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It's going to be all right. Speaker 1: That's nice. Okay, very efficient. So grapefruit! That's the first time I've heard grapefruit. Every so often I get thrown one, that's good. Story_ID: 16633 Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your parents and I was really intrigued, sort of, about your father. I'd like you to give his name and if you could talk about his background and what you know about his growing up and his family back then. Speaker 2: My dad's name was James Watson, James Thaddeus Watson. He was born in Texas and, of course, when he was born in Texas it was not a state, it was a territory. He was born at the last part of the nineteenth century [1892]. He was a farmer. He was the youngest of seventeen children and his parents owned the farm in Texas. His mother had inherited it from her father. So it was a family farm that his mother inherited but his dad and mother operated the farm. And, as I say, he was the youngest of seventeen so they had inherited it about the middle of the nineteenth century. It--. He stayed there until he ran into a problem, actually, with a relative. It was a situation where, in those days, farmers took goods from the store and they used goods from the store and then when they got their crops they would pay the store most of what they got from their crops. Well, he married a schoolteacher, who was my mother [Lola Watson], and, of course, the first thing she did, she came--. She was a schoolteacher in Paris, Texas, this was in Roxton, Texas. She moved to Roxton, Texas. She got a teaching assignment there, and the first thing she did was to say, oh no, we pay as we go. Well that didn't go over great with the store and the owners of the store happened to be cousins of his. So when the time came for the crops and he said, "Well, no I don't owe you anything." And she had all the receipts, there was an argument that ensued and they threatened to lynch him. And he got the first train out and he went to Phoenix, Arizona. So he went to Phoenix, Arizona, my mother had to finish her teaching assignment. After she finished her teaching assignment, she moved to Phoenix, Arizona and they stayed for a little while, maybe a few years, then they came to California in 1921 and they moved to Los Angeles. He worked at various jobs a little bit but, really, very soon after that went to work for the studios, for MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer] Studio, and he was a janitor. My mother did not do a lot for a while but then she went to school and she became a real estate broker. So, he was a janitor there at the time that [U.S. President] Ronald Reagan was head of the Screen Actor's Guild [SAG]. There was a strike and, I can remember at fourteen walking in the picket lines they organized and my dad was one of the charter organizers of the service employee's union which, at that time, it was called the Building Service Union, it has now grown to be a huge union but at that time he was one of the organizers and the charter members of the studio unions. And an interesting part of that is that not only did I walk on my first picket line, they established a scholarship and I was the first person to get a service employee scholarship, not the studio union had a scholarship, but the service employees, and I was the first person to get the scholarship from that union. Story_ID: 16634 Speaker 1: In that scholarship [from her father's Building Union Services] you went to a school, right, there? Speaker 2: I went to--. Well, I went to Berkeley, University of California at Berkeley. I stayed there for a couple of years and then I decided I wanted to save money, I came back. I graduated from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Calif.]. I did not go to school the whole four years; I went summers and rushed through so I actually got a degree in three and a half years. And then I went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.] law school and I still received my scholarship for four years so I got, like, a year of law school free. Story_ID: 16635 Speaker 1: You know, I want to go back to your father [James Watson] and his growing up, did he share any stories with you about his parents and growing up in [Roxton]Texas? Speaker 2: His parents were, obviously if his mother inherited the farm, he had an uncle that was a lawyer, family was really people who were considered fairly distinguished, they were farmers and they were successful farmers. But his mother was a baker, she would always bake bread for everyone and it was a large family but it was a family that I guess you would say was a successful family. Speaker 1: Now when you said that your relatives, that the relatives were the ones who owned the store, were they the white relatives? Speaker 2: Those were white relatives, yes. But they all lived in the same place [Texas] and the stories that my mother would tell, my dad would never tell these stories, my mother would say that since my grandmother was a person who baked bread and she loved to bake bread, she wasn't a commercial baker she would just, every Saturday; she would bake a lot of bread. They would buy the flour from the relatives and then the relatives would come on Saturday to get the bread. And she really hated that, my mother did. This was the way people accepted things in those days, though, you know. You were a relative on some days and on other days you were a stranger and that was very strange to my mother. Story_ID: 16636 Speaker 1: Now you mother, what did she--? Tell us her name and what you would--. My mother's name was, her real name, was Leora Moore, but she changed her name fairly early in life to Lola and she always, as a broker and as a businesswoman she went by Lola Watson. Speaker 2: And did she share anything growing up? You said she was from Paris, Texas? Speaker 1: She was from Texas. Her dad had been born in Oklahoma on a Cherokee reservation and she spent a lot of time trying to get her share of the money, as a matter of fact, because everybody in the family got a certain amount of money, some of them very successfully. So one of my uncles, rather her uncle, one of her uncles used his money, well his money rather, oil was found on it [his property], so as a result he spent his money, and she happened to be his favorite niece, so that's how she went to college. She went to a normal school and that's how she became a teacher because her dad didn't really have very much money, her mother died when she was fourteen so she had stepmothers. But because she had this uncle who had, had oil on his property, he sent her to school, did a lot of things for her and, as a result, she was a teacher and had a lot of benefits. Speaker 2: Did she ever talk about the mixed heritage of, you know, Indian and African American, you know, or anything about the family being on (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well, I knew only one grandparent because, obviously, my parents were much older and she had been born also at the last part of the nineteenth century, in 19--,1891. So her dad was probably born, I guess, you know, in the mid-nineteenth century. And he did talk a lot about the reservations and he was the only grandfather I ever knew and he was a really interesting kind of person. Speaker 2: Did they speak of it as proudly or something that was--? Speaker 1: Well, you know, a person who came out of that era and he certainly wrote beautifully, he had gone to school because I think that what they did is the children there [from the reservation] were sent to special schools. So, obviously he had a person of--. Even though--. His father had been a, what they call a freedman, so he was black, his father was a freedman who he did not know, he only knew he was raised by his grandmother who was a person, he said, of really a status within the tribe. So he had also had a lot of benefits but he never knew his father. Story_ID: 16637 Speaker 1: And, how did your parents [James and Lola Watson] meet? Did they flirt? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. It's a really interesting story. My dad played baseball so he was on the town team and he was playing in Paris, Texas, they were on the weekend playing, and they had a picnic after the baseball game and my mother met my dad. And they dated for six years before they got married. Speaker 1: And do you know why, I understand why they left, you know, Texas, that's obvious but do you know why they didn't settle in Phoenix [Ariz.] and they came out to Los Angeles [Calif.]? Speaker 2: I don't think the job that my dad got in Phoenix was one of where my mother was not happy with it and I don't know that they knew anyone in Los Angeles. They had some friends, I think, who were coming here to Los Angeles as well but a lot of people, I think, were coming from Texas to Los Angeles. But they liked Phoenix all right except he was not happy with the job he had. And my mother was not happy with the opportunities there. Story_ID: 16638 Speaker 1: And, okay, you're the only child? Speaker 2: I'm an only child. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you talk about some of your early memories growing up? Speaker 2: I grew up very close to where we are right now [Los Angeles, Calif.]. I was born on Washington Boulevard and, which is about, oh, fifteen blocks away, and I grew up there. I went to school there, close by, for a few years. And then--. And i took--. I grew up at a time where there lots of things that were offered as part of WPA [Works Progress Administration] and all of those things so I had every kind of lesson you can imagine, dancing lesson, violin--, well now violin lessons my mother just found a violin teacher and I had a violin teacher from Germany who would come to the house and I don't know whether he was a person who had left Germany as a Jewish person or not because his name was Bacon so I don't know. But at any rate all I know is that I had a German violin teacher who also taught me piano. I would go to all of these other lessons at centers nearby. I was an only child, as a result I did get a lot of lessons and opportunities, I guess. And then when I was in the fourth grade I was transferred to a special school and I went over to Thirty-second Street School [Thirty-second St. USC Performing Arts Magnet, Los Angeles, Calif.], which was a laboratory school, and I went by bus by myself. By the time I was in fourth grade I would catch a bus to go to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.], to their lab school. Speaker 1: So your first school was what, what's the name? Speaker 2: Twentieth Street School [Los Angeles, Calif.]. Speaker 1: Twentieth Street School. Speaker 2: It was right around the corner from where I lived. Speaker 1: Okay. And then you went to this laboratory school. Speaker 2: Right. I went there for elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went to a school called John Adams [middle school, Los Angeles, Calif.] and then I graduated from Manual Arts High School [Los Angeles, Calif.]. Story_ID: 16639 Speaker 1: And what would you say--? At that time, though, your, wait your first name is--. Speaker 2: My real first name is Perle. Speaker 1: Perle that's right. Speaker 2: But I was never known by that, that's another interesting story, my mother [Lola Watson], of course, was a lot older when she, she was forty-four when I was born, so she did have some problems when I was born and my godmother gave the name and her middle name was Perle so she gave the name Perle. But my mother said Yvonne but since she was the one who filled it out for the doctor. I was born at home, not in a hospital. My mother was very ill, the nurse who was there who took care of me had every idea that she was going to get me because my mother would probably die or something but my mother did live. But somehow on my birth certificate this was the name, Perle, which I've never been called except for a few people in elementary school because they had to give that right, that name, when I went to elementary school. Story_ID: 16640 Speaker 1: What do you think you were like as a young person? Were you, you know, do you think you had a great imagination or, you know, young--. Speaker 2: I was volatile, I think, a lot more than I am now. I think that I was certainly probably fairly aggressive. I can remember fighting with boys until I was like eleven. I was somewhat a tomboy. I've always liked athletics even though in my day, you know, there weren't a lot of opportunities but I always played a lot with boys. And also music was very important to me, music was the center of my life. When I got a little older I started taking piano at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angela, Calif.] and I took there--, until I got to high school [Manual Arts High School, Los Angeles, Calif.] and I became interested in debate and what they called declamation at that time and competing and poetry reading and so I competed all over the state and that's how I was able to get other scholarships to college because I got a lot of awards and scholarships. Story_ID: 16641 Speaker 1: And what was the environment that you were growing up in? I want to understand what Los Angeles [Calif.] was at the time. Speaker 2: Los Angeles was a very diverse place, just like it is today, and even though I lived on Washington [Blvd.] and Central [Ave.] which you would probably call the center of the black community because on that corner of Washington and Central was a hotel called the Clark Hotel, there was a theater, the Lincoln Theater was very close by. So it was the center of--. Central Avenue was the center of the black community. However, it was highly diverse in terms of who lived there. I remember the Japanese being taken away. Not understanding it or knowing what it was but I remember the day they left. The Chinese were there that I knew people who I knew who were Chinese, Latinos; there were always a sizable number of people who were Mexicans. I don't know of any other Latinos I knew. Then when I went to junior high school [John Adams Middle School, Los Angeles, Calif.], the junior high school I attended also, at that point, was, you know, maybe, 10 percent African American, about 20 percent Latino and always Asians, maybe the same number of Asians as there were African Americans. And the high school [Manual Arts High School, Los Angeles, Calif.] I went to was about the same, there were always--. It was a very diverse. The high school was mostly white, of course, but there were Asians and African Americans and Latinos and--. People were separate but together. I was, like, the girls' judge and then I was Vice President of the student body. There were no black teachers in the school. I don't remember having any black teacher after, maybe, my second grade teacher. But, I did go to one junior high school for one semester where I did have a black teacher, an English teacher. But other than that there were not a lot of black teachers but my mother had friends who were teachers so I knew black teachers. And I also can remember the first African American woman who became a lawyer in Los Angeles and it was really interesting--. In those days, you know, on Sunday you would go to dinner, out to dinner. You didn't go to dinner in the middle of the week [laughs] you only went out to dinner and you went to Chinese food. I don't know whether it's that way in the east but in California on Sunday you went to Chinese food if you were going out to dinner. So I was--. We were sitting very close to where we are now [Los Angeles, Calif.] on Eighth [St.] and San Pedro [St.] at the Chinese restaurant that was our favorite restaurant and this woman walked in with her cap and gown on and my mother [Lola Watson] explained to me that this woman had graduated from law school. And it was Martha, at that time, her name was Martha Malone. She ultimately married Joe Louis [professional boxer], incidentally, but she had a crowd of people with her and my mother explained to me that she was a lawyer and she was going to practice law and everything and it was a very exciting thing. Story_ID: 16642 Speaker 1: Now you--. What messaging as a black person did you receive, I mean, you were aware that you were black or colored or, you know? Speaker 2: Sure, of course. Speaker 1: But in this community [Los Angeles, California]--. Speaker 2: We couldn't live anyplace. I mean, there were many places we could not live. We lived where we lived until I was, maybe, certainly about twelve before we could move, maybe eleven. And I was very aware of when the first lawsuit that was represented by Loren Miller, I mean this was like a man who was a hero in our world. He set aside restrictive covenants and once restrictive covenants were eliminated we moved away from where we had lived and we moved into other areas and we moved into areas where before we were restricted and we couldn't live. Story_ID: 16643 Speaker 1: Now what things were forming you as a young person? Were there teachers that influenced you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean, who were some of the other people that were influencing you? Speaker 2: I had great teachers. I had teachers who would spend hours and hours with me. I had, you know, teachers who made arrangements for me to go to a lab school, you know. You know--. I had--. There was--. Really the way I think I got to the lab school was that the first African American woman was elected to the school board and she was only there for a very short time, her name was Faye Allen (?), and she gave me a transfer and put me in this lab school [Thirty-second St. USC Performing Arts Magnet] . and, of course, obviously there were no other blacks, I was the only black in the lab school. in the school there. And so the school I graduated from in elementary school there were no other blacks in the school. But, you know, and too, I was sensitive because there were sometimes things that were said that were offensive. There were kids who came from Oklahoma and this was during the war and people came from Oklahoma and from Arkansas and these were people who were very different and who did not underst-, know how to get along and were very, you know, and they brought prejudice. And all of us were aware, everybody in the school was aware that these were people who came from other places where they were prejudice people, and they brought it with them. Speaker 1: So California at that time was a little more egalitarian in some respects? Speaker 2: Right. But it was discriminatory, you know, we couldn't use the swimming pools except for a few swimming pools and the beaches. Everyone knew you went to a certain beach. You went to Santa Monica and you went to Cabrillo Beach and those were beaches blacks went to and we went to the beach all the time. And--. But you didn't go to Ocean Park because it was a white beach. So it was a segregated place but at the same time it was--. And public accommodations, restaurants were not open to everyone so--. But there were certain ones that were open and those were the ones you went to. Jobs were--. All jobs were not open too. People--. So California was segregated in public accommodations, in a sense, but at the same time it was always a diverse place and, of course, schools obviously were not segregated. Story_ID: 16644 Speaker 1: Now your father [James Watson], he started at MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer], you said, in 1921? Speaker 2: No, no, not in '21 [1921], he came to California in '21 [1921]. He started there a little later than that. Speaker 1: Okay. But this was the time the movie industry is really, sort of, you know, taking off and so--. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: So how did that impact or did he share any stories or, I mean, that wasn't--. Even though he was a janitor was that typical that there were a lot of blacks as the janitors then? Speaker 2: Yes. There were lots of blacks who were janitors. You know, it was always, forever it was always the Irish ran it, of course. You know, in terms of the janitors' union, the Irish were the people who were really the people but he got along very well with them. And there were blacks who were janitors. I don't think there were Latinos who were janitors; I think it was just blacks and whites. And, of course, you know, I mean, it was, like, he brought home all the pictures of all the stars and, you know it was--. Obviously we were--. I was young and we followed everything and he knew all the executives, of course. (laughs) Speaker 1: So--. What--. Are there any other anecdote story, and I'm talking about graduating from high school [Manual Arts High School, Los Angeles, Calif.] that you'd like to share or, you know, sort of, come to mind or memories? Speaker 2: Well the strike [Building Service Union strike at MGM, 1946] was, of course, very difficult for us but we survived the strike. It also opened up a lot. The fact that he was a labor person, opened up a lot of experiences because the labor unions even in those days had entertainment and had conventions in interesting places, so it opened up a lot of things to us. Speaker 1: Do you think your father--. Was he--. Did he ever feel or you get a sense about him, your mother [Lola Watson] being a, you know, a teacher and him being a janitor, was there any other sense about that or--? Speaker 2: Well she was a kind of an interesting person; she never drove her car. So he had to drive her everywhere. And the other thing that was interesting about my parents was is that they both like to gamble and they had what they call Chinese lottery here so often we went to places where they had Chinese lottery. And my dad, during the Depression, won a large amount of money, that's how we bought the house and they followed the Chinese lottery. I had relatives who lived in Watts [district of central Los Angeles, Calif.], and that's where the Chinese had the lottery, so we went there. My parents also liked the races and so I grew up a lot going to the horse races. So it was kind of an interesting situation. Until later years I had no relatives except a few relatives who lived here who were my parents' age but later some of his brothers, one brother, moved here with his family. So I did have some relatives later that I got a chance to grow up with and know. Story_ID: 16645 Speaker 1: So you were pretty much a nuclear little, you know, family, your parents and yourself. Now anything else, any other memories growing up things? Speaker 2: Well one of the things, I guess, are my mother [Lola Watson] did have a nephew who, when the war was over, he came to live with us and also his sister came to live with us and stayed with us so that I did have other, those two, relatives that I got to know and was close to. I can remember on Sundays, this nephew, he played the piano and so we would play the piano and sing in the afternoons sometime. It's true, it was a nuclear kind of family of where people had a lot of activities and there was--. I never had a lack of activity and one of the other things growing up in California is every holiday most blacks went to Val Verde [Calif.]. And Val Verde had a swimming pool and had a clubhouse and everything and you would just, en masse, like, drive and it was like, you know, it's probably like thirty miles from downtown Los Angeles [California] but that seemed a long way. And that was the place where people--. There were places where African Americans, just like they did in the East, I'm sure, where there was entertainment. Story_ID: 16646 Speaker 1: Now what would you say in terms of your parents [James and Lola Watson], you know we all take things from our parents, what--, how are you like each one of them, you know, what do you get from both, each one of them? Speaker 2: Well, I probably take a great deal from my dad. My mother was a little bit different than I am. My mother was, kind of, diverse, you know, she was a person who was aggressive but at the same time, you know, she liked the idea of being home a lot, sometimes. And she always, of course, talked on the telephone a lot, had a lot of friends. But she was traditional, she was not too happy with me going into politics. My dad thought it was great because my dad had been involved in politics over the years and once supporting a mayor's candidate and various things like that. Both of my parents were Republicans and they became Democrats when I ran for office so they could vote for me in the primary [California Primary Election, 1967]. But I can remember though, I was always a Democrat. When I was a little girl and going to this Twentieth Street School [Los Angeles, Calif.] where most of the people were Democrats there and my mother would put a button on me, a [Thomas] Dewey button, when I'd leave home and when I'd get close to school I'd put the Dewey button underneath my collar (laughs0 because I didn't want to be labeled as a Republican. So I never was happy being a Republican, I never was but my parents were Republicans. Story_ID: 16647 Speaker 1: You know, the story about--. The Indian story. We are actually getting ready to do a program that's why I was intrigued with that about the mixed heritage. Speaker 2: Well I think most blacks in Texas are Indian and--. And see there were like four tribes so even though one person, one part of your family may be Cherokee Tribe, but others are Creeks and Chactaws, the Chickasaws, I mean, all four are there but they look different though, different people look different. And the Creeks were dark, you know, and some of the Cherokees were dark. But the Chickasaws tended to be lighter people. Story_ID: 16648 Speaker 1: So you say you were most like your father [James Watson] though? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yes. Speaker 1: Now who--. Was there any thought, like when you graduated, that you would not go on to college or was there a push in your family that that was--? Speaker 2: There was never a discussion. There was never--. From the time--. I can't even remember ever any discussion at any time about not going to college. There was never a discussion about it. Speaker 1: Now when you were just, I want to go just a tad bit younger, did you dream of being anything? Speaker 2: Well, now here's where your parent--. My mother [Lola Watson] always said that you want to be a teacher and that's what you're going to be. And that's what she had in her mind, I was going to be a teacher because that's what was good [laughs]. And that was what I was always taught and that's what I said I was going to do until, here's the thing that was interesting, you know, I said that Loren Miller [attorney] had this case [to outlaw restrictive covenants in Los Angeles, Calif.] so we were able to move. So you can imagine this man was like a god because we wanted to move a long time. We owned our duplex there on Washington [Blvd.] but then we still couldn't move away from there. So when I was fifteen, a friend who was his nephew, had a birthday party and he had it at Loren Miller's house. When we got to the party, the party was outside on the patio and in the yard, but the house was two-story and as you looked up you could see Loren Miller with his books sitting up in his library reading. And as I looked up there I said, "That's me. (laughs) That's what I'm going to do. I'm going to have all those books and I'm going to be sitting in there and I'm going to be working at home with my books." And that was what I kind of visualized, that I was going to be a person who saved the world, who was a lawyer, at that moment. And from that point on I said I was going to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: Now how old were you then? Speaker 2: I was fifteen. Story_ID: 16649 Speaker 1: So when you went to school--. Speaker 2: I majored in Political Science. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh you majored in Political Science? Were you thinking politics at the time? Speaker 2: No. I was taking political science because it was the best thing for law school. Speaker 1: So talk about your experience at, you said you went to UC Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, Calif.]. Speaker 2: I went to Berkeley first. Speaker 1: Berkeley first, okay, okay. Speaker 2: And it was quite an adjustment for me. I came from Manual Arts [High School, Los Angeles, Calif.], which was a school that was middle-class, lower middle-class school that was middle class, lower middle-class school, albeit it was an integrated lower and heavily white school. It was not the same as when I went up to San Francisco [Calif.], I mean, to Berkeley and kids who were coming from those private schools and Lowell High School [San Francisco, Calif.] where they were highly intellectual and even Berkeley High School [Berkeley, Calif.]. I had a few months of real adjustment that I had to work very hard and had to put it all together and fortunately I was able to. Plus I didn't have a choice, I had to have a B plus, A minus average, I really had to have almost an A- average to keep my scholarship. So I didn't have a choice, I had to get good grades, I had a few months there I had to really get it together and learn how to write essays and do all those things and I was not accustomed to those, we always had true-false and multiple choice at Manual Arts. Plus I was a Latin major so I, you know, I majored in Latin. So I had a little difficult few weeks, I won't say a semester because I never had low grades in terms of on my record but--. And then I decided to come home to save money because I knew it was going to be expensive to go to law school. And I also knew that I wanted to get out in a hurry so I would--. In those days you could take as many units as you wanted so I took twenty-three units a semester and then I would go to summer school so I was able to rush through and I rushed through college. Speaker 1: Now when you, just back to UC Berkeley, when you went there was that, I mean, you're away from home for the first time and so I'm wondering what else was going on in terms of your maturation during that, you know, that--. Speaker 2: Well, here's an interesting thing, my mother [Lola Watson] and one of my cousin's wives who had been to college, the two of them took me to Berkeley and I went to the dorm and when they got there my mother saw a maid and said to the maid, "Watch her." (laughs) And the maid said to me, "You know, I went to college too but I was looking out the window--." or something at a boy or something or anyhow she violated some rule and they put her out of college and she said, "Don't let that happen to you." And I said, "Oh no, I won't let that happen to you." But I thought it was interesting my mother put the maid in charge of me and she left. Well it was a little bit different, it was my first, of course, it was my first real independence even though, as I said, my parent's gave me a certain amount of leeway and I have a friend and we always laugh that, talk about Val Verde [Calif.], during the summer sometimes my parents would take the two of us up there to Val Verde, rent a cabin, give us money, and we would stay a week and they'd come back at the end of the week and get us. And we would ride horses and have fun for a week but, you know, we were responsible, pretty much responsible. But we were very mobile, even as children. There was great public transportation, we would go to the beach whenever we wanted to, go to Long Beach [Calif.], wherever, go to the movies, we were very mobile as teenagers and could move around everywhere. Speaker 1: Now how many blacks were at Berkeley when you were there? Speaker 2: Not many, maybe fifty, on the outside. Speaker 1: Okay, with the whole university, fifty? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. How about your class, how many came in with you? Speaker 2: There were about four or five of us. Story_ID: 16650 Speaker 1: Now, so you come back, you speed through, sort of, you know, is there a difference when you come back to UC [University of California, Berkeley, Calif.], is there a difference? Speaker 2: At UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Calif.]? Speaker 1: UCLA, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: No. An interesting thing happened to me though, obviously I was working in the summers and Christmas and everything, and I worked a Christmas at Biltmore Florist making decorations. I worked everywhere I worked at the garment industry sewing, I worked lifeguards, or not lifeguard I worked in the swimming pool as a manager of the swimming pool, but I worked different places. But I also, during Christmas, sometimes I'd work at the Post Office, but this Christmas I worked at Biltmore Florists and I got ill. And I became very ill, I really didn't know it but I had pneumonia and I even went out on New Year's Eve just because I didn't want to make anyone feel bad and I was very ill. When I went back to UCLA they said I had pneumonia and what had happened is that, as a result, I became very, very thin. I weighed probably about 108 pounds. I was walking around the campus at UCLA and a woman came up to me and said, "Would you like to become a model?" And I started modeling for this photographer so I did a lot of modeling for Ebony [magazine]and Jet [magazine] and Fashions [magazine] and I also got extra money because I would go and get the clothes and bring them to them. So what happened during my last couple years is I worked, I went to school three days, took a full course, and those Tuesday and Thursday I studied or had those available so I could work. And so I did also work as a model during that time. I also became interested in theater, took a lot of theater arts courses and did some extra work and that sort of thing, 'Amos and Andy', so those things too. But I did have a variety but I always was going to law school and I never wavered from that. Story_ID: 16651 Speaker 1: And what did men think of you at the time [during college]? I mean, I know you ultimately married briefly but I think it was a mathematician, but what did they think of you? Did they think that you were, or did your father ever say you should just not try--. No! Your father encouraged you right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This whole time? Okay. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what did men think. Everyone accepted me for what I was, you know, I mean, everybody knew that I always studied hard. You know, I don't know that I was so smart but I always worked hard and I was always a person who was very, very direct in terms of, and driven, in terms of my own career. There has never been a time that I wasn't, just, put a lot of time in my career and my studies and what ever. Well by the time I was five, I mean, there was no time that I didn't always study hard, read a lot, just like I read a lot right now, every book that comes along, I've always been that, oriented that way. And they accepted me for that. I don't think that I--. And, you know, I did not have any kind of a sheltered life, I was like a, what, Kappa Court and joined a sorority, was President of a sorority, I've always done everything. I haven't missed a lot. Speaker 1: This is a full life *(inaudible). Speaker 2: I haven't really missed a lot, no. Speaker 1: No! I got the modeling and I thought--. So you're saying that you were actually sick but you were--. Speaker 2: I got sick so I lost so much weight I was thin. I was like very, very, I was as tall as I am, almost as tall, not as tall as I am now but almost and I weighed 108 pounds and so I was very thin. Speaker 1: Did you like the modeling? Speaker 2: I enjoyed it! I loved it. I still have the pictures and it was great. I'll never be that thin again! I hope I don't have to get pneumonia to do that. I've been thin a few more times since then but--. Speaker 1: So now when you, *(inaudible) that's good though. So you were Ebony model *(inaudible) back in the day? Speaker 2: Right, right. Okay, I have a friend who also--. I also did commercial things and they said, I was in law school, they said, and you would walk right past this Pepsi-Cola, they had a Pepsi-Cola billboard, go right past that to law school. I was right outside the law school and in those days that was not really what most lawyers were doing, or people who wanted to be lawyers. But, you know, you had to make a living, so-- . Speaker 1: Are you saying you were on the Pepsi-Cola (inaudible)? Speaker 2: Right! Outside, the Pepsi-Cola ad! [laughter] Speaker 1: Ok, I'm like. I know you said you'd walk right by it I'm thinking you had--.(laugher) Speaker 2: Yeah I had, the Pepsi-Cola ad was right near USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.] and people were driving right past there seeing it going to school. Speaker 1: Amazing, wow, okay. But you never thought that that was something you wanted to do? It was just that--. Speaker 2: Well I didn't think it was anything that was going to make me any great livelihood anyhow. If I had had an opportunity to be an actress, I would have done that. But the opportunities would never have been there in that day and time. Story_ID: 16652 Speaker 1: But even the fact that you were on ads is sort of impressive too in that day and time [early to mid 1950s], you know? Speaker 2: Well, they had black ads. Even though I can remember once I went to a photographer and the photographer said to me, he was doing one of those ads, you know, and he said, "You know you're too dark for us to do for the ads well." And I remember that, I mean, and I said "Okay, well, all right." But even then, I mean, even though they had blacks in ads, there was a color difference. And I had a lot of issues in terms of my opportunities to get jobs because of my color as a black person. I had a friend and we went out looking for a job one summer to operate an elevator at Bullitts (?), which was a department store, and as, we didn't get it, but as we were leaving the man called my friend over, who was fairer and had red hair and freckles and said to her, "Don't ever go looking for a job with anyone else because they won't hire her, but we would hire you as an elevator operator but we wouldn't hire her." So it was--. I was very aware that there was prejudice of all kinds, prejudice in terms of the fact that I was not fair and, you know, prejudice because I was black. So there were all of those things but they never really affected me too much, you know, I mean, I had a lot of benefits as well. Speaker 1: They didn't affect you self-esteem is what you're saying? Speaker 2: No not at all. I mean, in those days you accepted it. I mean, you knew that, my sorority was one that did not have a lot of people who were dark but, you know, and I was very sensitive to that. Speaker 1: And they made exception for you because of your-- Speaker 2: I was in California and I--. It was a different thing in California. In California our attitudes were different. Story_ID: 16653 Speaker 1: Now when you're getting ready to go to law school, so you're sort of hell bent on going to law school [USC, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.] and you've been, you know-- Speaker 2: And also there'd never been a black woman in law school except, well there had been. There'd been one African American woman at USC, not at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Calif.] or Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, Calif.]. Other women who had gone to law school went to Southwestern [University School of Law, Los Angeles, Calif.], which was like a semi-accredited school. And I had a friend who had been trying to get into USC who had very good grades and she had not been able to get into USC law school. Again, my mother, who was really come up with all kinds of things, she said, and you have to send your picture in. So she just found an overexposed picture, attached it to the application and we sent it in and I got into law school. And I was the first African American woman who was there since 1928 was the last person who had gotten into that law school. Speaker 1: So was it because it was over exposed you didn't look black? Speaker 2: That's right I really couldn't tell who I was. You couldn't tell. Speaker 1: So when you show up the first day what do they say? Speaker 2: I got along fine, everybody, I mean, you know, no one ever admitted it, you know, years later they say but that--. Let me tell you what happened though, that girl and another African American girl got in the next year. They let them in. The theory in those days was that if you had one spot for a black person or a certain number of spots for a Jewish person or a certain number of spots for women, if you took in a woman in a Jewish spot or a black spot, that meant that a man couldn't get in and they always thought you were just going to go and not practice and it was a wasted spot. In medical school it was the same thing, they didn't want to take women in because you took a man's spot. So even though, you know, California's supposedly very liberal, in the whole school, the whole law school at that time, you know, there were maybe ten women in the whole school. Speaker 1: So what was that experience? This is something you've wanted. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What is the experience when you really get there? Speaker 2: The experience? Oh, it was tough, you know, they had Ladies' Day where women had to recite all day, all hour. You'd go into a class and they'd say, "Ladies' Day" and they'd make us sit together, you know, we couldn't sit with the men. So they'd say, "This is Ladies' Day so you have to recite." So we'd have to recite all the cases, those five of us would have to recite all hour and stand up to recite. So it was different. We were always told we would not go out on job interviews. But, now, I did just fine, I mean, I'm still friends with all the people there I got along with. I made great friends, friends for life, with the men, with the women, with the teachers. Once I got there everything was fine. Story_ID: 16654 Speaker 1: And was there anyone who mentored you there [USC, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.] or you-- Speaker 2: In law school? Not necessarily, no. There were a lot of older people in school though when I went because there was the Korean War and what happened was that the Korean War was just over so a lot of men who had been away came back and so there were a lot of veterans. So I was the youngest person in the class, obviously, and maybe some who were the same age, but a lot of the people who were in law school were older in those days. Speaker 1: And you tell the story about the women's law society or law group that refused admission and you--. Speaker 2: I never knew. Speaker 1: You didn't know at the--. Speaker 2: Not until later, much later. No, no one told me. What happened is that I was admitted, there were law sororities, I guess there's P-A--, it was, I think it's P-A-D [Phi Alpha Delta] or something, and then there was (inaudible), which was another one. So there were two women's law sororities. I was only rushed by one, which was (inaudible). And my friend, who's a judge here, who was in the class, it was my best friend; the two of us decided that we would go to (inaudible). And they just took me in, I went to all the meetings. They were really great, you know, they helped you with everything, they had meetings at their house. They didn't have public places like I guess they do today, I mean, they do now, but in those days there were so few women lawyers that the meetings were always held at someone's home. And the woman who had been one of the organizers of it was a woman by the name of Rosalind Bates (?), she was still the President running it and these other women were there. I never knew anything about it then years later my friend, who knew and didn't tell me, said that they had put them out of the national organization because they took me in. And they just said, okay, put us out. And then when I was gone they--And then they took in the other black women who came in. But I did not know until later. Speaker 1: So they got actually put out of the national-- Speaker 2: They were removed from the national, oh yes. Speaker 1: Oh, hmm. And no discussion, you were clueless? Speaker 2: No one said anything to me. Speaker 1: Now what courses and things did you gravitate towards? Speaker 2: Moot court [mock court where hypothetical cases are tried for the training of law students], I made law, reviewed it, and I was--.The moot court, I was competing in moot court intramurally, you know, between schools, so I did not do a law review article, as such. I did moot court and I was the person on the moot court Team to compete for the school. Story_ID: 16655 Speaker 1: And now what are you thinking you want to do [after graduating USC]? Are you wanting to be a young Perry Mason, are you--. Speaker 2: I wanted to be a civil rights lawyer. And then I applied to the Justice Department because what happened is that my work I did for moot court mock [court where hypothetical cases are tried for the training of law students] was in antitrust, Section Seven of the Clayton Act [1914, antitrust law that prohibits mergers that could create a monopoly]. So the Justice Department was looking for people, I applied to the Justice Department to go to Washington [D.C.] to work but there was a change of administration and they cut down the Section Seven Clayton Act in antitrust enforcement so I was never called to actually start work. And as a result I went to work before the bar as a secretary, before actually, I heard from the bar I worked as a secretary in a law firm because I typed well, did shorthand and everything. So I worked as a secretary and then when I got my news and I had passed the bar they asked me to stay on as a secretary they said, "You're not going to be able to make a living or anything." And I said, "Well, I'm going to take a chance." So I just went out, I found an office, and I went to work on my own. Speaker 1: So that's the picture out there of you in your law office, is that it, on the walls? Speaker 2: Yeah. I went out on my own. Ultimately I joined as an associate with other lawyers and I worked like crazy and I did okay. I never had any--Well I practiced everything, whatever walked in the door; I was a whatever-walked-in-the-door lawyer. Then I took the exam for the State [Calif.] to work for the state shortly after that and I was in the top three. I was sharing this with someone the other day, they had to take the top person and also you could not turn down a position three times. So my first offer, they called me, was Workman's Compensation. I got there and the man said, listen, we are not going to have a woman and if you insist on us taking you because you're at the top of this list, we're going to send you up to the mines to work. And I said, "Well you know I can only waive three times." They said, "Well you're just going to have to take a waiver on this or else I'll send you to the mines." So I waived. There was a man who was in charge of corporations whose name was John Sobieski, he got in touch with me and hired me and I became Deputy Corporation Commissioner and I worked for the State in Corporations [California Department of Corporations] and I worked there for a few years. And that's how I got a background in corporate. Speaker 1: So did he just sort of happen or did he know about this discussion with the mines? Speaker 2: I think that it was everybody. I think everybody in the legal community knew it. I mean, you know, everybody--, here first of all you have this woman who has just graduated from USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.], which everyone had to try and figure out what in the world is she going to do and what's happening. And the legal community probably was fairly small and also I'm sure it got all over that the person who had taken the test for attorney had been, they were threatening to make her waive three times and get her off the list. Speaker 1: So they felt maybe legally vulnerable, that this was--. Now when the mines, what were the mines? Is that someplace that--. Speaker 2: Like coalmines, you know, way up in Northern California (laughs), what we called the boondocks, I don't know what they call it anyplace else but it's like, in California you have all kinds of copper mines and, you know, in those days I don't know if we had coal but you had mines of all kinds where people were up there working in the mines and hurt and this was the state compensation. Speaker 1: Now what year are we talking about? Speaker 2: This was early '57 [1957], '58 [1958], late '50s [1950s], yeah, late '50s [1950s]. Story_ID: 16656 Speaker 1: So now [late 1950s] you worked as the--. Speaker 2: In [California Department of] Corporations , I worked there for a few years and then I decided--. I was married [to Louis Brathwaite], incidentally, at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, no you got married *(inaudible)? Speaker 2: I got married as soon as I got out of law school [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: So okay. Did you meet your husband while you were in law school? Speaker 2: No. I met him while I was working as a secretary and he was a friend, he was the brother of someone I went to high school with. He came to Los Angeles, he came to my mother to look for a house to rent, and I met him there. Speaker 1: Okay so he was--. Speaker 2: Older. Speaker 1: Older. Okay. Oh he was older, okay. Speaker 2: And from New York [city, New York] and came to Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I knew his brother who had grown up in Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Okay so you're working--. So he knows he's marrying a professional woman? Speaker 2: Right. I'm not sure he knew what it entailed (laughs) but he knew he was going to have a professional woman. Speaker 1: A working stiff. Speaker 2: Yes. And I think that yeah, I think he thought that was great except he, you know, I don't know. Story_ID: 16657 Speaker 1: So what happens? So you work in this position and then what happens at that point? What happens *(inaudible)? Speaker 2: I worked in [California Department of] Corporations , I was married [to Louis Brathwaite], and then I decided that I did not want to get stuck for life in the State working for Corporations and at a point where you're working on a job, you know, you start getting promotions, and then it gets tough and you may not ever leave. So I decided that if I got an opportunity I would leave. And an attorney became ill who had a probate practice and another attorney took it over, he was working on it, and his wife became ill. And I heard this, someone told me that, "Do you know what's happened, that Arnett's wife is ill, that practice he's just taken over, they've closed the doors because he has to stay with her and they've closed it." So I didn't even know the attorney's wife, the attorney who he'd taken it over from, this second attorney, was quite ill and his wife was running things. So I went to the wife, I talked to her, I worked a deal out and I took over the office and opened it up. And then I moved the office over to Crenshaw [Blvd.]; it was on Central [Ave.] [Los Angeles, Calif.]. Speaker 1: So that was your own law practice, that's probably where the photo was from, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you did that how long? Speaker 2: I did that from about five years. Speaker 1: Five years so we're up to the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Now what did you get involved with the [Civil Rights] movement and things like that? Speaker 1: I was involved always with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] from the time I was like, certainly before I was in law school [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.], and I worked on drives and raised money and I was involved. But then after I left Corporations and I was practicing, that's when I represented people. '65 [1965] I represented some of the people who were arrested at the federal building. Later than that, I represented the plaintiffs who were able to integrate the realty boards. So I was working all of the time. Speaker 2: And are you--. Speaker 1: (Off-camera voice)- We have to change tapes. Story_ID: 16658 Speaker 1: When was this picture taken? Speaker 2: (Looking up at the wall) Oh this picture was taken just before I, no, I was in the [California State] legislature, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, there. (Inaudible). Speaker 2: I was in the legislature but it's an interesting story to that. Speaker 1: (Off camera voice)- (Inaudible). Speaker 2: Ok, I was in the--. I was in the legislature and [Mayor] Tom Bradley, I've always been, I, you know, obviously worked on campaigns, and I was working on Tom Bradley's campaign and he had this huge event at Burt Lancaster's house, in his yard. I guess there were a thousand people at Burt Lancaster's estate at this fundraiser for Tom Bradley. A photographer walked up to me and said, "Could I take your picture?" And I said, "Sure", you know, I was a Legislator and he said, "Would you mind sitting here?" And so I sat down with my little fur stole and sat down there, obviously, I was dressed up and he took the picture, I didn't think anything else about it. About a year later someone came up to me and said, "You know there's an artist who is painting a series of paintings for the savings and loans for this exhibit, and this man said he didn't know who this picture was and I said to him, 'That's Yvonne Brathwaite, that's who that is." And he said, "I don't know who it was, I just saw this woman and said could I take your picture." And so he said, "Well do you think she would let me try to touch it up and make it more like what it is as a person?" And so he said, "I'll call her." Actually it was a judge who called me. And he called me and asked me if I would do it and I said, "Sure but I can't even remember him." So when I saw it and he explained to me where the picture was taken, I realized, so I sat and let him fix up the picture and it went on this exhibit. And when the exhibit was over he says the exhibit's over and I'm going to sell these off. And I said, well maybe I'll buy it, so I bought it. Speaker 1: It's a beautiful picture, it's really beautiful. Speaker 2: Now where do you put it, that gets to be the problem with a picture that big! Speaker 1: No, it's stunning, it's stunning. Speaker 2: What do you do with it? So fortunately we've have a conference room in here where the people have to look at it (laughs). Speaker 1: No, but it's stunning. Speaker 2: Before I had it in my house and--. Speaker 1: No, it's stunning. Story_ID: 16659 Speaker 1: So okay, so you've always been active you said in the [Civil Rights] movement? Speaker 2: I've always been active in civil--. Oh sure, of course. Speaker 1: And I know that I read somewhere where you have been interviewed for another oral history project and you were talking, you know, you were talking about the death, I think, of [U.S. President] John F. Kennedy, following the death of--. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, all of those were very difficult times for me. Again, I was elected to the [California State] legislature the same time [Senator] Barbara Jordan was elected. And that's the reason Martin Luther King, you know, here's two African American women who are now in the legislature who were young, there were other women in state legislatures, and in states where there were no other African American women, so he invited us to conventions and meetings to speak. I established a friendship with Doctor [Martin Luther] King as a result of that and was in touch with him. At the same time I was active in politics in a way, I was, you know, going to conventions, Democratic Party, and so I was in Chicago [Ill.] when all of that [1968 Chicago Democratic Convention protests] happened. And because I was, you know, there were just not that many African American women who were in positions like that, I did all kinds of things, seconded nominations of people and was very active. But Chicago was really tough, you know, it was a terrible experience for everyone who attended that convention. Likewise, since I was involved in politics, I was involved in the [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] Kennedy campaign. Not John F. Kennedy, I came a little long after that even though an interesting story, I was working in corporations when John F. Kennedy ran, and I'm sure I wasn't supposed to be doing this, but my understanding of the rules in terms of, I can't remember what they called it in those days, you weren't supposed to be in politics if you were a state officer, that you could participate somewhat as long as you didn't bring it into the office. So at noontime I'd go down to the convention, the convention was in Los Angeles [Calif.]. The night--. I went to all the meetings, you know, where John F. Kennedy addressed the black community at the Shrine Auditorium [Los Angeles, Calif.] once during that time the convention was going on, I went to that. And then, at noontime, I'd go down and act as a hostess for like a reception hospitality room at the Biltmore [Hotel] for the delegates because I was really enjoying this convention going on in Los Angeles. I was on my way there when, all of a sudden they stopped everyone, and that was when Lyndon Johnson was coming to the Biltmore to meet with John F. Kennedy and ultimately agreed to be the Vice President. And I just stood out in front, I just happened to be standing out in front because I worked right down here I worked across the street from here [Kenneth Hahn Hall of Administration, Los Angeles, Calif.]. So I was there during that. And so I was involved, in a sense, and I went to the inauguration of, not of John F. Kennedy, but I went to the inauguration later of [President] Lyndon Johnson. But I also worked on the Robert Kennedy campaign and was very involved in it. I was late and didn't get to the Ambassador [hotel, Los Angeles, Calif.] before the shooting. I literally was in the car on my way to the Ambassador when the shooting took place. So it was a combination of a lot of things. I think it was the assassination of Robert Kennedy, the assassination of Martin Luther King, all of these things, the '68 [1968] convention, all those things kind of really were very tough for me and it was a time when I was very--I think it was tough for everyone. No one really knew where they were going or what was happening; was society falling apart? It was a very confusing time and a very difficult time. Story_ID: 16660 Speaker 1: How did you come to run for office in the first place? We don't need to skip over that. You were practicing? Speaker 2: I was practicing law with that firm, the pictures are there, and the 1965 [Watts Riots, Los Angeles, California] riots came about. I was actually doing part time as a Hearing Officer for the [Los Angeles] Police Commissioner so I was actually in the police department when all these people were going nuts. All the officers, I was in the basement getting my car and these officers were running back and forth and I said, "What's going on?" And they said, "It's a riot!" There was a 1965 riot here in Los Angeles. Speaker 1: The Watts Riot? Speaker 2: Watts Riots, right. So I was, as you say, I was involved in a lot of different organizations. One of the things I did I set up a defense fund for people who were being arrested so that we could get lawyers for them and try and get them out and I was doing a lot of those things and after the, in the aftermath, the Governor [Pat Brown] appointed a commission to investigate it called the McCone Commission and [Director of the CIA] John McCone headed it up. [Secretary of State] Warren Christopher was on the commission, that's how I met him. And I had a friend who was by then a partner, not a partner but worked for a large law firm. They asked him to come in to work as an attorney. So he called me and asked me if I would work, his name was Sam Williams, and I went to work as an attorney on the staff of the McCone Commission. And we were analyzing things and we did all kinds of surveys and we did all kinds of things, trying to figure out what went wrong and how things--. I wrote the Criminal Justice and the Housing Report for the McCone Commission. And in the course of that they said we really have to find younger people to run for office. And Sam Williams had run for the Board of Education and he said I'm not going to run again but Yvonne, you have to run and so I said oh well, maybe I'll run one of these days. Right in the middle of this, as the report's coming out, the Assemblyman in the district that I live [sixty-third] says he's not going to run and already the Assemblyman had designated his Chief Deputy who he was supporting, [Democratic Assembly Speaker] Jess Unruh was supporting him, and I let him talk me into it, just like that. I went to my dad's union [Building Service Union], they helped me and I had a lot of friends, I was in a lot of organizations and clubs and I was just, non-traditional way of doing something I was able to put the money together and an organization of friends and associates and lawyers and people I knew and I was a liberal and some of the liberal Jewish communities supported me. Some of the women's groups who were liberal and concerned about some of those issues, they would support me, and so even though I didn't have a change because Jess Unruh had a candidate, there was a CDC [California Democratic Council], which was a California Democratic Party, they had had someone who had been running for this district every year that they were all supporting. So the organized Democratic Party had their candidates and what they didn't know is that the district, even though it was only 30 percent African American, in the Democratic Party there was over 50 percent in the Democratic Party. So I was able to put together a coalition of people and I won by a huge margin, the Primary, then I ran against the John Birch Society member, in the general election. That's how I got elected. Speaker 1: So this was real history making, really, big time. Speaker 2: Yeah it was really big time. It was unusual, right. Speaker 1: So how did you find--. So how was that whole experience (inaudible)? Speaker 2: It was unbelievable. Speaker 1: Now was your marriage [to Louis Brathwaite] intact at this point? Speaker 2: No, no, I was divorced. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got divorced before that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not a lot before that but I got divorced--. Speaker 1: Did you think that a divorced woman didn't have any impact on things? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It wasn't--. Okay. Speaker 2: A few people may have had comments, you know, but--. I got divorced in 1964. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so this was like a year and a half later. Story_ID: 16661 Speaker 1: So you--. Your winning [Assemblywoman, Sixty-Third Assembly District of California], I mean, this was a whole big deal. I mean, it's different being a lawyer, you know, being an assistant (?) it's different being a politician even though you had had a Political Science background. Speaker 2: But you know what? A lawyer was not considered a woman, I have to tell you that. You know, it's like a doctor in those days was not considered a woman, it was, she was a doctor. A woman who's a lawyer is not considered--. She's considered a lawyer. She's a person who goes into court and fights the battles and she's just, she was considered differently. The title under your name was a different situation. And this was before the women's movement or anything else. You just didn't consider, my winning was not like a win for women, my win was one where I was able to put it together and no one even talked about the fact that I was--. The only that they talked about a little bit was that this was, you have to realize, the time of the Black Power Movement and there was a black man who did run and a lot of people raised the issue: should a woman come up there, this is the time for black men to be moved to the forefront. So that was an issue in terms of blacks, black men needed to be given leadership positions, we needed to--. That was discussed. Speaker 1: And you served in that position for how--. Speaker 2: Six years. Speaker 1: Six years, okay. Speaker 2: I have never--. I've held this job that I'm in now longer than any job I've ever had. I've never stayed anywhere very long. I served in the [California State] legislature six years. Speaker 1: And then you went to Congress. Speaker 2: Congress, I stayed there six years. Story_ID: 16662 Speaker 1: Before I go on I wanted to ask a question and it has to do with you getting to know Martin Luther King, but more the role that lawyers played, you know, because, actually, this project came, I was really struck one time when I was at the National Bar Association, that's how the HistoryMakers sort of came because--. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I kept thinking, you know, people know Martin Luther King and they know Rosa Parks and they've almost reached mythological status but, you know, they don't know the other people, you know the lawyers and the other people, I mean, they know Thurgood Marshall, but they don't know, you know, the other people who were involved very actively in the [Civil Rights] Movement that really were the very important parts of it; the legal part was an extremely important part of the equation. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So I wanted you to, sort of, address, if could address, you know, shortly that issue, the role lawyers, sort of, played and who were some of the other people that you consider, sort of, important in that? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there were always tremendous lawyers but Thurgood Marshall was the big one, you know, there's no question in terms of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. As far as SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] was not a legal movement, you know. Harry Belafonte was a big person in there, a lot of the ministers. It was a religious group and they were the ones who more or less--. [Reverend] Jesse Jackson was like an assistant. Andy Young, that's how I knew Andy because he was, of course, the big, big assistant there and Doctor [Marin Luther] King's right-hand person. [Reverend Ralph] Abernathy was there. There were lots of people who were working, you know, but the top people were, for the most part, religious. It was a heavily--. SCLC was a religious movement. NAACP was more of a legal movement. And interestingly enough, a lot of the lawsuits were brought about individually. For instance, the lawsuit I had which integrated the realty boards here in California, I just started it then once I started it the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union]came in and helped me. And once the ACLU helped me I was able to do a better representation and the Justice Department picked it up and it never had to go to trial. The Justice Department took it up as antitrust. But a lot of it was individual. Speaker 1: Individual but there was collaboration among the-- . Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, there was this feeder system, right? Speaker 2: There was a feeder system but there was not a financial--. There was not legal defense. NAACP Legal Defense Fund [to provide legal assistance to poor African Americans] did not come to Los Angeles [Calif.] until a few years ago, say ten years ago. I was part of the group that raised the money for their first office. In San Francisco [Calif.] they had a branch office but here in Los Angeles they didn't have that kind of office. If you have a lawyer who had a case maybe you could get them to join it, maybe the ACLU would come in to help. Speaker 1: AND Snick [SNCC, Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee], what role did they play or did they play much a role, I mean, they were--. Speaker 2: They were here, they were certainly, you know, Snick, the [Black] Panthers, [activist, author] Ron Karenga and us, all of those groups came along at the end of the '60s or the early '70s, they were very prominent. But they were part of a different counter movement and certainly they got a lot of publicity and there were a lot of people who supported that. I was never part of that, I was part of the traditional Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 16663 Speaker 1: Now, when you campaigned, what was your platform that you were really campaigning on? Speaker 2: Well, when I ran for the [California State] legislature I campaigned on limiting garnishments of wages and making sure that airports didn't come in and take people's property and not adequately compensate them. Issues like that, consumer issues. Speaker 1: And when you were serving in the legislature, was that--. That was a new experience many ways where you have to address a constituency, it's a much different thing than, you know--. Speaker 2: That's right and I had to learn it. I had to learn how to get bills passed. I had to learn how to address a constituency and I've always had a position of choice, you know, in a district [sixty-third, Los Angeles, Calif.] that was heavily Catholic, you know, and a lot of people who were--. The Catholic Church, very strong. I can remember, you know, when the issues of abortion came up and they brought truckloads and busloads of people who came up there and I said, "Listen you can use my office but I'm not voting with you." So there were a lot of issues. Issues of gambling were big in our community because, you know, it's a religious community. In the district I represent now they're one thousand churches. Churches are big in the African American community and the Latino communities so religion has always been a very big issue. And I've always been involved in church, I should say that, you know, I was always a church member and involved and active. Speaker 1: What's your denomination? Speaker 2: Well I originally was CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal], my family. But in later years I became Episcopalian. Speaker 1: (unclear). (laughter) Speaker 2: Well I got caught in a fight with the CMEs, well, the CMEs were in a battle and I wasn't going to get in the middle of it so I just--. When my dad passed away I became an Episcopalian. And then I found out he'd been going to the Episcopalian Church too, he didn't want to be in the fight either (laughs). Story_ID: 16664 Speaker 1: Now you said your mother [Lola Watson], also, did she come around? I mean, because she passed away [1968] during, right around the time--. Speaker 2: I was in the [California State] legislature, right. Oh, she sat there when I was sworn in [1966] to the [Sixty-Third] Assembly, yes, she came around, she worked hard, she accepted it. And she had always been a person who always fought the establishment too, she was a person that she would get people to, if there were houses that they wouldn't sell to blacks, she'd find a white person to go in there and make the offer and then, under the name of the black person, she did all of those things, you know. Speaker 1: Did she not want you to run because she thought it was not something, you know, that you would be vulnerable or, you know, you were--? Speaker 2: She didn't want me to run because in her mind politics was a very dirty kind of business and she really didn't want me to get involved in the kind of things that she considered were, just, you know, she thought of it as this guy with a cigar and wheeler-dealer and she didn't want me to become that person. Always in the back of her mind she saw me as going to be this teacher who--, was an educator and I'm sure she thought sooner or later teach at a university or something. She had a different vision of what she wanted her daughter to be. Story_ID: 16665 Speaker 1: Now, I have to ask this question about you and [U.S. Representative] Barbara Jordan since you were coming in at the same time, you are totally different personalities so, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She would, I would say, you know, oh I shouldn't say, you know, be a little more masculine-type you or you know, the very--. Was there--. Speaker 2: No, the difference between us, interestingly enough was that she was a conventional politician. She was a person who worked within the system and came up through the system. I was a person who came up outside of the system and worked outside of the system and we got along very, very well, we were always very friendly, stayed in touch until her death [1996]. I went to her funeral and the lady who wrote her memoirs [Mary Beth Rogers] said that she always, that Barbara used to always say, "One thing is you're lacking a great soup." And when I was sick she'd bring me soup! Nobody else would ever do anything like that, but she would bring me soup. But I got along fine with Barbara, even though Barbara never sat with the rest of us, you know, she always sat with Texas, she was a Texan. And she was proud to be a Texan and she was part of her delegation; she was very loyal to her delegation. And I always felt that her loyalty was never repaid. I was never loyal, you know, I was there, when I say I wasn't loyal, I was loyal but I was not part of the Democratic Party and to tap dance to everything, I basically was concerned with issues. And the issues that were more liberal. I guess I was a more liberal person even though nowadays people say I'm not as liberal as I used to be [laughs]. Story_ID: 16666 Speaker 1: Now when you--. How did the decision come about for you running for Congress? I mean, was that just because--? Speaker 2: I just decided I was going to run for Congress and there was no district so I fought hard for--. It was reapportionment year [1972], so I fought for a district and, really a tough fight for a district, a district I could win in. My kind of district is and has always been a district that is diverse. And when I was able to get that district [Thirty-seventh Congressional] through reapportionment, then I had a tough campaign but it was possible for me to win and I ran against a City Councilperson [Billy Mills]. Speaker 1: Right. And the City Councilperson, he was popular wasn't he? Speaker 2: Very popular, right. Speaker 1: So how do you think--. why do you think you were successful at that time? Speaker 2: Because it was my district. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a district. It was a district that had substantial diversity. Story_ID: 16667 Speaker 1: And you met your husband [William A. Burke], you got married shortly after? Speaker 2: Well, I knew my husband before he, even before he was married before, but not dating, just a friend, and he was the campaign manager for the person that I ran against [Billy Mills]. It was just very interesting, and he was going to try to talk me out of running and (laughs), so, he said, "Well, I'm going to come up to Sacramento [Calif.]" he was always active in Sacramento because he had been [Democratic Assembly Speaker] Jess Unruh Office of Radio and Television, he had worked there, and then he worked for [California Lieutenant Governor] Merv Dymally and he had worked for this Councilman, but he had gone into business at that point and he, we were friends, we were friendly, but he was supporting this campaign and he talked to me said, "Why do you want to do this, why are you doing it?" And I said, "Yeah, I'm going to run for this office [Representative] and I want to get this district [Thirty-seventh Congressional, Calif.] and I know that the district that elects me is a different district than elects Billy." So he says, "I'm going to come up and why don't we sit down and have lunch or sit down and have dinner?" I said, "Sure, sure." So we started having lunch and started having dinner and talking about this and it eroded and all of a sudden finally he said, "Well I'm going to just have to tell Billy I'm pulling out of his campaign." And so then the worst of it came when the person I was fighting with the most on this district was the person he had worked for who was Merv Dymally. And Merv Dymally and I were just at (inaudible) heads on this district on where these lines would be. And it was like two in the morning and we were still just, you know, fighting, and I had called Bill to come up, I said, "You've got to talk to Merv" and the worst happened, we were all in an elevator and this fellow and I were going at it, you know, really going at it and at that point I heard Bill said, "God, I've got to get myself out of this mess." You know, so he did help me, he worked hard in my campaign. We didn't let anybody know that we were getting married until, you know, I think a few months, well, all of this happened fairly fast, that was like in the summer and in about October and by the end of the year in December we had gotten engaged but no one really believed we were going to get married. My friends said he's a spy trying to find out what's happening in the campaign and his friends said, you know, he was a traitor. It was like very strange situation and I never let people know that we were going out necessarily, you know. And then election night I announced that two weeks later I was getting married. Speaker 1: That must have been (inaudible) or whatever, it must have been a lot of gossip! (laughter) Speaker 2: That's right! Let me tell you, people who want to gossip, they really had it and they said it would never last, this whole thing is just a farce, it's she did this just to get the, you know, campaign and oh it was just, it was bad. Speaker 1: So this was a whole--. Speaker 2: That was twenty-nine years later. The thing is this is twenty-nine years later. (laughter) Speaker 1: That's what I was reading that i was like--. (laughter) Speaker 2: Right. It was not your traditional courtship. Speaker 1: So he came up to take you out and he got a wife and he fell head over (inaudible) he hadn't been exposed to (inaudible) (laughter) . Speaker 2: This is someone he knew, yeah, I mean, we had known each other. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true. Speaker 2: And everyone, you know, as you say, everybody had a different theory about this whole thing and it was very, you know, they didn't know what to think. Story_ID: 16668 Speaker 1: So here you are, how many, at this point, how many, you said there were three black females at that point in Congress or were you the--. No, you were the first? Speaker 2: Shirley [Chisholm] was the first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then Barbara [Jordan] and I were the second and third, and then later Cardiss Collins was elected. Speaker 1: So tell me how you find Washington [D.C.]. This is a whole--. Speaker 2: Washington was different. Washington was a little bit new for me, the press was not kindly as the press had been in Sacramento [Calif.]; Sacramento they kind of let legislators alone. The press, and I hear I was someone who didn't fit the mold, and the press was pretty tough on me. Speaker 1: What were the things they were saying? Speaker 2: Well the first thing that happened on the day that I was sworn in, there was an event that night for Barbara Jordan that I went to, and the Washington Post [newspaper] said I had on a see-through, long see-through dress, which was not true. I had on a knit dress but it was not see-through. I said how could I have on a see-through dress with a girdle and all these slips and everything else, you know. So I really went in and met with the editorial board, showed them the pictures and there was an African American woman who was the one who reported that and she was thinking she was getting points. Later she was one of these people I think that wrote one of these false stories too. But, at any rate. So the press was not good when I went there but I fought it through and, also, you have to realize I came to Congress after having been very visible after being Vice Chair of the Democratic Party. And that had come about just on a fluke, you know. Speaker 1: I was wondering how that came across. Speaker 2: That came about because what happened is the Black Caucus was demanding a black Vice Chair at the [Democratic] convention , women were demanding a woman, so one of the people in the Black Caucus said, "Okay, let's find a black woman." And they started trying to figure out who and I can't remember Barbara Jordan, I think, was more tied in with a more traditional group of people and she wouldn't have bolted that way. And they decided on me without even telling me, I just get a call from CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] one morning that--, "We're out in front, we want to interview you about being--." I wasn't even going to the convention. I had just gotten married. So that's how I ended up and I went there and I had a lot of visibility. So I went to Congress with people knowing me and having seen me and also having seen that I was not really, that I was kind of a tough person in a sense that I could handle it and I was not a shrinking violet. No matter what I looked like I was still a tough lady. Story_ID: 16669 Speaker 1: So now, when you're in Congress its, this is it's a different exp-. So you come in it's, sort of, you know, you come into a more antagonistic environment so, you know, as you're saying because you're loved here and, you know, in California. And it's distant too, you know, I'm wondering did you feel any sense of frustration because there's this pecking order and, you know, you're away from your, you know--. Speaker 2: Well you know, the thing that happened with me is that it was at a time when they were starting to eliminate a whole system and change the system and it wasn't the strict number of years you had been there for everything. So, first of all is that, you know, I would introduce amendments because I had come from the [Calif.] legislature, I didn't know you weren't supposed to, they told me you weren't supposed to speak or any of those things but I didn't take that too seriously. So I always believed in waiting and listening a while and to know what I'm talking about before, I don't jump out. I always take time to, kind of, figure out the methods and everything. But I never was a quiet retiring member. I would introduce amendments, and I was fairly successful in getting my things through the Congress and then I ran for Appropriations Committee and I won. So I was able to go on Appropriations a few months after or six months after I came to Congress. Then [1973], of course, I had a baby [Autumn Burke]. That's what i was wondering (laughs). And that's even, that's the first female. Speaker 1: The first woman ever having a baby on the Congress, right, I had the baby and everybody was nice to me. I mean, you know, everyone was wonderful, everyone was wonderful to me and was nice to me and I did okay. I was very successful in Congress. My only problem was that it was a long way to travel. Speaker 2: And I wondered about that. Speaker 1: And I traveled with the baby because she was, like, five years old when I decided that I would come back home. And that was a function of school, I could not work out the schooling for her. We'd travel back and forth, I never left her there, I took her. Speaker 2: You took her back--. Speaker 1: When I would travel to Europe or someplace like that the first time I took her but after that they said she cannot go any more, you have to leave her here in the United States, she can't go on the government planes because of the insurance so I stopped. So she didn't go but she went everywhere else and I'd travel with her but I could not work the school thing out and I had to make some decisions. Again, I've always felt that I was entitled to have everything and I wanted to be sure that I was always with my child. I was not willing to leave her anywhere because I felt you only have one time, one chance, and I want to do it that way. So I ran for Attorney General. There had never been a woman Attorney General in the United States. I won the Primary [against Judicial Appointments Secretary Burt Pines] in a tough, tough primary and then I got into a general election and they hit me with the death penalty and, you know, a number of things and I just couldn't survive it, I lost by two percent [to Calif. Governor George Deukmejian]. So I went back to practicing law. Story_ID: 16670 Speaker 1: So how was that? Was that sort of a turning point [losing the election for Attorney General, 1978], or sort of a self-assess, you know re-assessment because you obviously had made a decision to make a lifestyle change to come live here [Los Angeles, Calif.]. Speaker 2: Right, right, that was a chance. I took a chance and in my own mind I knew I had taken a chance. But it was a tough defeat because I was so far ahead and everything else and all of a sudden, you know, I lose. On issues that I tried to, I felt that I'd would have been a good Attorney General; I really felt I would have, but I lost. I really didn't figure out exactly what I would be doing and then I joined a law firm. Talked to a lot of different law firms and for the first time I went into a white law firm, a large firm. Speaker 1: That was Jones Day? Speaker 2: No. I went into at that time I went to Kaplan Livingston. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: I went to Kaplan Livingston and I was there for a short time and the person who was in this district that I lived in, by that time I had moved out of the area where I'd grown up, just one day just quit. So the [Calif.] Governor had to appoint. And Jerry Brown and I had always been friends from when he was in Sacramento [Calif.] and I was in Sacramento, we'd always been really good friends. So he appointed me to the Board of Supervisors here [Los Angeles, Calif.] , not in this district, but in a district where there was only like 10 percent African American. Now the difference is this is my first time running in an election where it wasn't a partisan race and it was a district where there were affluent people, conservative, heavily conservative, it's a district that before and after has never been represented by a Democrat. And as hard as I tried I could never get over 47 percent. I got 47 percent in the primary, against eleven people, I ran against eleven people and I could never get over 47 and I was defeated. And that was a tough one because I felt I had done a good job. But I went back, went back to practicing law and I first went into a firm Kutak, Omaha [Neb.] law firm, but soon after I joined them they closed their Los Angeles [Calif.] office. So I worked a deal out with them, they had trained me as a municipal finance lawyer. I worked a deal out with them that I had done all this to get these clients that I would do a joint venture with them. So I started doing municipal finance to get my name in the red book and working with this firm in Nebraska then I formed a firm, I brought two other lawyers. And so it was Burke, Robinson and Pearman, and we had a municipal finance firm and I stayed there, we practiced for about five years. And I just--. They were younger and they had different aspirations and they wanted to grow into this huge big firm. I was not ready to go into that kind of financial risk. Maybe I had known a little bit better about how law ebbs and flows. And I was just not ready to do that and I told them, you know, I just felt that maybe I should think about something else so I went into Jones Day and I stayed at Jones, Day until I ran for office [Board of Supervisors] here. Speaker 1: Now how did you find practice, I mean, you had had a small practice at the beginning and then you said that--. Speaker 2: Right. I had to learn. Speaker 1: So you had to learn? Okay. Speaker 2: I had to learn. Speaker 1: Were people patient with you? You came in with a great deal of credibility already, so--. Speaker 2: Some people were competitive with me some people were--. My skills, probably, some of them had eroded, you know, and some of them had never been developed because I had not been a heavy document lawyer, you know. But I have to say this, the time I was with Kutak, they did a lot of training and I did, I got, I think, a good ground in the law but I don't think that I ever got the kind of training you get from being an associate and working your way up. So there were things that I had weaknesses, but at the same time where I really was able to put it together in a large firm was eventually I carved, when public finance got to be not so good, I carved up this public private partnership kind of practice which took off so I was doing okay. Speaker 1: And that practice continued with Jones Day? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 16671 Speaker 1: So how did it come about this, you know, the position [County of Los Angeles, Calif., Board of Supervisors Elected Official] you have now? How did that come about? Speaker 2: Well, it was reapportionment year, ten years ago, and the person who was here asked me if I would be in-, represent him on reapportionment, I did. And I worked on reapportionment and worked on the districts and there was a lot of discussion of expanding the board so there were a lot of issues like that. I had, prior to that time, been very concerned about the fact that there had never been a minority on this Board of Supervisors. And I had testified in the Garza Case [Garza vs. County of Los Angeles, 1990] that required them to set new districts. Now the fact that there had never been a black in this district was not because it didn't have a large number of blacks but because the people here felt that [County Supervisor] Kenneth Hahn represented them well. So when this was a heavily African American district Billy Mills once ran but no one ever really seriously ran against Kenneth Hahn and he stayed here forty years. There had not been a Latino, you know. But some of the experiences I had in the Fourth District certainly the court looked at in the fact that there had never been a minority elected. So I testified in the Garza Case and the Garza Case required them, of course, to a reapportionment and a Latino [Gloria Molina] was elected to the board. Then I was working on reapportionment and I was still an attorney, of course, practicing law and an interesting thing happened. My daughter [Autumn Burke] was ready to go to college, everyone was pushing me to run for this seat but there were a number of people interested. Diane Watson who was a [Calif.] State Senator and some other people who were in Congress and other places were interested. I really had, I said, "Gee, you know, I'm making money for the first time" and then I thought about it and I said, "You know, a lot of people have invested in me." So I was going back and forth. My daughter decided to go to UC San Diego [University of California, San Diego], we drove her down there. As we're leaving San Diego I look at my husband [William A. Burke] and I said, "You know, maybe I should run for office. Maybe I should go back into the public sector. You know, do we really need the money? I mean, why shouldn't I just go on and run for office?" So I did. And it was a tough campaign, a difficult campaign. Actually, Maxine [U.S. Representative Maxine Waters] had done a lot of analysis on it and after she, and I had said I won't run against Kenneth Hahn but he eventually decided he would not run, I said I wouldn't run against Maxine. Maxine did a lot of analysis and she said that, you know, she came to the conclusion that it would be a tough race for her too and that she would have to spend a lot of time traveling back and forth, and it was going to be tough for her. So she gave me her polls and it was obvious from her poll that I could win. It would be tough but it was obvious, the polling that she had done, that a person who was a moderate in this district could win. So I had a tough time of it raising a million and a half dollars when you're not in public office but I did. And I won by, out of four hundred thousand votes, twenty-three hundred votes. So, of course, the next two times I was unopposed. Story_ID: 16672 Speaker 1: So how are you enjoying this time of your life [2001]? Speaker 2: I enjoy it. Speaker 1: This is your third term [County of Los Angeles, Calif., Board of Supervisors Elected Official]? Speaker 2: My third term, I enjoy it. Speaker 1: But it also is your third, sort of, public position. Speaker 2: Right. And it's great, you know. One of the things that was really tough for me to decide to run is because, you know, in private life I was a Regent of the University of California, at the time I was Chairing the Federal Reserve Bank, I was on Ford Foundation Board so I was having a pretty good time as a lawyer aside from making money. It was a tough one for me to decide to come back. I really didn't think I was going to have to give up all those things but I did. But I have, I've enjoyed it and it's a bit challenging and I've been here longer than any job I've ever held and I think I'm going to stay a while. Speaker 1: So what things do you want to accomplish that you haven't accomplished in your life to date? And then I have to go back to the Congressional Black Caucus, I need (inaudible). Speaker 2: Oh yes. Well, you know, I don't know. There probably are some things that I would like to accomplish that come across my mind from time to time. I never did, was successful running statewide. I don't know whether that's overriding in my thoughts. I don't know, I've never had a big successful business that I established. You know, there are a lot of things that I have not done that I probably would enjoy doing but right now I'm happy right where I am. Story_ID: 16673 Speaker 1: Now back to the Congressional Black Caucus [CBC] because--. Speaker 2: That had to be an experience for someone like me! (laughs) Speaker 1: Right! Because you were the--. Well I want to talk about that because we're actually trying to do a lot of the CBC, we just started, but we're trying to do--. I would like to do that history. Speaker 2: I was in a very interesting position with the Congressional Black Congress, I went there when they were broke and they were having these big dinners and making no money. And one of the reasons they turned to me is that they knew that I was kind of a business kind of person and I went in to get them on financial footing. And one of the things that I was pushing for was the foundation [Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, Inc.]. And with [U.S. Representative Barbara Jordan] Barbara who, at that point, was the Executive Director, we sat down and figured out if we could ever get large corporations to contribute, not, where they could get a deduction, you could bring in a whole new group of people contributing and rather than the people who came there and, you know, did not make a large contribution. So basically I came along at the time and we put together the foundation, the wives said why not have interns, you know, and that worked out really well because we really didn't know what to do once we got the Foundation. But, basically, that was the contribution I made to the Black Caucus. The Black Caucus was an interesting experience for me because I had never been working with this many African American people, political figures, you know. Obviously there were members of the [Calif.] legislature that I worked with but not these mega personalities, you know. But I enjoyed it; I enjoyed it. But it was a great experience working with the Black Caucus and, of course, obviously I became, they're still friends, you know, they are friends for life and everyone was really just was great and the Caucus grew. I don't know what it's like now with forty members, there were nineteen of us and it was interesting. So I'm sure it's really interesting with forty members there. Story_ID: 16674 Speaker 1: Now do you--, but you had sort of said that you were hoping that there would be that time, I remember reading that, that you, you know--. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --you were talking about your daughter, you know, Autumn, which is such a pretty name, I mean, but you were talking about what your vision for her and her world would be. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you said that, what did you say? You said that--? Speaker 2: Well, for one thing they asked me if she would be a member of Congress and I said, "Oh no, she'll be President." (laughs) But also the thing that I said is that in her era there would not be anything unusual about being a person of color who is accomplished and I think that's the important thing. And I've lived through so many changes and they're--, it's great! And when you see these young people who have all these opportunities, they have so many they don't know what to do. My daughter, she doesn't know which one to take, you know, she's just constantly turning around and, you know, she doesn't know what to do because there's so many things to do. That we're not alternatives, with me I had to sit down and figure out which one of these things will I try to tackle. But it's great there's a generation that doesn't have to just fight it day after day but it hasn't changed as much in terms of attitude as I would have believed. Story_ID: 16675 Speaker 1: Now back to the Congressional Black Caucus [CBC], what do you see its importance in that sort of organization? Why do you see that as important? Speaker 2: Well when I was there [Chair, 1976] it was important to have a group that could attract the media and place the issues of concern to the African American community in the limelight, full employment. Today, you know, we don't fight about the fact that you want to have low unemployment. No one accepted that in those days, you know, I can remember, you know, the Federal Reserve Bank, [Federal Reserve Bank Chairman Arthur Burns] Burns would say, "Oh no we can't have low unemployment, that means we'll, you know, you have to have a certain percentage of unemployment or else it throws everything out of whack." These were issues that came to the forefront, [U.S. Representative] Augustus Hawkins with full employment attitudes. There were so many issues that we were able to articulate and bring forward. The issues of Affirmative Action had never been at the forefront. I can remember when I introduced my first Amendment on a Federal Bill, which was in the Alaskan Pipeline, and I introduced it, not only do you have employment, fair employment, but you have to have Affirmative Action in contracts. It was so strange no one voted against it. I introduced the Amendment, no one said anything, and they just let it go through because they didn't even know what it was. And so then I introduced that the next time there was another bill, which I believe was on economic development and [U.S. Representative] Parren Mitchell put that amendment in there. As far as defense, [U.S. Representative] Ron Dellums came to me, he said, "Let me have that language." I said, "Here." Nobody paid any attention to any of this because no one knew what it was. But my little amendment on the Alaskan Pipeline ended up with 350 million dollars in contracts, you know, when women and minorities got--. Well now after they start trying to pass regulations they realized it was something different. So then the Senators started asking about it realizing that something has started. Well, granted, it didn't turn out as it should have ultimately because we start--, we got all of these changes in laws and attitudes that came about. But for a while there it was enough of a window that you had people emerge who were able to get businesses and who got opportunities. So being there at a time when they're in--. The Black Caucus was very key in coming up with these ideas that took people by storm that they weren't even prepared to fight. That's what the Black Caucus was about. Today, though, I think they're important because they are a sizeable number that can make a difference in a close decision. We could make differences in close decisions back there with nineteen but now with the number it can make a lot of difference. Plus I think the other thing that's great is that now you have a wide variety of people and they aren't all media stars, there are some people who are, you know, workers in the vineyard and people who have different roles, and that's great. Story_ID: 16676 Speaker 1: Now you are the first African female, I'm sorry, but you were the first female head of the organization [Congressional Black Caucus], how was that with the--? Speaker 2: Well! Let me tell you. (laughs) You know it was--. They were in a situation where they were willing to do almost anything but it was really interesting. It was hard for them to really even turn over the gavel, you know, it was kind of tough. It was kind of tough for them to realize what had happened but ultimately everything came along okay. Speaker 1: Now I'm not going to say that was a smooth transition. Speaker 2: Who was before you? Speaker 1: [U.S. Representative] Parren Mitchell. Speaker 2: Oh Parren, okay, so he was an old-timer, I'm sorry, okay he was sort of an old-timer (inaudible). Speaker 1: Oh yeah he was, yeah. But they realized there had to be a new direction and they thought, first of all, they knew I could bring--. Here's someone who had raised more money than anyone had ever raised in a Congressional campaign. So they felt that I knew how to raise money and I would be able to help raise money for the Congressional Black Caucus, I think that was really why. Because they hadn't heard about anybody raising three hundred thousand dollars to run for Congress there, not any blacks. So this is the awe that they held me in that I knew how to raise money. Speaker 2: Now this--. Speaker 1: And that's true of all the people in the Congress now, not just the African American members. People in California who say, "Well, you know, here's someone who raised all this money." Speaker 2: Now you know people have predicted the death of the Black Caucus when the funding, you know, when the Republicans got in and people were saying, "Oh, you know, there it goes, it's going to be gone, how are they going to exist?" But they're doing okay, right? Speaker 1: They're doing all right. Speaker 2: But there are also people who think that it's just a big party. Speaker 1: Well I think that there has been an attempt to bring substance and some of the seminars are doing good at that and more and more they're developing that. That issue has to be addressed. It has to be addressed. I think it's very positive some of the things that are coming out of the Black Caucus weekend [Congressional Black Caucus Legislative Weekend] and the members of the Black Caucus individually are achieving things which is important. Story_ID: 16677 Speaker 1: Now, okay, I just have a few more questions because I know we're running out of time. I have--. There is, you know, in the last, I want to say fifteen to twenty years, there has been a push more you know, in the United States, well, there's been an anti-political thing going on. Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: And at one point in time, you know, and still I think it is still the case today, you know, politics that was a big thing, you know, I mean, for black people to have their place at the table. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I'm wondering--. And now there's, you know, push for economics, you know, economic empowerment business. What do you think, I mean, for those who are young and looking at careers themselves, you know, when your mother came on teaching was the career. What would you say, is it still a career that people should, you know, go into and--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And why? Speaker 2: It's important to have Representatives and what I'm noticing is that, at least in Los Angeles [Calif.] and I think across the nation, you're seeing younger and younger people running for political office and being successful. I'm a little concerned that as African Americans we have not seen that same kind of development of the campaign skills you have to have today to compete, the skills in raising money that you have to have today to compete because now you have to raise millions to be a force. You have to have people who are really technically on top of it. I'm a little concerned about the fact that our bright people and they have so many opportunities, they're interested in making money, it's not quite the same attraction for them to go into political office and to become political know-how and, you know, consultants, big, big money in political consultants. What most people fail to realize, [U.S. Representative Maxine Waters] Maxine worked in campaigns, put on campaigns before she decided to run for office. And, you know, we aren't having people who are getting involved who are the ones who have the degrees. And the people who are up in the other communities, it's the people who have those masters and who are lawyers and are people who can really compete at a very high level are also the ones doing some of this campaign fund raising and organizing and running for office. We have to move more young people in that direction. Speaker 1: Don't you think there's a fear of, well, there's a perception that all politicians are crooked in some respects? And then there's a fear about how horrible campaigning, you know, and the press can be right now. Speaker 2: I understand that. The press can be tough. The press is tough on me. But you know what you have to realize that the kitchens hot, you know. It's not easy in politics. It's worse now and it's harder now than it ever was. The campaign laws, the ethics laws, the conflict laws, you can't get away with things today and we have constituents who expect it. I just had a meeting with minister this morning, I said, "Listen, it's not the way it is today as it was when [Los Angeles County Supervisor Kenneth Hahn] Mr. Hahn was sitting here where he could just hand out contracts, you have to compete for contracts. I'll fight for you to get those contracts. But we can't hand them out to our friends because that is what doesn't go today. And when people don't stay with the straight and narrow, the press, you know, you end up in jail. We've had these bright young guys go into jail and that shouldn't happen. But it's tough but it's doable and it's a great profession and it's something that we need. Speaker 1: Why is it a great profession? Speaker 2: It's an opportunity for change. And there are very few places that you can look back on your career and say, you know, this, this, and this happened because I was willing to introduce a bill that I was able to just get a bill through, this is something I saw happen, this has changed the course of history and the course of people's lives. Story_ID: 16678 Speaker 1: Now you have been involved in a time that there's been tremendous change even in the black community and I'm wondering, you know, you alluded a little bit to some things not have gotten as far as you would have liked but what are your hopes and your concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: The reality is that the black community is not going to be the same kind of largest minority group in the United States. We're going to have to see the black community, more and more people, going in and being part of mainstream politics, running in districts where they are not a majority; it's a reality of life. I think what's happening in California, where you have the Latino population as the largest population; actually, it's almost the largest sector of population. But throughout this nation we have immigrants who are coming here and it's an era of where you'll see people of different ethnic backgrounds. And also, as African Americans have gotten more successful, more money, they have not been happy to stay within the black community; they move into diverse communities. So our political power is not going to be defined the same way it was traditionally, it's going to be defined in terms of some people are going to be able to be elected in the black core of the community. But, for the most part, we're going to have to see more and more people who go out there and compete and who are elected in the mainstream. And we're going to see them and they're going to be up there and they're going to be Governors and running for President and everything else. It's just a matter of time. Story_ID: 16679 Speaker 1: Your mother [Lola Watson] who, now (inaudible), saw part of your success, but she didn't--. She's going to see--wait, she didn't see you elected to Congress [1972], did she? Speaker 2: No, she did not. Speaker 1: What do you think she would have said at that point? Speaker 2: She would have been very proud. I'm sure she would have been very proud. She was proud of me in the [Calif.] legislature [1966]. She was there. She sat there on the floor of the assembly when I was sworn in, and that was a big thing for her. Speaker 1: What are the things that people don't know about Yvonne Brathwaite Burke that they, you know--. I mean something that, you know, they would not know or your public demeanor would not let people know? I mean I was interested that you--. Do you quilt? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. That's what I thought. Speaker 2: I quilt. I fish. Oh, of course I like sushi. I quilt. I fish. You know, there are probably people who don't think that I do things like that, you know. They probably think that none of us do anything but just work. I like to travel and I enjoy--. I do have an enjoyable life. I like boats. I like the water. Spend a lot of time on the water. Speaker 1: And what do you think the success of your marriage [to William A. Burke], why that has been such a successful union? Speaker 2: Well, we're such different people. We have different goals and we're people who have different directions, certainly different personalities, but also, we have a lot of things in common that we enjoy doing. I do enjoy fishing. We both read a lot. So, you know, in our house there may be no conversation all day, people reading, and that's not strange. We both like family, even though he does not have a large extended family either. We do a lot of things with our children. They're important. We both like a certain lifestyle, though, that I think is important. We both enjoy a pleasant lifestyle and those kinds of things. Story_ID: 16680 Speaker 1: And for your children, what are your hopes for your children? Speaker 2: Well, I want them to do what they want to do. Obviously there's certain things--. I'd like for Autumn [Burke] to be successful. I don't think there's any question that Christine has found her niche. But I know that I didn't do anything anyone told me to do. I didn't marry the person my parents told me to marry. I really think everyone has to find themselves, and the important thing for me, that I'd like to see my children happy because there's nothing worse than people who are miserable in their lives, who are doing things they really don't want to do, who are around people they don't want to be around, and who feel the pressures are such that they have to do it. And I've been very sensitive to the fact that often there is this expectation that your children do exactly what you do, and in our society, that's a very strong expectation. If she wants to, I would like to see my daughter [Autumn Burke] run for office. But unless she really wants to, I would never push her to do it. The reality is that she has some of those kinds of traits that are probably geared to it because there's a lot of similarities in terms of our approach and mannerisms and I think that she also has a real desire to help and interest in issues. She's an issue person. But she has to do what she wants to do and that's the most (inaudible), and I'm not going to push her. Story_ID: 16681 Speaker 1: You know, and you've been a person who was set on a path, I would say, and that path has been productive for you really. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean you're blessed in that way. Speaker 2: Well, also, I don't mind changes, you know. I don't mind risk taking and I take my chance. I realize I have to suffer from those mistakes I make. I have not had a pattern in life. I have done whatever came across my way and I've been lucky. I have to say that. I've been very fortunate and lucky that things went as well as they have because I've taken a lot of chances. Story_ID: 16682 Speaker 1: And who are the people you've most admired in your life, would you say? Or do you have any one person or a couple or? Speaker 2: There are a number of people. In politics, I really did admire [U.S. Representative Augustus "Gus" Hawkins] Gus Hawkins. I admired him tremendously. As a lawyer: Martha Jefferson. It wasn't a matter of whether I admired her or not because she did it: I always knew I could do it. Unfortunately, there were no women in politics for me to try to emulate, so I didn't really have a chance to say, "Okay, I'm going to be like that person." I just decided, "Well, there's room out there for me." Now my attitude is, you know, if someone can do it, then why can't I do it? I should be able to try to do it. But again, I have, and I've said, I really haven't had a long attention span on jobs, which I don't know whether that's very positive or not. Speaker 1: It's very "in" these days. (laughter) Speaker 2: That's right. It's different today than it was in my years. Speaker 1: So you have no need to be apologetic. Speaker 2: No, I haven't really had a lot of longevity in jobs because by the time I'm here awhile, I'm ready to do something different. But I'm staying here and I enjoy it. Story_ID: 16683 Speaker 1: Your legacy: what do you want it to be? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I think that the important thing is that I may have started some trends or I may have given some people a feeling that they can do it too. I run into young women who say, "You know, I saw you had a baby and I knew I could have a child and could be a lawyer or I could do whatever I wanted to do." I run into people who say, "You know, I think that I can run for office because you ran for office." And maybe the thing about me that's a little different is that it's easier sometimes, I think, for women to identify with me. Those who are not the most brilliant and the most dynamic and all of those things, they can identify with me as just another person who can do it. And it proves that hard work can get you a long way if you're willing to put in the time and the effort, and that's been true in terms of fundraising and a lot of other things that people say, "Well, you know, blacks can't raise money." Obviously you can. You can if you learn how to do it, and you learn how and you can compete. So there are a lot of pieces of legislation that I've passed that I think have made a difference in peoples lives. There are a lot of things I do here [County of Los Angeles, Calif.] that I think will make a difference: programs and approaches to things. Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: Okay, thank you. Speaker 1: Thank you. Thank you. Story_ID: 16684 Speaker 1: This was in 1963. Speaker 2: Okay. And where was it taken? Speaker 1: In my new office I opened up. Speaker 2: Okay. And if you could give us a left to right quickly, that'd be great. Speaker 1: Cleo was a secretary. James Reese, now a judge. That's me in the center, although you can't tell. And that was a secretary whose name has escaped me right this minute. That's Charles Matthews who was one of my--was a lawyer. He was the senior kind of lawyer there. And sitting down is Barbara Hill who was my secretary, who still works for me right now. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke with her staff at her law office, Los Angeles, California, 1963; (L. to R.) Cleo, James Reese, Yvonne Brathwaite Burke, an unidentified secretary, and Charles Matthews; (Seated) Barbara Hill. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16685 Speaker 1: All right. On the left is Elihu Harris who served in the [State of California] Assembly and was Mayor of Oakland [California]. What year was this? Gosh, I don't know what year that was. But that's Elihu Harris, that's me, and I can't remember who the next person is, and [San Francisco, California Mayor] Willie Brown on the right. But I'd have to believe that was probably around 1972 or three [1973]. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke with other California political leaders, ca. 1972-1973; (L. to R.): Oakland Mayor, Elihu Harris, Yvonne Brathwaite Burke, an unidentified man, and San Francisco Mayor, Willie Brown. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16686 Speaker 1: This is probably around 1975. [U.S. Representative] Charles Rangel, [singer] Dionne Warwick. Oh, that's the singer Lou Rawls. That's Lou Rawls, who's my daughter's godfather. That's me, [U.S. Representative, William] Bill Clay and [U.S. Representative, Louis] Lou Stokes. I was honoring Lou Rawls and Dionne Warwick. Speaker 2: Mrs. Burke, can you lean to your right a little bit. Speaker 1: I was honoring them. Lou doesn't look the same, does he? Speaker 2: Hair's falling out a little bit. Speaker 1: So what was this? What was the occasion? Speaker 2: I was honoring them. Speaker 1: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke with entertainers and politicians on the steps of the Capitol, Washington, D.C., ca. 1975; (L. to R.): U.S. Representative Charles Rangel, Dionne Warwick, Lou Rawls, U.S. Representatives William Clay and Louis Stokes. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16687 Speaker 1: And this is the marriage of Barry Gordy's [CEO of Motown Records] daughter [Hazel Gordy] to Jermaine Jackson [singer], and that was--. I know when that was. That was December of 1973. I had just had a baby [Autumn Burke] and that's me and my husband [William A. Burke]. Speaker 2: So you were guests at the wedding? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. No official (inaudible). Speaker 1: I was just a guest at the wedding. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke (second from right) and her husband, William A. Burke, at the wedding of Jermaine Jackson and Hazel Gordy, 1973. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16688 Speaker 1: Okay, that's [Senator] Hillary Clinton, [Congresswoman] Diane Watson, and myself, and I'd have to believe that was probably around 1999, somewhere around then. Or is there a date on it? I'm sorry. It's July 19, 1993. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke (right) and others being greeted by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, Washington, D.C., 1993. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16689 Speaker 1: And that's Mrs. King and that's me. Speaker 2: Do you know the occasion, or? Speaker 1: No. Gosh. I can't tell you what date that is. I'd say it's probably in the '70s. Coretta Scott King. I think that she was giving a fundraiser for me or something. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke (right) and Coretta Scott King, 1970s. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16690 Speaker 1: Vicky Pipkin. Is that Mike Bolkey (?) ? And that's--. Speaker 2: Who is our Civil Service Commissioner? Speaker 1: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke (seated, second from right) and her staff, Los Angeles, California, n.d. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16691 Speaker 1: Okay, [Ronald] Ron Dellums [U.S. Representative, California] and then the [U.S.] Congressman [Robert Nix] from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. John Conyers [U.S. Representative, Michigan] next. Shirley Chisholm [U.S. Representative, New York]. Oh, that's [Andrew] Andy Young [U.S. Representative, Georgia] next to him, and the man from Chicago [Illinois]. What was his name? Speaker 2: Not Gus Savage? Speaker 1: No. It was the one who was the athlete--who was--Metcalf. Speaker 2: Metcalf, Ralph Metcalf [U.S. Representative, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Ralph Metcalf. And okay, Barbara Jordan [U.S. Representative, Texas]. Oh, wait. [Walter] Fauntroy [U.S. Representative, Washington, D.C.], next to Metcalf. Barbara Jordan. I think that's Lou--is that [Louis] Lou Stokes [U.S. Representative, Ohio] next to him, and Charles Diggs [Jr., U.S. Representative, Michigan]. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: That's it. Yeah. Now in the lower level is [Augustus] 'Gus' Hawkins, [U.S. Representative, California] Cardiss Collins, [U.S. Representative, Illinois] Charlie Rangel [U.S. Representative, New York], myself [U.S. Representative, California], [William Lacy] Bill Clay [U.S. Representative, Missouri], and Parren Mitchell [U.S. Representative, Maryland]. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke with other members of the Congressional Black Caucus, Washington, D.C., ca. 1974-1977; (Front row, L. to R.): Augustus "Gus" Hawkins, Cardiss Collins, Charles Rangel, Yvonne Brathwaite Burke, William Lacy Clay and Parren Mitchell; (Back row, L. to R.): Ronald Dellums, Robert Nix, John Conyers, Shirley Chisholm, Andrew Young, unidentified Congressman, Ralph Metcalf, Walter Fauntroy, Barbara Jordan, Louis Stokes and Charles Diggs, Jr. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16692 Speaker 1: And this was in Anaheim [California] about three weeks before he was shot, and that's the one where he was at the CVC (?) convention, where they say that the man was out there. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: The CVC convention where the person who shot him was there. Speaker 2: Really? They said--okay. Okay. Speaker 1: And this is out on a balcony too--I've got news for you. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke (second from left) with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Gwen Green and Gwen Green's daughter, Anaheim, California, 1968. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16693 Speaker 1: We have a photo now of, obviously, Mrs. Burke and [former California Governor] Ronald Reagan. We don't know when this was taken. And everyone has left the room. I'm here by myself narrating these. So for all you historian researchers, I apologize, but at least we know who it is, ok. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke with former California Governor, Ronald Reagan, ca. 1967-1975. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16694 Speaker 1: Okay. Mrs. Brathwaite Burke with Dr. Henry Kissinger. Time and place unknown, unless it has something in the inscription here. "To Yvonne Burke, with every good wish, Henry A. Kissinger." That's it. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke and Dr. Henry Kissinger, ca. 1970s. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16695 Speaker 1: Down here. There you go. Okay. Mrs. Burke and Bill [sic, Los Angeles, California Mayor Thomas] Bradley--. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke and Los Angeles, California Mayor Tom Bradley, ca. 1980s-1990s. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16696 Speaker 1: See [U.S. Representative] Charlie Rangel there, in the center. Is that Mrs. Burke on his right? Bunch of press in back and--. Speaker 2: Yes, I think that's her on his right. Speaker 1: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke (seated, second from right) with U.S. President Gerald R. Ford and the Congressional Black Caucus, Washington, D.C., ca. 1974-1977. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16697 Speaker 1: This is a photo of Mrs. Burke and the late [U.S. Vice President] Hubert [H.] Humphrey. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke receives a kiss from former U.S. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, n.d. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16698 Speaker 1: This is a shot of Yvonne [Brathwaite] Burke and Kenneth Hahn. Did you say H-A-H-N? Who was her predecessor at the [Los Angeles County, California] Supervisor's Office, with [musician] Ray Charles and he has some kind of medal. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke (right) with singer Ray Charles, and former Los Angeles County Supervisor, Kenneth Hahn, Los Angeles, California, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16699 Speaker 1: A shot of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke thumbs up. I don't know. Must have something to do with the campaign, right? But we don't know where or when. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke giving the 'thumbs up', Los Angeles, California, n.d. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16700 Speaker 1: Cesar Chavez [migrant labor activist] I believe it is, and some associates of his apparently, and Mrs. [Yvonne-Brathwaite] Burke. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke (second from right) with United Farm Workers union activist, Cesar Chavez (left) and others, California, n.d. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16701 Speaker 1: Mrs. [Yvonne Brathwaite] Burke's current staff at the [Los Angeles County, California] Supervisor's Office. Too numerous to list their names, but we know that's her staff. Speaker 2: She served here three decades--. Speaker 1: She has served here-- Speaker 2: --Oh no, three terms, three terms. Speaker 1: She has served three terms here. Been the longest place she's ever held office, and this photo, we believe was taken very recently. Either in 2000 or 2001 or maybe 199--. Speaker 2: It's 1999. Speaker 1: 1999. Speaker 2: [Yvonne Brathwaite Burke's staff at the Los Angeles County Supervisor's Office, Los Angeles, California, 1999. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.] Story_ID: 16702 Speaker 1: Okay, finally we have the portrait that was referred to during the interview by Mrs. [Yvonne Brathwaite] Burke. The one where a photo was taken and then later on she hooked up with the painter and sat for him and this was part of an exhibit and then ultimately, after the exhibit, the painting was sold--paintings were sold and she bought this one, and it hangs now in the conference room. Speaker 2: [Painting of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke, n.d. From the collection of Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.]..