 Story_ID: 4241 Speaker 1: ...It for us, including your middle name, your birth date--. Speaker 2: Not the year, of course (laughs). Speaker 1: Give us the year. But see--why do people--someone refused to do that recently for us--. Speaker 2: And? And you were empathetic? Speaker 1: I just said, "I'll find the date someplace (unclear)--." Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It's not gonna come out of my mouth, you can say it. "She's about thirty." (sarcastically) My name is Diann Burns. D-I-A-N-N, no middle name, legally, and my last name is Burns, B-U-R-N-S. My birthday is September 29th (pause). The year is a secret (laughs). Speaker 1: Is that--seriously? No, we're slating this. Speaker 2: You trying to ruin my career? Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: I'd have to kill everybody who saw the tape. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And today's date? Speaker 2: This is May 23, 2001. Speaker 1: Okay. And location we're at The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue]. Speaker 2: This is The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And your--your profession? Speaker 2: I am a news anchor for ABC [America Broadcasting Company] Television in Chicago. Story_ID: 4242 Speaker 1: There are five questions I ask, since you know one of them--what they are. But I ask, "What's your favorite color?" That is one of them. Okay. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: No, seriously. I ask these five 'People' magazine-ish questions at the beginning, so--. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. My favorite colors are yellow and orange, and I didn't really think about why until I was on an audition for a job, and that was a question that they threw out in my interview on camera. And the guy who I was rehearsing with, whatever, said, "I feel so bad because my colors are--my favorite color is brown." And I thought, "You know, "I guess it's because I'm an outdoor person, and I like all things that are sunshine and flowers," and his was an earthy color, which was fine, and we wound up working together. There was just an instant chemistry, and so I've never really been able to choose between yellow and orange so those are my two favorite colors. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is macaroni and cheese. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying. There are quite a few. I believe the one that stands out the most is that one from the Bible [1 Cor. 10:13] where they talk about, "God will never put on you more than you can bear." Story_ID: 4243 Speaker 1: I want to know if you would give your mother's name and if you would talk about her, you know, what you know of her family background? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Louise Burns. Her maiden name is Louise Mathis. She was born in Georgia, Alamo, Georgia, which is the southern part of Georgia. She is very close to her mother, and that's my grandmother [Mary Newbern] who is still alive. She's in her late eighties, and she was also born in south Georgia and--a big family, and I know my great-grandmother, my great-grandfather. And I was--my mom had children early, so I was old enough to actually have relationships with many of the older people in our family and to hear all the stories about them growing up and what their values were. And one of the things I think that stands out to me as I look at the generations of our family, education was very important early on. Of course, as most black people, there were slaves in my family and the first generation that could be removed. There were ten children in my grandmother's family and all of them had to go to work at an early age to make sure that one daughter could go to college, and she went to nursing school, and when she went to nursing school later, she would bring two of my--she brought my grandmother and my grandmother's sister to the North, and my grandmother raised her children working in the school cafeteria in Cleveland, Ohio and put her children through school, and I even lived with my grandmother through part of school, because I was very close to my grandmother. She taught me how to drive and just all the things I remember of them just talking about what you should do in life, and that was you didn't necessarily have to find a goal as a child, but you had to make a promise to yourself that you would do something to further yourself, to not let the family stay stagnant. So I always remembered that and they always said, "Always be able to take care of yourself as well as take care of others." So, that's what I got from that side of the family. My mom and I are very close. I just talked to her today, and my mom now takes care of my grandmother because she's older, and I suspect that if my mom needs me to take care of her, I will as well and that's really the core of, historically, the black family. You take care of your family and if somebody down the street's family needed somebody, you take care of them. We've had cousins live with us over the years when we were very young who perhaps couldn't live in their own family, and that's just how it was and it was great. Story_ID: 4244 Speaker 1: From your mother's side of the family, there were a lot of peop-- you know, a lot of kids. Speaker 2: That's where the bigger side of the family is, yes. Millions of--of kids. Speaker 1: And what about your father? Speaker 2: My father came from a smaller family. He's from Vicksburg, Mississippi, and my father is from a family of mostly boys and the dynamics are a little bit different. I do know my father's grandmother--my father's mother, of course, she's dead now, but they all lived and pretty much settled in Cleveland [Ohio], which is where my mom and dad met. So, I still was very close to my cousins in my father's side of the family as well. So it wasn't so much a transplanted--where you are just close to one side of the family. It was great, and they lived nearby, so all the kids could play together and everybody got along which was something else that was great. Speaker 1: Did your father ever talk about growing up, and what's his name? Speaker 2: My father's name is Lenny Burns. Lendoris W. Burns is his formal name and he was a minister, and so a lot of our roots are in the church. Both sides of the family, my great, great-grandfather was a minister as well on my mother's side at the church in Alamo, Georgia, and most of my mother's side of the family is buried there to this day out in the back of the church as they call it. So because the families were just there, on their farms, et cetera, doing what they had to do. Sugar cane was the family business as well as chickens and that sort of thing, but mostly sugar cane, and then the church was the root of it all. Speaker 1: Now you--so, what--what denomination is your father? Speaker 2: Methodist. Speaker 1: So you--AME [African Methodist Episcopal]? Speaker 2: Right--No. CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal]. Speaker 1: CME, okay, CME. So you--you're a preacher's kid. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 4245 Speaker 1: Now, you--well how about your siblings, in the order and you know, how many siblings are--? Speaker 2: My oldest brother is named after my father, Lendoris W. Burns, but we call him 'Lenny', too, and he was the first child, and then my sister was born five years later. So, he was sort of the "take care of everybody, the serious guy in the family," although he was also a practical joker when nobody was home. But he was sort of the leader and told everybody after experience what would happen. He was quiet. Then my sister, who is a year older than me. My sister, though, died in her twenties in a car wreck, and then there's a younger brother who is seven years younger than I am who is still living in Ohio. His name is Donald Andrew Burns. My sister's name is Anita Lucille Burns. Story_ID: 4246 Speaker 1: Now you--what are your--some of your--what is your earliest memory of growing up or some of your early memories? Speaker 2: My early memories pretty much focus around what was going on in our home. We were raised to--there were rules, we didn't just haphazardly run around, and I remember one of the earliest rules was all the kids had to stay in the house and my brother [Lendorance W. Burns, Jr.] was sort of in charge, and nobody could come in and nobody could go out, which was what the rule was. So, we all had to play together. I remember following my sisters [sic, sister, Anita Lucille Burns] and brothers [sic, brother] to school, and we had some other family members--kids our age lived with us too and I would follow them to school when I was the youngest left home alone. And every day, me and the dog would follow them to school, and every day the school would call and tell my parents [Louise Mathis Burns and Lendoris W. Burns, Sr.] to come and get me and bring me back home. And I just thought it was fascinating they would all get to walk together for ten blocks and they would, you know, dilly-dally along the way, and then they'd go to this big building and they'd come home, and they'd know all this stuff. So, I wanted to get there to see what went on in there, and finally I made it one day and I remember just how overwhelmed I was, and I could not wait to go. So, I always loved school from the beginning, and we would play school at home and that sort of thing. I just remember vacations in the summer with my parents and just the closeness, and they would talk to us about everything. I mean I remember to this day being in a car and we were driving on the freeway from Cincinnati [Ohio] to Cleveland [Ohio] when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated and my parents stopped the car to explain to us what they were talking about on the radio, and even now, I just get so choked up about it because it's just--it was such an historic moment and it meant so much to my parents. I just remember they were so (with emphasis) broken up about it. I remember where I was when [President] John F. Kennedy was killed. And they explained racism, and they explained the word "nigger." I remember being called a "nigger" for the first time when I was probably six [years old], and I didn't know, but the way it came out, I knew it must not be such a great thing to be. And they explained who the people are who used that word and why, and they told me in a very positive way, why it was used, why I was not that and how people who use that word felt about themselves. So, it's a word that never bothered me then, or since then. "It's more of a reflection of the person who uses it--" they said, "--than the person that they call that terrible word." So, those are the kind of memories. I learned so much from them just about the country and about different places. We would drive to the West Coast with them on vacation and sort of camp out on the way out and that sort of thing and they'd explain the different regions and the different places and the different families and their customs and the rich history of just people and why people are different. I just remember all those things that are very basic that help you to grow up to be a balanced person and also be able to accept anybody from any (with emphasis) economic level and from any walk of life that I really appreciate just growing up and being exposed to that by them. Story_ID: 4247 Speaker 1: Now, what was the community like? What part of Cleveland [Ohio] were you raised in? Speaker 2: I was born in Cleveland, moved to Cincinnati [Ohio] with my father's [Lendoris W. Burns, Sr.] church and we lived in a small town that was then called Lincoln Heights [Ohio]. And it was a working-class neighborhood and it was--mixed group of people and small. I made good friends there that I still know to this day but everybody there was just like--you know, those places where they tell everything, you know. Your neighbor tells everything that happened, even the neighbor two blocks away, if they saw you somewhere, they would tell. And they were allowed to come out and say, "You're not supposed to be doing that. Go home." I mean that was back in the day. So, it was a nourishing and nurturing place to be. And then we moved back to Cleveland, and I remember when they announced we we're moving back to Cleveland--we didn't really have any experience there as children, but all the kids started crying because, you know, everybody said, "We're gonna get killed there. It's a dangerous, terrible place." And then we moved there, of course, anyway because of my father's church and it was great. And we met friends that I still know to this day that were at my wedding and, you know, there to commemorate everything in my life, and it was not what we'd thought it would be. Speaker 1: Now, what age were you when you moved--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) When I moved--, Speaker 1: --to--to Cincinnati? Speaker 2: --I was probably (pause)--I know--there was a stint somewhere in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and I would say it's--I would have to double check the years or something, but there was a stint in Pittsburgh when I was probably three and then in Cincinnati, I would have been second grade to sixth grade and then we moved to Cleveland. I have to double check those dates. But, so, there was Cleveland I was born, there was a stint in Pittsburgh, we moved to Cincinnati, then to Cleveland. Speaker 1: And there are four--four kids? Speaker 2: Four kids. Speaker 1: Okay, four kids. Speaker 2: Two girls, two boys. Story_ID: 4248 Speaker 1: Now how was it being a minister's daughter, seriously, you hear, you know, about preacher's kids. Did you feel--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) What do you hear? (laughs) Speaker 1: Well, you hear different things, you know, sometimes they rebel, you know, there are those things, but, you know, the other thing is, did you feel pressure at all as a preacher--you know, were there responsibilities that you felt or did you feel impacted at all? I mean, maybe later maybe when you got older, but--(unclear). Speaker 2: I didn't feel like I had to have the calling or anything, far beyond that, you know, especially, there's probably more pressure on boys to follow their fathers into the ministry than girls and that's probably just because of the makeup of it back then. You know, women in that role maybe, but the only pressure really when I was very young was, you know, you always had to be in church all day. You had to be there Wednesday for prayer service. You were just there and you had to be in the choir or an usher. You know, you had to do something and then Sunday School. And so you had to be there, which, you know, you pick up a lot of knowledge about it, but, you know, as a kid there are other things you'd really rather be doing when the sun is shining especially. And unfortunately for us, when we were children, we lived right next door to the church, so--and the way my parents [Louise Mathis Burns and Lendoris W. Burns, Sr.] laid the house out is you could look from the pulpit right into the family room, so you'd know when we weren't in church, and we'd try to, you know, to be in there, sneaking around on Sunday, and then the usher would come knock on the door and say, "Your father says you better get to church right away." So, you know, you couldn't hide anywhere. You couldn't be home and say you were sick 'cause somebody's gonna see you. So, that was pretty--that was a lot of pressure and also the pressure to be kind of morally perfect. You didn't feel it so much until you reached puberty and everybody's looking at you and you just feel like your friends are doing other things, and this included not so much in the Methodist Church, the dancing and that sort of thing, but just the boys and, you know, you--people looked at you for boy-watching home from school, which my father did not allow for--maybe I was--'til I was sixteen, and he didn't like it then, and it was like they were always stalking you. So, you know, you were always looking over your shoulder for everything. No makeup. No this, no short skirts, noth-. Basically, what the rest of the world was doing, you were not expected to do that, and (pause) I don't know, I mean it--I don't even think that as a preacher's kid, it's a case of rebellion. I think any kid would rebel because you want to be like everybody else, so my sister [Anita Lucille Burns] was a little better at it than I was. You know, she went along with it and I was at school putting the makeup on, wash it off when I was leaving to go home. A boy would walk me, and a couple of times, my father caught, you know, the boy walking me home from school and he'd scare them to death and they'd never talk to me again. And so--so that was pretty tense. You had to go and find out about life through another source and especially when you are a preacher's kid, you're not going to hear very much about sex. Okay, let me check that. You're not going to hear anything about sex at all. What you hear about sex is that, you know, if you bump into a boy in a hallway at school, you're going to get pregnant or something, and that's a terrible thing, the worse thing that could happen in your life. So, all those issues were there and I decided, I think, unknowingly, not a conscious--I sat down and thought about it decision, but I had to live my own life, and my life was not going to be at the convent, I knew that. And there's some things that I wanted to do that definitely would be a little bit eyebrow raising in the church, the whole theater world, which I absolutely loved. So, I had to do what I had to do and I could still be in church and enjoy my life and make a life for myself without being, you know, outside the parameters of the law if not, you know, the moral boundaries as well. Story_ID: 4249 Speaker 1: Now, who do you think you're most like? Are you most like your mother [Louise Mathis Burns] or your father [Lendoris W. Burns, Sr.] and what do you have of both? I mean what--. Speaker 2: Hmm. I am independent, and I would say that's a combination of them both. My mother always said, "Never have to depend on someone to make you happy or to keep you--a roof over your head." And so I was never the type to think that I couldn't scramble if I had to be on my own. I'm stubborn a little bit, probably like my father. Sensitive like my mother. Ambitious like my father. I'm a combination, but I'm a little bit different than both of them too. Speaker 1: In what ways? Speaker 2: I think that I'm always looking for more in the big picture and I'm more of a risk taker. Speaker 1: And give me an example. Speaker 2: I would leave a career if I were not happy, just based on my sheer happiness. I would not stay because of a paycheck or security. I would leave and find something else to do. If I found another career that were more attractive, I would make no bones about it. And I am not the type who would stay in a job until I found another career, I would just go and focus and I've scared them to death when I've done that. Story_ID: 4250 Speaker 1: Now who--when you were showing these signs of independence, who was--who was interceding on your behalf? Did--did your mother [Louise Mathis Burns] help intercede, or were you--were the both parents sort of like, "Oh, my God. What kind of child do we have on our hands?" Speaker 2: Yeah. (laughs) No. I did- it wasn't that sort of a long, drawn-out decision. I was probably seventeen when I realized that if I wanted to make my own way that I would have to finance that because my father was very protective and thought that, you know, "You should go to this particular school, that you should major in this and I think you'd be good at that." And we were having a discussion about it one day, and you don't really, you don't really stand up to your parents back in that day anyway just every day of your life, and we were having a discussion and my father [Lendoris W. Burns, Sr.] thought I should go to a certain school, have a certain career, and in the discussion, when he realized I was resistant, he said, "Well, you know. I'm paying for it and this is what you have to do." And that was the day I decided that I wouldn't take a dime from my parents and that they also wouldn't tell me what I was going to do, and so, that was it, and I didn't say it out loud. I just did it because I didn't want to have the conflict and I didn't want to have another discussion about how I was going to do it. So, I just did it. I got a full-time job and I went to school and I told my parents where I was going, and the last thing my parents said when they dropped me off was, "We love you. We think you're great, but if you decide you don't like it, you can always come home." And sure enough, a month later, I didn't like it and I still didn't want to do what my father wanted me to do. I just didn't want him to make the choice for me. So, I came home and my father said, "Well, you can stay here, but you have to go to school somewhere. So, while you're making the decision, just enroll in any old school and then you can always transfer, but you have to stay in school." So, I wound up going to school there in Cleveland [Ohio], Cleveland State University, and applied to other schools I thought I would like, UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles], places far away, warm places, cold places, wherever, and I got accepted, and I wanted to go to UCLA, and when I got the letter, I remember reading it, thinking, "It just didn't mean to me what I thought," because what I had found by going to an urban school was I could go to school. I could also work full-time and I could also stay in theater, which is what I also loved. And so I kept putting off going and I moved into my own place with, you know, a thousand people--roommates, and I did everything that I wanted to do at the same time until I figured it would hit me, which direction I should go. So, that's what I did and then one of my teachers in school said, "You know, you're a good writer. Why don't you, instead of working at the mall, get a job working as an intern at the paper?" because they paid, and so I did, and it paid my way through the rest of school without working so hard and standing on my feet the whole time. And they wound up hiring me as a cub reporter when I graduated and so, I was still doing theater, too. So, it was great, and I still went to school and I still graduated and then I had money, so it was great. And then after that they hired me as a full-time reporter at the paper, and I loved it. And I was young, and I got to do all these things and interview all these people, and I was still doing theater. But then it hit me that it just wasn't--it wasn't where I was supposed to be, and it was a time of upheaval in my life because I was living with my sister at the time, and she was in dental school and we had another roommate. And I remember the--the night. I was going out with my friends and my sister was going to the library, and I came home and my sister never made it home, and that's when she was killed in a car wreck, and it's still awful to talk about today. So, my life took on another direction. And I'll tell you, I didn't want to get out of bed and I didn't for a while. Speaker 1: You were close to that sister? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Story_ID: 4251 Speaker 1: So anyway, we were--I wanted to ask you about--you know, I'm trying to understand what else was forming you as a young person, but--. Speaker 2: I would say, you know, when you're young and you grow up in a church and also when teachers have a lot of influence on you, which if you're in a small town or your parents are involved in the school, which my mom [Louise Mathis Burns] was in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], teachers were involved a lot in our lives. I remember kindergarten. I mean I just remember my first days at school, my favorite grades, my favorite teachers, and back then it would be the reading teacher taught you piano, you know, and this other teacher taught you how to read. Our babysitter was also a teacher, so at home, you know, it would just be like being at school because she'd say, "Well, let me just show you how to read," and I--the first thing I learned how to read--my mother knew I was interested in learning and the only thing we had with us was the 'Christian Index' [monthly magazine of the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church], and she taught me some words in there, basic words. I was so proud that I could like--I thought I could read but I could read, you know, just a few words. And I just--it was just--a light went on and it was the most amazing time. So, I think that by my mother being also--having that teacher and later she would become involved in the school system--it just really helped tremendously to make learning and to make education a really important part of growing up, so that it wasn't a chore and you didn't really focus on failing, you focused on growing. So I'd say my parents had the biggest influence, our teachers, and also just the people in the neighborhood. Everybody was so proud when you accomplished something that they went wild, so you just couldn't wait to do something--something else. Even if you were just acting out things in church or singing in the choir, and they said you couldn't really sing in the big kids' choir unless you learned how to read the words to the songs--you could practice. So, it was incentive. Everything was just encouragement, and I think that was pretty much the root of it all. It really helped shape me into who I am today. Speaker 1: Now how did you get involved in theater--when did that happen? Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, when you grow up in the church, there's always some theater (sarcastically), an aspect of it somewhere, where you have to perform the Sunday play, if it's Easter and Christmas and that sort of thing. But everybody doesn't really get into it and stick with it. And in second grade, I was in a play at school and I was 'Spring' and the name of the play was called 'Spring.' So, we had to learn these lines and everything, and we had this little show at the school auditorium, and I think that was probably when I got the bug. I just loved it and I can't say what it was about it. It was just a certain magic that I feel when I go to a play, or--musicals are my favorite. And even when I go to the movie theater, there's just a magic of sitting there and just being absorbed by a story. I love to hear stories, and that's it for me. Even though I'm not in that field now, I always thought I would be, but I still, I still get a lot of the magic from it. Story_ID: 4252 Speaker 1: So, how did you get from second grade to Karamu House [black cultural arts organization]? That's why I guess--or were you--. Speaker 2: I was discovered (sarcastically). No. Second grade was the start of it all. And then when I was in Cleveland [Ohio], I went to a show at Karamu House. I lived in the suburbs there and Karamu House was in the city, and my mother [Louise Mathis Burns] took me to a show there, and I just--I just thought it was so great because not only was it a story, but it was a story about black people and there's nothing better when, you know, you're a black girl to be in the audience and you see all these black people on the stage and it was just--I mean they were singing, they were dancing and there was just all this, you know, emotion. And I was like, "Wow! I want to do that," and finally I tried out. I remember trying out for this play, and it was called 'Tambourines to Glory' [by Langston Hughes], you might be familiar with that. And, I went in and I didn't know anything at this point about how to dress the part that you're looking to get. I didn't know what part I was looking to get, I just wanted to try out and wanted to be in the show. So, I showed up and I had my hair like in this ponytail. And of course, I wasn't wearing any makeup--you know why--and I had on a white sweatshirt and some jeans. So, I walk in, and all these urban people are there and the director looks at me like, "Where in the world did she come from?" And so they started calling me 'Colgate' because when I get really nervous, I just--it looks like I'm smiling, but I'm not really, I'm just nervous. And I was just smiling this whole time and so then it was time for me to do my little audition read, and they were just looking at me like, "Okay." So, I left and I got a call back and he said, "You know, you're not really right for some of these parts in this show because we don't know what your life experience is," but, they kind of wrote me in and my parents were shocked (with emphasis) because they came to the show and I was one of the gloriettas--that we wear these white tube dresses and we sang in the choir in church, but then we were also bad girls later in the show and my part as a bad girl, I had on this bikini thing with a halter top and I had a gun in the halter, and I shot somebody in the bar. (laughs) And I could see my parents in the audience, they were horrified. And I was having so much fun and then I was doing these 'hoochie mama' dances and stuff and I kept looking, thinking, "They think I lost my mind or that I've gone to the other side." And so I did that show for many, many months. Then I was in 'The Sistuhs' [by S. Pearl Sharp], and then I was in '[for] colored girls [who have considered suicide/when the rainbow is enuf]' [by Ntozake Shange] and we did 'colored girls' a little different too. And by then I thought I was 'Miss Urban.' I was just--and so I was the character who had an abortion. I was the character who was going to commit suicide, and I was just--my whole part in this whole show was just depressing (with emphasis), and so there's a part where I come out, and I'm right in the face of the audience and I'm--we wore leotards and these outfits that were very just non-descript, so you'd focus on the character, and I was right up in front of people's faces and I lay on the floor with my legs facing this way and I reenact an abortion scene, and I mean--it was--I could see the people just stiff in their chairs, and just--I mean, my poor mother was feeling like, "Oh, my God!" and she was like, "Have you--have you seen this before? What happened?" And I said, "No," I said, "You could talk to people and get this same feel of a life and, you know, what goes on." But I just think the whole Karamu experience brought so much out of me from the inside that I didn't really know was there, that I really appreciated that experience. Speaker 1: But how old were you at the time? Speaker 2: I was in college [at Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]. Story_ID: 4253 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this. Had you been active in theater in high school or was it just--were you active then? Speaker 2: Yes. I did plays in high school. And I was even in a class that--where you wrote plays and then you performed them at the end of the year. I was also performing in the glee club and also with an off-shoot group from the glee club, a singing group, where we went around and performed around the city. So, I didn't really find that I was shy about being on the stage. I loved the musicals, did those all through high school and college as well and then at Karamu [House], when--sort of my professional acting career. And then I was in the touring company of 'The Sist-'--of '[for] colored girls [who have considered suicide/when the rainbow is enuf],' and we toured for many months and it was--it was wonderful and I learned a lot about life then too. Speaker 1: But that's what I want you to talk about because I think part of--do you think you were attracted to the theater because it allowed you a new world that you hadn't been exposed to at home or freedom? Speaker 2: Well, I guess, that could be true. I don't know. Definitely, you know, you can read about things in life that you had not experienced, but when you can actually meet people who've either been there or reenact stories to tell someone else's story who's been there, it puts a whole different perspective on just being a casual observer of a lifestyle and it was definitely my experience in all those stories and that theater was not part of my background. So, I like that, and I also--you know, when you have the bug for the theater, you also feel the lure of Hollywood [Calilfornia], not so much Hollywood off the screen, but just the action of being on a movie set. I didn't really read a lot about, you know, about what movie stars did, you know, in their free time, or trouble or drugs and that sort of thing. I'm not even sure it was exposed that much back then, but--but it just all sounded so exciting and then just the whole feel when you're on the stage, and people are reacting to what you're doing. It's fabulous. Speaker 1: And when you were on the road with 'for colored girls,' where did you go? Speaker 2: Mostly in Ohio because we didn't have any money, and we didn't get paid, you know, so--and what we did get paid, it was probably lunch money or something like that but nobody was complaining. It was fun. It was all women and, you know, everybody came from a different place. You know, there was one other suburban friend of mine who was there, and then there was a woman who had five children and she was a single mom and, there was, you know, a teenager who was a cheerleader, and there was just different people. And--so when we shared those stories--compounded with what we shared just from the script. And then there were people just who worked on the crew who had, you know, some wild lifestyles and I was like, "You what?" And then the parties, you know, I'd never been to those kind of parties, those theater parties. Theater parties are probably the wildest parties you could ever go to. There's all--you know, the lights are always off, there's always something going on and you're like, "What? You know we could probably be arrested here." It's just a wild, wild part of life. It's not even real. That's why people are always in trouble. Story_ID: 4254 Speaker 1: So, okay. One other clarification I want. Your father [Lendoris W. Burns] wanted you to go to what school that you didn't want to go to and then--. Speaker 2: He wanted me to go to school in the South and I think he wasn't focused on a particular school but somewhere in Atlanta [Georgia]. I'm not even sure it wasn't one of the historically black colleges, but--'cause I didn't--I wasn't really hearing him, if you know what I mean. I didn't want to live in the South. I just didn't and I--and I've always, you know, when I used to go summers and whenever we could to visit my great-grandmother and great-grandfather, I loved visiting them and it was always fun until we left the farm. I didn't have good experiences outside their, you know, property and I just didn't like the way people looked at people, the way they treated people and the way I thought black people in the South were a little bit more docile and too nice. And I remember one day I was going to buy a newspaper and I was a young girl at the time, and I put my little money in the thing, and this white man came up and he said, "I don't know what you're buying the paper for. You people will never amount to anything," and I said, "You probably can't even read." My brother was like, "This is why you don't belong in the South." And I was like, "You know what? I don't want to live my life like that," and I have never, ever desired to live in the South, and I think it was because of just little things like that. I mean, that was where I was first called a "nigger." I mean, it's just--and it stays with you. I know as one person, you know, I don't want to go and be a rabble-rouser and tell everybody, "Okay. That's it." You know, "We're taking over the town." So, I just knew that I had to be someplace a little more progressive that I could take my attitude and, you know, I wouldn't be an angry person. And I think that can make you an angry person for the rest of your life, or it can make you even worse. It can make you a person whose ambition is killed or who starts to believe that kind of thing and so, you fulfilled a prophecy, and that's not me either. Story_ID: 4255 Speaker 1: You know, that's interesting. So, really, when you were going to Cleveland State [University] and acting at Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio], you were really discovering the city in many ways because you had been either in suburbs or small towns? And so what was that experience like, you know, going from--and I say this because I was just in New York and I--and I hadn't been there in a long time, and I was thinking, "Oh, I could handle this." Because when I first was there I was like, "Whoa!" and I felt like I was a city gal. Now I'm more of a city gal but I was just--you know I was wondering what that whole--? Speaker 2: It was great because, you know, when you grow up in a small town, and then suddenly--Boom!--one day you leave and decide you're going to live in the big city, I think it's tough to handle, because no matter what anybody says you're always going to be a little naïve and a lot of things can happen to you. And depending on what your personality is, whether it's addictive behavior, whether you're a person who can be easily taken advantage of, something can happen and it can go either way. I think my experiences in going to an urban school, being in the theater--and also, you know, back reflecting to when my sister was killed, I decided then and the months after that, that I didn't want to stay in Cleveland [Ohio]. Every other week, somebody was conjuring up that heavy, heavy emotion which is still here, in here somewhere today and I could not live my life. I could not go back to work and have that conversation and then go in the bathroom or sit there and dwell on just the sorrow and the grief all day. So, I went to New York to visit a friend of mine, who also had left Cleveland, and I was walking around and she said, "What do you wanna do?" and I said, "You know, I'm just going to do something by myself and just kind of soak in the city," and the place is wild. So, I went to a play and I said, "You know what? There's so much to do here and there's so much happening," that I decided, "I'm going to move to New York." So, my parents [Lendoris W. Burns and Louise Mathis Burns] of course were like, "Okay. That's it," and they couldn't believe it, you know, "Here she goes again." And so in order to do that, I figured I should go. I didn't want to be in newspaper anymore. I needed to make some sort of change. And the day I decided I didn't want to be in newspaper, I was doing a story where I had interviewed 50,000 people, nobody wanted me to use their name, they didn't want to be identified, blah, blah, blah. And in walks this TV [television] camera girl, and she turns the light on, and here are all the people who didn't want to be identified rush over and say, "I saw what happened. I'll talk to you." And I'm like, "Okay, so you don't want to be identified in the paper, but you want your face on television?" So, there was so much action. The lights were shining, dah, dah, dah, and my story was in the paper the next day. Hers was on that night. I'm like, "Ah-hah," and that's when I was like, "I've got to investigate this TV thing because it's kind of theater. It's, you know, it's still reporting, I could do that, and it's writing and I'm telling stories. Maybe." So, my friends and I decided we'd all go to New York at the same time. So we all applied at Columbia [University]. And, you know, I applied to journalism school, they go, "Just apply to drama, too and whoever accepts everybody first, that's where we'll go." So, of course, I got the journalism school. They got drama. And I went to journalism school at Columbia. I got a master's there and that's when I switched to television. Story_ID: 4256 Speaker 1: Now how was that experience, living in New York and, you know, going to journalism school, and you know and--? I mean, how was that--and what year are we at? Speaker 2: This is 19--. I moved there in 1980 and there were a bunch of rules. You weren't allowed to work while you were there. I wrote--I'd applied for a bunch of scholarships. I got a good scholarship from Scripps Howard [Foundation], which I'm thankful to this day. And so I went there in the fall of 1980 and since you're not allowed to work, you really have to focus. And there's a lot of things that you're not allowed to do because they don't want the distractions and they're serious (with emphasis). Though, you know, a couple of people I know were asked to leave and, you know, it's kind of a waste of time. So I hung around, and you learn a lot there. You are forced to, because you're not allowed to bring--you're not allowed to use a car. You're not allowed to take a cab--you have to--they give you a map and they give you the schedule for the trains and buses, and that's how you have to get around. And so you learn the city and you're forced to go right to the same assignments as the reporters from the 'New York Times' [newspaper] and the reporters from the TV stations and you have to come back and do your version and they compare them to what the professionals were doing. You weren't allowed to like call in sick or anything. You couldn't be late. There were just all these rules like you had a real job and it was real and you had to do magazine, newspaper, television, radio. You had to do every job there was in every single facet of media and then at the end, you sort of make a decision. So, I hung around this one TV station in New York, WPIX and I went there on the weekends just to see, 'cause I didn't really get it (with emphasis). I came from newspaper and--you know, they were saying all this stuff about the tapes, and, you know, how to put a story together, but I didn't quite--it didn't really click. So, I went to the station, I'm like, "Can I just like, you know, hang around, you know, practice writing and tell me if I'm really getting it?" And there were some people who were great and they looked at my stories and they even sneaked a couple of them on the air a few times, and I was like, "All proud I wrote that story," you know, and after I graduated, they hired me. And I had decided when I flew on the airplane and moved there that I was never leaving New York. I saw the skyline. I saw the people rushing around, the energy, and I just thought, "This is where I am supposed to be." So, it was really easy for me to be there. I wasn't scared. You know, I took your typical precautions, but I absolutely loved New York and so, I got into it, and when I worked at the TV station, I had an apartment. I had roommates and then I lived by myself for a while, and I just--I worked there for--you know, after I left school. I learned a lotta lot about urban life and just careers and competition and ambition. New York, if you don't have ambition, if you're not competitive, it's not going to happen. And you just get the energy from the people there and you just go. Story_ID: 4257 Speaker 1: Now, how--were you at this point deciding that you wanted to be on air? Had you made that decision, at the point that you went, you know, went to Columbia [University, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: No. I knew I liked television, but I wasn't sure where it would be. If I would be a--I was a good writer, so I knew I could do that. I didn't know much about the production side of it, but I figured I could find that. It just seemed like I--I had to be where that action was. So, when I worked at the TV station, it was--even though I had a master's degree, it was bottom level and part of it was that television is, by nature a little bit, I'd say (pause) biased against people in newspaper. Newspaper people think that people in TV aren't that smart. People in TV think that newspaper people are boring. So, there's just this fight that they have, "You don't know what we have, so you can't step in higher than--you know, nobody else--anybody else did, so we're not going to give you a chance." Plus, you know, there also is a level of racism there, too, there--in every business and that's one of the things that people don't realize is the first and the toughest lesson to deal with. There's a lot of racism and people will say it to your face, "You're black," "You got this because you're black," or "You're not getting this because you're black," you know, "You probably can't do this because you're black." And it's all preconceived notions based on skin color of your capabilities and I decided back then that if nothing else, in my mind I would just say, "You're not talking to me," and then I would ignore them. And after that, I just said, "Let it go." And I--you know, most of the people I must say I never saw again, and are definitely still doing what they're doing because they're focusing on the negative. And if you focus, as they say, on holding other people down, you can't move along in life and some people, it is so deep, deep, deep inside them, they can't help it anymore. So I just, you know--I got by that and I, you know, I learned what I had to learn. There were some nice people there who helped me put tapes together 'cause I was getting paid nothing (with emphasis). I mean, first it was free. Then I graduated and it was probably about $8,000 a year, and I was living in New York. I was eating tuna basically every day that I was doctoring up. Story_ID: 4258 Speaker 1: What were you doing at WPIX [television station in New York]? Speaker 2: I was--first I was a gopher, which is like a production assistant. You run around taking a page here, you take a page there, but what you do learn what every job is and why you're taking the papers there, if you ask. Because most of the people don't even see you or they don't have time to tell you. So you learn where every piece of paper goes and what the basic instructions are that--that put stories on the air and why the news business--how it functions. And then once I figured out that, that helped me figure out how to get a story on the air and what to do to put it together. So that's when I learned the business, being a gopher, which was fine and then I moved up to writer and then I moved up to--the person called the field producer, where all I did was do all the interviews for the stories. I wrote the stories and then the on-air person would come in, record what I did, sit down and be on the air when it was really my work, but that was fine and I liked to see them perform it. Well, then after I got really good at it, I started shooting myself in the story, too. And they had a version but I also had a version of my own, and then I would do a copy for myself and put it on my audition reel and that's how I got a job by making everybody I knew give my tape to everybody they crossed paths with. Speaker 1: So you learned a lot about the--do you think you learned that from school also, the business of how to get ahead in the business? Speaker 2: No. Everybody has their own story, and I think the people who make it, just are dogged in finding their own way. Everybody, I mean. I was talking to Oprah [Winfrey] a month or so ago, and she was talking about how she didn't get it 'til certain things happened in the turning point of her career. How she didn't, you know, think she'd be doing what she's doing now, she didn't sit down and say, "I'm going to be a big talk show host and make a gazillion dollars." It's not--it's not finding a goal and saying, "That's where I'm going and here's how I'm gonna get there." It's pushing along until something hits you that says, "I'm really good at this and it's really fun," and you just go on that road and that's how you become successful. She said the same thing, that she didn't sit down and carve her path of, "I'm going to go here and there," and the same thing happened to her, you know, people told her, "You'll never make it." And I think secretly, when people tell you you're never going to make it, I think somehow they know that if you don't listen to them, you will. Speaker 1: Now, so you--you worked at WPIX from eight--let's see now, from '80 [1980]--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Went there in '81 [1981] and I left in--at the end of '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: And then you left to do what? Speaker 2: I left and went to Columbus, Ohio to take a job as an anchor person and I had never really been on TV before really. I mean I had like three or four stories. They paid me fifteen dollars a story at the--at [W]PIX because finally I kinda broke in and I said, "I have a story idea." And they go, "Yeah, sure, do it and maybe we'll put it on." And so I did a few--and the reporters there helped me, and, you know, I had to work on my on-camera appearance and so I got some stories on, put them on my reel but I got fifteen dollars (with emphasis) and--and that was like--I didn't get paid my regular salary for the day, I got fifteen dollars for doing all that work. I was like, "That's okay. I got the tape." So I went and I got this job and, you know what? God really blessed me because I went to a place where it was a learning environment and the guy who was running the station, his name was [Ronald] Ron Belick and he was a teacher. He said things all the way from top to bottom, "You know, you look better if you sit this way," "It's better if you do this," you know, "This is what you want to do." And I was like, "Oh, okay," and then it was just some tweaking and I practiced for a week--they let me practice for a week being on TV. And then we just went on the air and he said, "Don't read. Just say something. Just talk," you know, "Just be who you are," and so our show was fun. We just made it up as we went along, and we were out in the field and we just talked to anybody who walked up on the street and asked them what their story was and we'd just do stories. And that's how I found who I was on TV because when you first get on TV, you're sort of who you've been watching over the years, you don't know. You see these--and there weren't many women who were really blasting on the scene back then, so you're just watching this Jessica Savitch, and she's just sitting there, and you know, she's just reading and then, you know, they turn to the guy, they turn back, and it was all just very whatever, and so you're like, "Oh, am I supposed to do that or--or, you know--?" And he goes, "Nah! Don't--don't be Jessica Savitch, just--you know, just practice reading." And my--my voice would be really high (with emphasis), you know, because I was really nervous, and then after you get settled down, you just--you are who you are, and people will either like it or they don't. Story_ID: 4259 Speaker 1: Now were there any--were there women role models for you at that point and time? Speaker 2: The only visible person really was Carole Simpson [news broadcaster], and she is--and I've met her, and she is just as she is on TV, professional, to the point, and just a nice--she has gentle eyes and that's what you want. You don't want some hard, you know, gaze into scre- TV screen, "I'm tough," you know. You want to know that they care about you. And she is just that person. So, she's a great person to model yourself after, but also to find out who you are and how you tell stories. So--and what's funny about it--as I think about how you find yourself, and by us being theater lovers, my role models were also like Diahann Carroll [actress], and people always ask me if I'm Diahann Carroll. I'm like, "Yeah!" "No," I go, "Thank you." She was on TV and she was great. So, you know, if there weren't the role models in news, they were there or on stage, so you could sort of find this person that you wanted to be like and find their confident--confidence level and also find it in yourself because that's tough. Story_ID: 4260 Speaker 1: ...That's why I mean out of that--why did he [Ron Belick, General Manager for WCMH-TV, Columbus, Ohio] hire you in the first place? Speaker 2: Why? Speaker 1: So he got your tape--. Speaker 2: He got my tape from--and this was weird--I used to make everybody just carry my tape around and just give to anybody that they thought worked in television. (laughs) So my tape was given to someone at a wedding, and he said he didn't need anybody, but he might have a friend who did and the man who hired me was the friend of his. And he was new at the station and he was trying to make a change, and he wanted to hire people who were energetic, fresh and different and--to just come in and have some fresh blood. So, he hired me 'cause he just said he liked, you know, what I talked about on the tape. It was kind of casual, my stories were--and a little bit more, I guess, personal. Not just that, "I don't care," you know, "This happened, that happened." It was, you know--I'm a little more relaxed. That's what I think my style is anyway--laid back. So--so he hired me. I was a little surprised he hired me to anchor, to tell you the truth, because I was little more comfortable in the street and I'd never anchored. But he said, "Eh, try it!" so I was like, "Okay." So, I did both and it was good because I could feel like it was part of just--you know, just my daily routine and out of habit I could do the story and my skills would take over naturally and then on the set, I had to work a little harder, but it--it came to me at, you know--I mean, I kind of made up--instead of reading, I just sort of read--talked about what I remembered, because reading a prompt is really different--to read a story and try to have some feeling. But it worked out and our--you know, our shows did well and we were number one, and you know, that's all they care about and then I got something out of it which was a great learning experience, and I was only there a year even though I was prepared to stay longer because I just thought, "You know, I should be." And then one day an agent I had met in New York called me and said, "You know, I'd like to be your agent." I was on satellite when I was there. I traveled and I went to the convention--the Republican [Party] Convention in Dallas [Texas], and when you're out of town, you are--your stories are fed back up by satellite, so anybody who's just sitting there, can look on the satellite and see who's there at any particular time. And he called me and said that when I was in Dallas reporting back to Columbus [Ohio], that somebody saw me in Chicago [Illinois] on the satellite and asked about me, and--so that's how I got an interview in Chicago. So, it was really, you know, it was just happenstance luck and at the time--I think I gave you a copy of it--what I was talking about on satellite that he liked was--I was talking about how in Dallas they were real modern. They had these toilets at the time, they flush when you walk away, 'cause they were asking me, "What's new in Dallas?" And so, he just sort of liked the casual, you know, conversation that I had, and so they called me and I remember, I wasn't scared until I came to the newsroom and I was like, "I can't--this is like a big city, you know." And then--and then they interviewed me and I was like, "Well, you know, I could take it or leave it, whatever," and I really thought I wanted to go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at the time. So, I didn't get real nervous or anything, I just did the interview and they called me back and I loved--I loved Chicago. I'd only been here once for a couple days, but I loved the fact that--I mean there are black people who are successful everywhere, but there are so many black people in Chicago who are successful and who are smart and who are educated and who help other black people move up in life. That I was--I was like, "This is where I should be." Story_ID: 4261 Speaker 1: So this is 1980--. Speaker 2: --Five [1985] when I came here [to Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Five--five, okay. And you had--that was sort of phenomenal, so he was building a news station--this is back in Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: He was building--and then he went to number one? Speaker 2: Went to number one there, and he--I wasn't the only one there. There were just a whole group of people who were--the station gave us a clothing allowance and we wore just good clothes. We were bright colors. We were, you know, good-looking people in terms of trendy. You know, we didn't wear like our navels out, not like that, but we wore the latest fashions and we wore colors, and our hair was done, and we got out in the community more--live--and it was just--we told people things that they never would have seen on the news in a--in a small town like Columbus. We went to High Street--was the big college strip and, you know, talked about the strip and talked about why the strip was so hot and we went to the campus. I mean, Ohio State [University] is everything there, and we had total access and we did, you know, controversial stories and happy stories, but we just--just everything (with emphasis)--we just put it on the air and we were popular right away. It was great. Story_ID: 4262 Speaker 1: So you get--so you get to Chicago [Illinois]. This is like, you know, someone--you're discovered--is basically (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you come and you're hired and you're at--what is the--Chicago--what in the--it's number two--? Speaker 2: It's number three market. Speaker 1: --number three market--so, you're hired--number three market. And wasn't--isn't Channel 7 [WLS-TV], wasn't it still the high- or is it--was the highest rated still? Speaker 2: At the time it was just eking to number one. [W]BBM [TV Channel 2], of course was the powerhouse, and this station was also changing over, new people, some familiar faces from the old stations, but mostly new people coming in. Same thing--a different look, different style, more energy, younger, more ambitious reporters were coming in, hard-working people, so I came in on a good wave. Speaker 1: And you said that you learned--this was a real learning experience for you (unclear)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It really was. Speaker 1: And so what was--what was that? What do you mean by that? Speaker 2: I'd say the greatest and most devastating lesson I learned when I came to Chicago about television was that everybody's not in your corner, especially in your own newsroom. There were some things that were said to me that I just couldn't believe. I mean from the first week, you know, "You got this job because you're black," and, I'm thinking, "This is a progressive place." I couldn't believe it. Just--just in the business, I mean, not even in the street. I remember a funny thing happened. I was doing a story, in Cicero [Illinois], which is not one of your more racially-balanced communities here and it's got a reputation, and this woman had just lost a bunch of members of her family in a tragic incident and she's sitting on her front step totally bummed out and I said, you know, "Is there something to be learned here?" She said, you know, "Yeah," and she started talking and she looked at me and said, "You know, you're attractive for a black woman." (laughs) My photographer is like this (motions looking from behind the camera lens) and he says--and he looks back, and he said, "You know, I'm a white guy, and I'm even shocked by that," and I said, "Yeah, you know, we all come in different sizes and shapes and some of us are attractive, some of us are not, just like white people." And I said, "But it's okay," and we went on, and she was just sort of stunned and, you know, she just looked at me. Now that one I could laugh at, but in my own office it wasn't funny. And, you know, they know to this day that there are some--there are some feelings deep inside me that I thought I didn't deserve, but you know what? After a while I decided, I'm not going anywhere. I was put here, if nothing else, to show you something. And whatever it is, it's gonna come through me, and I'm not gonna leave here because I'm black. It's not going to happen. And if somebody else leaves because I'm black, then that's--that's okay because then I don't have to put up with them, number one, and number two, you know, I tell young people who always ask me that question, "Do I have problems because I'm black?" I tell them, "Look in the mirror and realize when you go to bed and wake up tomorrow, you're gonna to be black." There's nothing wrong with it and I'm happy (with emphasis) about it. So, if it upsets somebody else, who cares? That's their problem. Live your life. You know, find success in your career. If that's your biggest problem in life, that's nothing 'cause there's nothing you can do about it. So, I found that, you know, the racism over the years, from here from there, I have, in my own way fought back, and I stand up for myself. I stand up for other people and I encourage other people because I feel like that must be my calling in life, in this particular job because it's there and if you do nothing about it, if you roll with the punches, if it passes over you, it will get the next person and what it does, if nobody does anything is, it stops progress and that's not what I'm there for, to stop progress, so that I can reap the successes. I know that I reap the successes because someone came before me and it must have been harder for them because there weren't that many black people in the news business, at least in front of the camera and as writers and producers when I came there, so it must have been harder before that. So, my job is to make it a little bit easier so that the next person does not have to speak up for themselves and so that they get assigned stories based on their ability, not based on the fact that they're black or Hispanic or whatever. Story_ID: 4263 Speaker 1: So, did you experience sexism at all? Or was it, would you say, racism? Speaker 2: Oh, sexism, racism, whatever-ism, it's there. As far as being a woman, I remember early on, you know, you sit in these meetings and they assign stories and they automatically say, "Well, let's give this story to him. Let's give this story to him." And I was like, "Wait a second," you know, "Why? I can do that story." You know, "I'm not going to sit here and beg to do that story, I'm doing (with emphasis) it." You know and--I mean, I've had run-ins, and I--and I guess I was a shy person, I would consider myself when I came here--but one thing all the experience does is it makes you speak up, because you can't sit there and listen to some of this, you know, archaic (with emphasis) decision-making and live your life and be successful. So, I spoke up and I, you know, I said, "He can't do that story because he's a guy. Why else is he doing the story?" So, I pushed my way in kicking and fighting and biting people, and pretty soon, you know what? If you do a good job, your name will be mentioned the next time, or--I had story ideas, and I think it puts a lot of pressure on people to get your name out there, but one of the ways to combat it is I would come in with five ideas every day. I would just have a folder and I kept ideas and if I didn't like the story I was getting, I would give a few ideas and they would say "Oh." And then I would get a better story the next day, and if I had five ideas more, they would ask if I had an idea and then I'd say, "Yeah." I always had an idea. I mean, if there's nothing going on, I've got an idea. If there's something going on, I've got an idea. So, I felt like you've got to bring something to get something, and even if you have to force somebody to put you in the picture, you get in the picture and once you're in the picture, you can never be out. Story_ID: 4264 Speaker 1: So, did you--so, you started at--in what position and then what was your--what was your succession, I mean, you know? Speaker 2: Right. I was a reporter--came here as a general assignment reporter [for WLS-TV, Channel 7]. I worked, you know, nights--I'm not sure--I don't remember if I worked weekends. But I was on the air I think the first day I started, and that was probably my third day living in Chicago [Illinois], and they were throwing me basically to the wolves to see what I would do and I made it. So, I worked for several months and then I was put on the weekends as an anchor. I did weekends for a few years and then the five o'clock [P.M.] anchor left and then I moved to five o'clock [P.M.]. And then a few years more, the ten o'clock [P.M.] anchor left and I stayed at five o'clock [P.M.] and went to also the ten o'clock [P.M.]. So, I do the five [o'clock P.M.] and the ten [o'clock P.M.]. Speaker 1: So that was Mary Ann Childers, was she the--? Speaker 2: She was the second to go. Joan Esposito was the first to leave, right. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --was the first to go. So that opened up the--. Speaker 2: Five o'clock [P.M.]. Speaker 1: Okay, but at that point when you did five o'clock [P.M], were you the first black to be--I mean, black female to be on? Speaker 2: To be on weekdays--, Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --afternoons, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 4265 Speaker 1: And, so did an agent play a role in this at all or was it [Joseph] Joe Ahern [General Manager at WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, what do you think? Speaker 2: Well, you know--me, talking, I mean I'm not the type--the bragadocious type or whatever, but clearly I was the best candidate at the time. I worked hard--I worked hard when I came there. I still work hard, and my thing is, I don't want there to be a tossup. I don't want to go in and ask, "Can I have that job?"--"Can I apply for that job?" I work hard enough so it's clear that if there's a job open, my name is the first name that comes across your lips and across your mind and there's no doubt about it, and from what they tell me, there was no doubt about it. There was never another option. Nobody was ever in the running. I was never competing with somebody that last two weeks or whatever for the job and I don't worry about it. I don't wait 'til there's a job opening or hear about a job opening and work hard until I get it. I work hard because I love what I do and there are always stories to tell and there's always some interesting issue out there, and if there's something better for me to move ahead, I'll move ahead. I'm not the type who says, "You know, one day, I want to do the ten o'clock [P.M.] news." Maybe not. One day, I'll do something else other than what I was doing. Maybe it was going to network, I don't know. But I just worked hard--I worked hard, and I was, you know--and even up to the late day when it was--what year--I mean we're talking the '90s [1990s], and somebody said to me, "You know, it's gonna be kind of, you know, scary for him, I mean--," the General Manager at the time, Joe Ahern, "--I mean can you really (with emphasis) put a black person on the ten o'clock [P.M.] news?" I'm thinking, "Here it is, the late '90s [1990s], and we're still talking about this." And (pause) "What's that?" and, you know, I said, you know, "Who else did you have in mind?" And in that case are we saying, "I shouldn't get the job because I'm black suddenly (with emphasis)?" You know, or, "That job should really go to a white person." What goes through your mind to think something like that? Of course not. So, I told them, "You know what? When you work hard enough and you're smart enough to run a station, you can pick whoever you want to be on the ten o'clock [P.M.] news. But I'm smarter than anybody that is in the running, I'm better than anybody that's in the running, and that's all there is, you know, to choose from. So, I'm not worried about it." And I guess it forced me to be a little more outspoken about my abilities because after a while you just get so tired of people challenging, challenging, when they can see the work you've done. When they can see the work you've done and--to get there educationally. I mean, I've got more on my resume than most of those people do, combined (with emphasis), so why shouldn't I get the job? Why shouldn't I? I didn't sit at home twiddling my fingers about it and, to tell you the truth, they told me as soon as the job was open, I was gonna get it. So, what am I sitting here worrying about, "Oh, should I go up there and ask?" I've never asked for a job in my life because I was the obvious choice, and that's all. If I know I'm working hard, I'm gonna be the obvious choice and that's why I work hard. Story_ID: 4266 Speaker 1: Now what have been the pleasant surprises since you got the job and the things that you--may have been disappointments? Speaker 2: Hmm. Surprises. Speaker 1: 'Cause the job came with a lot of fanfare. Speaker 2: You think so? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. 'Cause I remember. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Your salary. What you are going to be making. Speaker 2: But that's not fanfare. Speaker 1: I know. Publicity. Okay, but I mean, of what--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) But that wasn't publicity. That--see, that wasn't generated by me or by the station [WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois] and what I've learned about that is over the years is, it's best that people don't know, because I remember when I was--and there's--like I said, this has not been a paved road, by any (with emphasis) means. I remember when I was doing weekends and I was promoted to the five o'clock [P.M.] news and people don't realize that I worked during the five o'clock [P.M.] news making my weekend salary because it was so hard to give me the money--it was so hard for them. And I was sitting in a negotiating meeting when one of the men there said, "Well, what's she going to do with all that money? She's single and she's--" and everybody's head whipped around, because you know what was coming off his mouth next--that I was black--and I remember a guy saying, "Don't say it!!" because they thought I was going to sue or something, you know, then I'd really have a lot of money. And he was so upset and I thought to myself, "It's so hard to give me the money. Why?" I thought, "You know, I worked for a year and a half at this. The ratings are much better than they were. So, what?" You know, "Just pay me." And it was just hard. It's hard for them and--and not just--it's--and not just because they're men, you know, this is just--this is just how the business is. They can't take it. You know, suddenly you can afford a car like they can afford a car--they can't take it. So, my business is a weird business that's based on ego on and off the camera, so I don't--I am the last one to publicize my salary because I know how people feel about that. Everybody wants to think that they are doing better than the next person and that's not important to me. Just--I'm like, "Just let it go." I mean people went and protested my salary that they read in the paper which wasn't true anyway. It was more than that. No, just kidding--which it really was, but I was like, "They couldn't take it." So, you know, they went in and protested and I remember one day, a good friend of mine now, said to me--just confronted me in the hallway and said, "How could you make this much money?" And it wasn't even that much money. I mean we're talking people who made way more money than me, upset. And so he says, "Well you know, Mr. A is upset 'cause, you know, you make more money than him." And I'm like, "Well, yeah. I work harder than him." "Well, Mr. A is upset because you drive a car bigger than his." And I was just--I was stunned and I said something really, really rude, that it just came out of me and it stopped the conversation, and it cleared the room and, from that day, nobody else has said anything to me about it because I feel like you let people go to a certain point and then you gotta make a boundary and that's what I did. And soon they got over it and I said, "If you don't wanna to know, don't investigate, because you'll get your feelings hurt." So, you know, my thing is, "If you spend that much time working so hard to find out what other people have, transfer it and do the work in the office and you, too, can be successful." You know, that's all there is to it. So, the road was not paved. It was not paved. It was a hard (with emphasis) way to go. I mean people gave me a hard way at every turn. It was just amazing to me. I was fighting battles that I should not have had to fight. I fought battles with people who were older than I am, who've been in the business longer than I am, but they figure because a long time ago, somebody hit the wrong nerve and made me mad and, you know, I get loud if you go too far. I stick up for the next person too if I think they're getting stomped on. They all come to me and say, "Can you help me with something?" and I don't mind. I'm their mother, even though I'm forty years younger. Story_ID: 4267 Speaker 1: So, what would be your surprises? Speaker 2: My surprises--I am trying to thi-, you know, it gets to the point after--after my first couple of weeks there, when somebody told me I was only there because I was black. Can there be any more surprises, you know? I guess--I don't know, I guess if I had to say surprise or confirmation--you know how--how you listen to your parents, you listen to your grandparents and you say, "What do they know? They were never my age." It really is true that education can put you over the top. I think my rise is based on hard work and the fact that I am educated. If you get education, you definitely--I always tell kids nowadays who say, "You know, I want to make a lot of money." I say, "You know what? The more education you have, the less hard work you have to do." Hard work and I mean hard work (with emphasis) where it's physically laboring and every parent wants to see their child have an easier life and that's just the way to do it. That's the way to do it. It takes time. Sure, and you're sitting in the classroom and you think all that stuff is for nothing, but it really does pay off. It really does. Speaker 1: Now you--and when did you get married? Speaker 2: I got married in 1995. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, this is nineteen nine- (unclear)--. Speaker 2: This is my sixth year. Story_ID: 4268 Speaker 1: As a black woman who is successful in her own right and yet you've been able to find a man successful in his own right. Speaker 2: (Laughs) Speaker 1: No, I'm just--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) How did it happen? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: See, here's my theory. And I was an elderly bride--that's what I call myself--I joke around and tell my friends. We spend so much time focusing on career and moving around and how to get here, how to get there, and we work hard on that, but it--we just kinda date whoever chooses us, so we--just are kinda out there. Well, if we use the same kind of energy in finding the right person, I think there can be magic and you can find it. I actually met my husband five years before I dated him--in passing and, you know, I always say, "God has these people that float by in your life, but you really have to be looking and you really have to see, because you can look right at somebody and not really see them." Friends, too. I mean just anybody in life. And so, you know, I told my friends, including Alex here--I told my friends that I am going to focus on my situation, that's what I called it. And so I started blind dating. Can you believe it? I mean, I'd gone out with people 'cause they're cute, because they were interesting, because they were exciting, because they travel--for all these reasons, but I never went out with somebody because I was looking for the right person. The right person isn't necessarily the person who's the richest, the smartest, the most successful--dah, dah, dah, dah. And I sat down and I wrote down what I was looking for based on all the people I'd been with. And that was, you know, your first date--what I liked about him, what I liked about--liked about the guy I dated when I was in college, the guy who proposed or this, that or the other--and that goes on in life. You have to--I--for me--I had to figure out who was right for me based on who was wrong for me, and obviously, so far they had all been wrong. So, I knew that I wanted somebody who would care about me, who wanted a family, just all those things, you know, fantasy things or whatever. And then I started interviewing people. I would go on a date and I'd say, "You know, what? Look. I am not a young woman. I gotta get to the point. I don't want you to lie. I want you to just tell the truth." And I asked questions, not those questions, "What do you like to do?" I asked, "How often do you see your mother?", "Do you have any sisters?", "Do you do stuff with them and ask about their life?", "What's your--you know, what's your home situation?", "Do you have a dog?", "Have you ever had a dog?" Just questions that tell you a lot about the person, not about what they have. If they like their mother, then they generally care about women. Nothing is going to happen to you. He's not going to treat you bad. Especially, if they have a sister and they treat her well. If they have a dog, they know how to take care of things, you know. The dog's alive, you know, he must be feeding him, right? So, you have to ask questions that tell you about what's in their heart, not what's in their wallet, and I think that's what happens. So, I would go on these dates and I wouldn't commit to dinner even and I wouldn't even have them pick me up. I would drive and I wouldn't give them my home phone number, I would go--and they'd have to have a, you know, recommendation by somebody, you know, that I knew. So, I would go to these restaurants and I'd talk. I'd ask three questions or so, and if it was going well I'd say, "Okay." Well, if I heard one thing that was totally on my list of "I will not accept," I'd go, "Thank you so much." You know, the date's over. And my friends who are guys would laugh because I'd say, "Please don't call me anymore," and they'd be like, "What (with emphasis) is her problem?" But I figure, "You know what? I don't have a lot of time to waste here. And I'm not going to play the game like I used to play the game--stand at the club, you know, hope I look cute, you know, hope I get chosen." No! No! No! I am going to do the choosing this time and my husband is fine and he is so sweet and he is so--he's just really nice to me, and I know he loves me. And I knew the first weekend we went on a date that he was the man I was going to marry. I just knew and he tells me the same thing. Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's just great. And we have the greatest little boy. Speaker 1: (Unclear) --little boy. And you've got what--right--. Speaker 2: He's three now. He'll be four and I--you know, I just--I thank God because it could be different for me. I'm just--I'm just so--it's overwhelming. It's wonderful. Story_ID: 4269 Speaker 1: What do your parents [Lendoris W. Burns and Louise Mathis Burns] think of your--your success now since you--you've followed your own path? Speaker 2: I rebelled? My parents are so proud. I remember the first time they saw me on TV [television] and they just--they couldn't even say anything. I mean they were just so thrilled. And of course, my father, has never said to this day that he's glad I went against him, you know but I know he's glad because it's less maintenance for him. So, I know they're proud. My parents' friends are proud. You know, my grandmother's friends--and they still send me stuff for my birthday like, you know, ten dollars in a birthday card and stuff like that--it's so cute. And so, I know they're just so proud, and they still think of me though as 'Little Diann,' which is what they used to call me. And so, it's very encouraging for me because they think about me all the time and they call and they always ask if there's something that they can do for me. You know, I tell them to just make me a cake or something like that and then it lets me know that they still feel. Speaker 1: Do you think you'll ever get tired of being a news anchor? Speaker 2: It depends on what comes up next. I don't know. I don't get tired of the people. There's just--everybody has a story to tell and it's always something that somebody who's watching needs to hear. A lot of people don't realize--they go, "Oh, no. I'm not that interesting," but there's always something that can--that can help somebody who's watching--that has something in common or might be able to help them or maybe they help somebody just in the way of talking about it. And in a very basic way, if nothing else, somebody out there thinks that they're alone in their own experience and nobody's ever alone. It's just in finding that one kindred spirit that can help you, internalize it and move on and get what's coming to you in life. Story_ID: 4270 Speaker 1: What do you want to have as your legacy? You're--you're young, so it's sort of hard to ask those-- Speaker 2: Me? Speaker 1: --legacy questions. But what--what do you--you can either answer the legacy--go ahead try answering the legacy question. Or if not, what do you want to still do in your life that you haven't done? Speaker 2: Well, I think everybody starts their legacy when they start their life's work and I have tried all along to--just based on my own experience, what was not there for me--is to help along young black girls and young black boys, and, you know, there are kids who are not black, also. Just young people to find themselves, find what they are good at and to go for it and also to help the next person coming along behind them. There's a girl I told you about who I met on a sidewalk when she was eight years old here in Chicago [Illinois], and it was on Chicago Avenue. And I was coming out of a hair salon on my way to work, and she walked up and said, "Hi. I want to be like you when I grow up," and I said, "Oh, you're so cute. That's flattering." And I said, "Call me sometime." Well, she did call me and I was working weekends at the time and she asked could she come down to the station. She came down and I could see her eyes light up when she came into the studio. So, she started to visit me, you know, practically every weekend. Then, she brought her friends along and they would ask me questions about, you know, girl stuff, and "How do you get a career?", "What should I do?" And we talked about things like that, and pretty soon they would spend the weekends at my house, you know, just hanging out, and we would do girly stuff--popcorn, movies, swimming and things like that--and I became unknowingly, sort of like their mentor. And she would grow up--she's all grown up now. She graduated from Clark [Atlanta] University [Atlanta, Georgia] and she's a journalist in Atlanta [Georgia]. And that makes me proud and I feel like part of my legacy should be to make sure that somebody I've helped along, maybe not even in broadcasting, but helped along in just finding their way, and then finding a way in their heart to help the next person along and also to help the people who came before them. Because you can't forget about the people who spent their heart and soul and blood, sweat and tears helping you to get where you are. Even though you may not think looking at them that it's hard for them, but they sacrificed--they sacrificed to get you to move to where they can never be, and part of my success is also their success. When they are proud of me, they can be proud of what they did for me, and that makes me proud of them. So I--I am so--I'm so overwhelmed and so blessed all the time when I think of all the people that helped me and who are proud of me and the people that I can help, that it's just something I'm happy to do. Story_ID: 4271 Speaker 1: Here--here I was six months old and this is my parent's favorite picture. They propped me up in a chair--in my favorite baby chair, and snapped some photos. So, I'm six months old and I was already cracking up. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns at six months old, Cleveland, Ohio, 1956. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4272 Speaker 1: Let's see. This is when I was living in Cleveland [Ohio], and--I didn't talk about it, but this was when I was applying for jobs, and I got named the sports editor at the 'Cleveland Press' [newspaper]. And what had happened was, they asked me--they said, "The only job opening we have is for--in the sports department for a photographer," and they asked me if I could take pictures, and of course I said, "Sure," so I worked then. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns as sports editor for the 'Cleveland Press' newspaper, Cleveland, Ohio, not dated, from the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4273 Speaker 1: This is? Speaker 2: Yes. This is--, Speaker 1: It doesn't look like you anymore. Speaker 2: I know, this is totally dramatic makeup. It was for some shoot they were doing for a Chicago [Illinois] publication. And I want to say it was like 1986 or 7 [1987]. But, yeah they were doing a fashion shoot, and I am not the modeling type, so I was like so uncomfortable. Speaker 1: You've had a lot of different looks. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns in a fashion photo shoot, Chicago, Illinois, 1986-1987. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4274 Speaker 1: This is my senior year in high school. Look at my hair! (laughs) Cleveland Heights High [Cleveland Heights, Ohio]. I was a field hockey player in high school. A letter person, a letterman. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns's senior photo at Cleveland Heights High School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio, 1974. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4275 Speaker 1: This is my dorm [dormitory] room. This is when I lived in New York City. I was in graduate school at Columbia University. Studying in my dorm with a view. Actually, I had a pretty good view from that dorm room. My big old glasses. I guess that was the style then. Kind of creepy. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns in her dormitory room at Columbia University, New York, New York, early 1980s. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4276 Speaker 1: Now this is when we--that's my photographer, [Arthur] Art Campbell, and we had gone to cover the relief in Somalia [for WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois] and this is on the way back. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns with photographer Art Campbell on assignment in Somalia for WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois, 1993. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4277 Speaker 1: That's my grandmother, Mary Newbern, and that's my uncle, her son, [Robert] Bobby Christian. That's my grandmother who's now living--on my mom's side, that I was talking about. I should of brought my mother's picture. Speaker 2: Could you spell the name for us? Speaker 1: Sure. Mary M-A-R-Y, Newbern N-E-W-B-E-R-N. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns's maternal grandmother, Mary Newbern and her uncle, Robert Christian, not dated, from the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4278 Speaker 1: This is me in high school and that's my best friend, [Pamela] Pam Rubenstein. R-U-B-E-N-S-T-E-I-N. Now we were responsible for integrating the school. It was the time when you didn't walk with black people. You didn't walk with white people in the school--and there were only ten black people. And one day we dared to walk to the next class together and the whole school stopped and stared at us and we've been really, really good friends ever since. Speaker 2: You know that's amazing for the time--, Speaker 1: Yeah, for the time. Speaker 2: --when you think about it. Speaker 1: [Diann Burns (left) and Pam Rubenstein, Cleveland Heights High School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio, early 1970s. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4279 Speaker 1: Do you remember this? This is me performing with The Temptations. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yes. (laughs) They called me up to the stage, so we were singing 'My Girl' at a party. Speaker 2: And year? Speaker 1: 1987, '88 [1988], somewhere in there. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns performing with the Temptations, Chicago, Illinois, 1987-1988. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4280 Speaker 1: These are my roommates from graduate school, Sabrina, in the middle and Gina. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns (left) with her roommates Sabrina and Gina while a graduate student at Columbia University, New York, ca. early 1980s. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4281 Speaker 1: This is during the--the convention in Chicago [Illinois], Democratic [Party] Convention. Peter Jennings was here and we were doing a commercial together, or a promo for the five o'clock [P.M.] news. Alan was then doing the five o'clock [P.M.] news with me. Alan Krashesky, A-L-A-N K-R-A-S-H-E-S-K-Y is on the far right screen and Peter Jennings from ABC [American Broadcasting Company] News [network] is on left screen. Speaker 2: [(L. to R.): Peter Jennings, Diann Burns and Alan Krashesky cover the Democratic Convention for WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois, 1996. Copyright WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4282 Speaker 1: I know, isn't that a funny picture. My mom cut my hair. The pixie. This is me in second grade [at Lincoln Elementary School, Cincinnati, Ohio] and this is--this is when I was talking about--my parents and talking about all the racial stuff. When I was telling you about learning the experiences of racism, et cetera. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns's class photo from the second grade, Lincoln Elementary School, Cincinnati, Ohio, 1960s. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4283 Speaker 1: Now this is in Somalia and what's interesting here is all these children are smiling, and they were so happy just to meet us. And, you know, their custom is that women walk behind men and they're--you know, very subservient to men, and here I was walking in front of my photographer and giving directions and they were starving, and this was the American Relief effort to help them get food, and they were just happy people. And just so--the children, I just wanted to hug all of them and take them home. And they were so happy and they wanted to touch my skin and they said, "You're like us," and they were so proud and it was--it was just so emotional that we just felt great. We were so full on this trip, it was amazing and it tells you a lot about our people, too, because we can go through some stuff and still--. Speaker 2: Smile. Speaker 1: [Diann Burns in Somalia on assignment for WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois, 1993. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4284 Speaker 1: This is the "Bud Billiken" parade, which I am the host of every year on the south side of Chicago. The biggest black parade in the country, and this is [William] Bill Campbell far left. Oh, God! What is that actress' name [Telma Hopkins]? You know, from--. Speaker 2: (Unclear)--. Speaker 1: No. From the other show with Reid, [Timothy] Tim Reid. I'll ask the publicity (unclear). Harry Porterfield--and we all know Harry and me. Speaker 2: (Unclear)--? Speaker 1: Lord knows. It might be 1989. Speaker 2: [(L. to R.): Bill Campbell, Telma Hopkins, Harry Porterfield and Diann Burns host the Bud Billiken Parade for WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois, 1989. Copyright WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4285 Speaker 1: This is John Drury. He's the co-anchor with me on the ten o'clock [P.M.] news. J-O-H-N D-R-U-R-Y. I've worked on the ten o'clock [P.M.] in one capacity or the other with John for sixteen years now, since 1985 and he is just great. He's a great friend and just always has encouraged me, and he's one of those sensitive guys who'll--he told me when I first started working there, "You know, you're going to be a big star. I can just tell." Yeah, he's just--and he's always been encouraging. Speaker 2: That's nice. So he wasn't one of the jerks. Speaker 1: No. Definitely not. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns with Co-Anchor John Drury, WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois, 1990s. Copyright WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4286 Speaker 1: This is 1985 when I first came to [WLS-TV] Channel 7 [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns's publicity photo for WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois, 1985. Copyright WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4287 Speaker 1: This is just a couple of people that I've interviewed over the years. Charles and I are hometown buddies. Charles Oakley plays in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. He's from Cleveland [Ohio] and now he plays for the Toronto [Ontario, Canada] Raptors or something. But Charles Oakley and I are hometown buddies--Cleveland (with emphasis)--and he is just one of those cool guys who--just like, you know, Ohio people. He's focused and he's just always been really encouraging--kept up over the years to tell me, you know, what's going on. And he's busy in the entertainment field outside. He's ambitious. Just a real good friend and a real good guy. Helped me out when I did all those sports stories over time. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns and NBA basketball player, Charles Oakley, 1986. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4288 Speaker 1: This is Al B. Sure. Do you remember him? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Al, initial B period, last name Sure, like the word sure. I was doing a story with him just about being--when he was just becoming a huge star. And he was just a sweet guy, a little young guy. He was talking all this stuff about--and the same thing, ambitious, hard-working. I was just really proud of him. Speaker 2: (Unclear)--. Speaker 1: Yeah, these are all my baby brothers (sarcastically), Charles [Oakley] and Al. They're just like little kids. Speaker 2: And what year was that last one? Speaker 1: That looks like 1986, too. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns interviewing singer Al B. Sure for WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois, 1986. Copyright WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4289 Speaker 1: Now this is my husband, Marc, but I'm going to give you a better picture of him and [Diann Burns' son] Ryan because this is just a--he was on the cover of the 'National Association of Black Journalists Journal' [September/October 1996] and this is the year that they were talking about black people--journalists, on the campaign trail. And they were talking about how there are none and he was--he switched from general reporting to national political news, and he was, like the only black guy on the campaign trail. So, they did a whole big story about that. He had recently come from O.J. [Orenthal James Simpson trial], where he'd done--he was the anchor for the O.J. coverage, and then he was on the political beat, so they were talking about how you don't really run into too many black people. His name is Marc Watts, M-A-R-C W-A-T-T-S. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns's husband, Marc Watts, on the cover of the 'National Association of Black Journalists Journal,' September/October 1996. Copyright 'NABJ Journal,' Adelphi, Maryland. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4290 Speaker 1: This is part--a scene from 'for colored girls who have considered suicide/when the rainbow's not [sic, rainbow is] enuf,' and this was at the Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Spell Karamu for us. Speaker 1: Karamu Theater is spelled--Karamu House, it's called technically--K-A-R-A-M-U. Speaker 2: Year and identify (unclear)--. Speaker 1: I am on the right. Diann is on the right. Her name is Terry, and I want to say it's Duncan and there's no way for me to double check, but her name is Terry and she is another character. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns in a Karamu House performance of 'for colored girls who have considered suicide/when the rainbow is enuf,' Cleveland, Ohio, 1970s. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4291 Speaker 1: This is [January] 1991 and it's an article in 'Chicago' magazine--I mean 'North Shore' magazine. Let me just look at one thing. Do you want me to turn it or are you okay? Speaker 2: No, that's fine. Speaker 1: Leave it this way? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It is 'North Shore' magazine and it's a story that pretty much chronicles my career in journalism and talks about how I actually did work and sort of rebuts the claim that I might have, you know, made it because I'm black--which is fine with me, however you make it, you make it. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns in the article, "Making it on Merit," by Michael Leiderman for 'North Shore' magazine, January, 1991. Copyright 'North Shore' magazine, Glenview, Illinois. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4292 Speaker 1: This is Columbia University in New York [New York], 1981--, Speaker 2: And that's your graduation--. Speaker 1: --and this is my gradua- graduation class. My graduating class. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns with her graduating class from the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University, New York, New York, 1981. From the collection of Diann Burns.] Story_ID: 4293 Speaker 1: This is just talk--a story talking about how much fun I'm having. That's pretty much it. It just goes through, you know, what I do and how every day is different. It talks about really the part where we were talking about people walking up, telling me their story and that sort of thing and--what they all had to do with me being successful. Speaker 2: [Diann Burns in an article by Jane Ammeson for 'Chicago Life' magazine, May/June 1995. Copyright 'Chicago Life' magazine, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Diann Burns.]..