 Story_ID: 17090 Speaker 1: My name is Shawn Wilson. I'm the interviewer. And the videographer is Neculai Burghelea. And I would like for you to start by stating your name for me and spelling it out for me. Speaker 2: Elizabeth--my name is Elizabeth Catlett. Should I spell out Elizabeth? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: C-A-T-L-E-T-T. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: April 15th, I was born April 15, 1915. Speaker 1: Your place of birth? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Um? Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, this is July 27, 2005. Speaker 1: And the lo--it's---the location of this interview? Speaker 2: We're in June Kelly's back room--. Speaker 1: Back room? Speaker 2: June Kelly Gallery [New York, New York] back room. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a sculptor and a printmaker. Story_ID: 17091 Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, ooh, I would say watermelon. Speaker 1: Nice. Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is--I live in Mexico so my favorite time of the year is the dry season which is between September and May. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I'm on vacation all the time. Well, I used to go on cruises that I liked very much. Speaker 1: And lastly, your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I'll have to think about that. I do. Story_ID: 17092 Speaker 1: If you can tell me your mother's name and spell it out for me? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mary Carson. You need to spell it? Speaker 1: Is it C-A-R-S-O-N? Speaker 2: Yes, so, that's it. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Lincolnton, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Lincolnton. Now, did she grow up in Lincolnton also? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was your mother's background? Do you know? Speaker 2: What do you mean her background? Speaker 1: Her--. Speaker 2: You're getting into my grandparents now. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My grandparents were slaves, somewhere in North Carolina. I don't know where. And when they were freed, my grandmother--they were in their teens, my grandfather worked on the railroads. I'm not sure what he did. I imagine it was on tracks and bought a farm of a few acres. And they had four boys, and then they had four girls. My mother was the second girl. And the girl--the boys went to Billiard University. They educated them through that level. It's now Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina]. And the girls went to Scotia Seminary, which is now a college. I think then they were both Presbyterian schools. My grand--well, my grandfather knew how to read and write, and my grandmother knew how to read print. Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Cera, C-E-R-A Carson. Speaker 1: And the last name--Carson? Speaker 2: Carson. Speaker 1: And then your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Charles. Speaker 1: Charles. Now, what were the names of your--the siblings? Do you know the names of your--? Speaker 2: My mother's siblings? Speaker 1: --mother's siblings, mother's sisters and brothers? Speaker 2: The oldest one was Annie, and then my mother, Mary, and then Elizabeth and then Bernice. Speaker 1: Now, did they all grow up in the same area? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What can you--? Speaker 2: They all grew up, and they all went to Scotia Seminary. That's the same school Mrs. Bethune went to. Speaker 1: What can you tell me about stories they told you about their lives growing up? Speaker 2: My mother was--every, all the girls had something to do, specialty, and my mother's was sewing. And when she finished Scotia, she had a certificate to teach in North Carolina, in black schools in North Carolina. But she didn't like teaching, so she went to Washington to help her friend and a cousin who was a dressmaker. I don't know what her name was. And, and in Washington, she met my father who was a teach--a mathematics teacher. Speaker 1: What year did she meet your father? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know. But they were married, let me see (pause), I think they were married--it's in my wedding ring, but I can't look and see. I can't get it off. I think they were married in nineteen four [1904]. I'm trying to remember my mother's birth date. She died in '68 [1968]. It was in an Olympic year, '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when they were Mexico. She died in 1968, and she was seventy-four. So it's--can you do the math for me? Speaker 1: Yes, that's--say that again. She died in--? Speaker 2: Sixty eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. And she was born in? Speaker 2: She was seventy-four years old. Speaker 1: When she was seventy-four. Let's see. Nicholi, can you help us with that? What's that? I guess '68 [1968], seventy-four--. Speaker 2: Well, four from eight is--. Speaker 1: Four from eight is, four. So she (whispering), I'll have to figure it out. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I'm not that good. Speaker 1: Wait a minute. Speaker 2: Yeah, let me just, yeah, give me a minute. She, she died in sixty-eight, and she was seventy four. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's 1898, no eighteen ninety--ninety six. Speaker 1: Ninety four [1894]. Speaker 2: Ninety five [1895]. Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1895]. Speaker 2: What was it, four. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Eighteen ninety six [1896]. Speaker 1: She was seventy-four, yeah, 1896. Speaker 2: So she was born in 1896? Speaker 1: Okay. And I don't know, they were, they were--they had four children. And one of my, one of my brothers died as a baby. And the other one was John, and my sister was Sarah. And I was the baby. Story_ID: 17093 Speaker 1: My father died of tuberculosis, and it's, it was some time before, the year 1915, before--my mother didn't know she--maybe, maybe it was 1914 because my mother didn't know she was pregnant. And I was born in April. So it must have been 1914 that he died. And I'll tell you about him, since he was the first one. All I know about my father is that he was a, that he was a teacher. Speaker 2: What was your father's name? Speaker 1: John Catlett. And he taught at Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] with Dr., Booker T. Washington and Dr. [George Washington] Carver. Somebody gave me a slip of when he was there, and he taught arithmetic and something else, I forget what. And when he married my mother, he came back to Washington [D.C.] to live in a house that my grandfather built, his father--that my grandfather bought, I'm sorry. And he taught at Armstrong High School, math, mathematics in Washington [D.C.]. I know that he played the violin and the guitar. And he drew because we had a drawing by him, and he did some wood carving because we had a relief in wood carving. And as I remember, it was finished enough so that it wasn't the first and only thing that he did. So that's all I can tell you about my father. Story_ID: 17094 Speaker 1: When my father died and my mother pregnant, we lived--they lived with my grandmother who was Louisa Catlett. And she had been a slave. And she was liberated when she was--I don't know, bef--when she was still a child. And her uncle, who was a free man and a barber in Washington [D.C.], went to a town in Virginia--I don't know the name, and brought her back to Washington. But he had to buy all the seats in one coach in order to bring her on the train. Speaker 2: Why was that? Speaker 1: I have no idea, probably because she was an ex-slave. It wasn't a great distance, somewhere in Virginia. And my mother worked, I guess after I was born, my mother went for a job to take care of her three children. And she couldn't teach in Washington. So she got a job, she washed the floors in, in schools before, in, in the morn--in the daytime, and she had a job checking coats in a club at night. And I had--she had a cousin in Washington that was a very famous surgeon. And so she, he and some other middle-class people in Washington got her a job as a social worker. She was a truant officer. And they called it--what did they call it? A public school attendance officer. That was the fancy name, but she was a truant officer. And I remember my mother worked very hard. The earliest I can remember is she left me with some lady. My sister and brother, I didn't know the other, other brother, but my sister and brother were at least four years older than I was. He was between us. I imagine that that's when the other brother died. Speaker 2: Before we get to your siblings, do you remember the name of your cousin that was a famous surgeon? Speaker 1: His name was Simeon Carson. Speaker 2: How do you spell that? Do you--? Speaker 1: S-I-M-E-O-N. Speaker 2: Simeon Carson. Speaker 1: Carson. Speaker 2: And what--and he was general surgeon. I would imag--at that time, a surgeon did ev--did everything, surgery on everything back then. Speaker 1: Well, he had worked in the Indian reservation. And I was told that he did open, that he at one time did open heart surgery. This was something nobody was doing then. Speaker 2: And what year, about what years was this? Do you, do you know? Speaker 1: This was about--I, I only knew him when I began to grow up, but he was in Washington when my father died [1914]. But he had a hospital. Speaker 2: Did you know your father's grandparent--I mean your father's parents? Speaker 1: My father's mother was the one we lived. Speaker 2: Was the one, okay. And her name was? Speaker 1: Louisa--. Speaker 2: Louisa--. Speaker 1: Catlett. Speaker 2: Catlett, and then so your mother was Mary. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay, so do you, did you know your, your father's father? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I didn't even know my father. Story_ID: 17095 Speaker 1: Your siblings, can you name your siblings for me? Speaker 2: John and Sara Speaker 1: John and Sara, so it's just the--? Speaker 2: Three of us. Speaker 1: Three of you, okay. And what--did they, did, you all grew up then in Washington [D.C.] together? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: What was life like in Washington at that time for the three of you? Speaker 2: Well, we lived in the Northwest, which was in the middle-class area. And growing up, I remember--I remember that my mother used to pick me up, but this was before I went to the, went to the first grade. I don't think I went to kindergarten. And what I remember about the first grade is the teacher's name was Mrs. Haines, and she had a little farm with little animals in the house. And I fell in love with the little white lamb, and I stole it and took it home. And my mother made me take it back and apologize to the class. And I was sorry that I stole Mrs. Haines' little white lamb. And that's all I remember about the first grade. We had a house that had one story half way--the street was higher than the backyard. We had a big backyard. And the, the first floor was half down, you know, the--half a story down the street. That was brick. The rest of the house was a frame house. And my grandmother had, it had two living rooms--they were very small rooms, and two little living rooms. And then there was a big room in the back, and there was a bath. And my grandmother, that was my grandmother's room. And downstairs was the kitchen and the dining room and the furnace room. And upstairs were two big bedrooms and a bathroom and a little bedroom. And the front bedroom was my mother, my two brothers, my two, two siblings and myself. I slept with my mother. And I remember waking up on the chiffionier one day, one morning. That's all I remember about being small. (microphone interference) I won't touch that again (laughs). I was wondering what it was. So I remember they had, we had oak trees on Lemont Street, and we used to watch the squirrels going from one to the other, a lot of squirrels lived in those oak trees and watched collect their acorns and stuff. And I remember that at the house I used to skate, and I used to make paper dolls. And I would make a doll and a whole series of dresses and bathing suits and underwear and hats, and one thing and the other. And I found out that if we had no money at all, I found out that I could sell a whole set for five cents. And so I was in business. I must have been about eight years old. Story_ID: 17096 Speaker 1: And in the summer, I don't remember how old I was the first we went, but fairly young, my mother would put--she, she took school census in the summer. And she had about two weeks off for vacation. And I don't know what she did. I imagine she rested for vacation. And she would put us on a train, and we would go to Lincolnton, North Carolina and stay with our grandparents on the farm all summer. Speaker 2: What was that like? Speaker 1: And she would tell my--us not to get off the train, and my, you, you know, the trained stopped a lot then. It took ages. And we would stop in Charlotte, North Carolina where my aunt, my Aunt Annie. And we would stay there a couple of days, and then we would take the train to Lincolnton which took at least half a day. And when I went in a car from Charlotte [North Carolina] to, to, to Lincolnton about five years ago, it took something like a half hour (laughs). I had no idea why it took so long. Well, in the summer, we--their farm was on a hill; the house was a hill. And they had a little creek that ran around through the farm. And my grandfather planted corn and beans, cotton and tobacco and peanuts. And there was, going down from the house, was tobacco. Behind the house, on a flat area, we had some cotton. On a hill on the other side, on the other side, was peanuts one year and cotton--and tobacco one year. And the cotton was on the other hill. There was a little road coming down from town. The town came right to the edge--as I remember, the town came right to the edge of the farm. And it was separated from another farm that was owned by some middle-class white people. And it was taken care of by a family Houk, H-O-U-K. And they had three children. And we played with them. And they have a pump with water, when my grandparents had a spring. So we would go over to the Houk's--there was a little gate between the two farms, we would go over to the Houk's and get water. My grandmother was a midwife. She delivered children, and she also washed clothes for white people. She didn't iron them. She just washed them. She taught me to iron. I started out with overalls and work pants and work shirts. Every year, I would move up a little bit, and finally I moved up to dress shirts and dresses. And we would get up, I don't know, around 7:00 o'clock [a.m.]. We had breakfast. My grandfather had already brought--milked the cow, and he a horse and a cow and hogs and pigs. And I'll talk about my grandparents later. And he would come up the hill with milk, fresh milk. And my grandmother would separate and put the cream in the (spring?). And then we would have breakfast, and we had to wash the dishes and make up our beds. And then we could play. And my grandmother had--the front of the house, there was a porch, and you could way in the distance. And if you ran up the hill where the, where the peanuts and tobacco, or tobacco were, and walked a little ways further, and you came to a lady's house who had been an ex-slave. And her name was Aunt Jane. Speaker 2: Aunt Jane? Speaker 1: Aunt Jane. And she had a one-room house with a privy. My folks had a, my grandparents had a privy too. She had a one-room house with a privy, and I remember her house so well because it was papered with colored things out of magazines inside. And whenever I would go see Aunt Jane, I would watch, I would look at all the different pictures she had on her walls. But the whole place was papered. She was a very dark, very dark brown woman with a head rag, a do-rag. And she used to tell me stories about witches (laughter). My sister and brother didn't want anything to do with Aunt Jane. She had two children--three. She had two girls. They were older than we were. And they all came to--I was gonna say they all came to the state, they all came North to work, and one son. And I never saw them after they left. But the son was somebody's chauffeur when I lived in New York [New York] in Greenwich Village. He used to come see me sometimes. And once I had a cold, a bad cold, and he told me, you put a hat on the bed to get rid of a cold, you put a hat on the bed. And then you drink some rum until you see two hats, and you won't have the cold anymore. And it worked. But we would go swimming or wading. We played in the bridge, and then there was a big meadow between the bridge and the stable where the cow and the horse ate grass. I mean that's where they were. And that was part of the bridge there, and that's where we went to play. And we would catch some little crawfish or something and look for some blue stones there, then, and then we would--Lizzie and what was her other name? Alma, Lizzie and Alma Houk, they were about our age, my sister and I. And they had a little brother that we didn't like. But we, they used to steal biscuits. Their mother made biscuits this high, and my grandmother's biscuits were this high. So we would--one of their biscuits counted for two of ours. So we used to, they used to steal biscuits, one for everybody, and we would go down in the basement and get out a jar or something of my grandmother's preserves or jelly or jam or something. And we would go have a picnic. That was one of the things we did, playing. I remember I used to draw all the time. And I was very upset because their father, that, that farm had a huge barn with big horses. If you sat on the horses, your legs stuck out on each side, you know, they were so big. And we played in their barn a lot, hide and seek and stuff, behind big bales of hay. And from, from their house--their house was up on the same hill ours was, my grandparents' were, you went down, down. Then the land went down. And they had corn planted all down there. And they hound dogs. And these people that owned the farm would come with horses and little foxes and ride, training the hound dogs, right through their, right through whatever they had planted if the fox went that way. And I remember I always thought that was so terrible. And I didn't understand why these people were so poor. And they had all this land and all these hound dogs and all these horses and things. The other thing that happened when I was, was with my grandparents, they, they lived on the farm and they didn't go to church. But they sent us to Sunday school. They would go to church once in a while. My grandfather had a horse with a buggy, but they would send us to Sunday school, every Sunday. In Freedman, it was called, the town where, the place where black people lived, was a Presbyterian church. And a lady named Ms. Beulah, had a big mole on her nose, she was the main singer. She was really fine. My mother's Presbyterian church in Washington, the minister was Reverend Grimke . He was a brother to the famous Dr. Grimke. And they started a school in the basement of their church. It would be a high school to train children so they could go to the university. It later became Dunbar High School, but going to Sunday school, we had to go through an area of people that worked in a factory. And from the time we set foot--the road ran right through this town. The moment we set foot on the, one foot on the factory road land, we had a bunch of little white children behind us saying "nigger, nigger, nigger," and throwing little stones at us until we went out on the other side. And that was every Sunday. And I remember that one Sunday, I just wouldn't go, and so when I got to the Houk's barn, they were there, the kids were there. So I took off my Sunday dress, and hung it up so it wouldn't get dirty, and I played until I thought it was time to be coming back from Sunday school. My brother and sister came, and I put on my dress, and we went back. And my grandmother had seen me. She said, running around in your petticoat. And she made me go out and get a branch off of a reef--off of a peach tree so I could get my whipping (laughter). Story_ID: 17097 Speaker 1: We will continue to talk about life in Lincolnton--. Speaker 2: Lincolnton. Speaker 1: --North Carolina, which, where--the place you went to for your summer breaks. And about what year this was--was, did a lot of this occur? Speaker 2: Well, let me see. I was born in 1915, and let's add eight to that, '23 [1923]. Speaker 1: Nineteen twenties [1920s] so. Speaker 2: Maybe in '23 [1923]. The year, around 1922, '23 [1923] up until I was about--my brother and sister stopped going, but I would go when I was, up until I was about sixteen, I would go down there. Once I had rheumatic fever, one summer, and my grandmother took care of me and then she sent me home. She knew a lot about nursing. Speaker 1: She was a midwife also. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So what can you tell me about your grandparents? Speaker 2: My grandfather was very tall. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Charles Carson. And he used to duck his head when he went under the, when he went through a doorway, even if it was high. He would go like this. And he had a big white mustache. He also had diabetes. He died in his seventies, which was early in my family. My grandmother lived to be ninety-three, and my mother was eighty something when she died--no, seventy-four when she died. My grandmother never talked to us about slavery. But when she came to live with us after my grandfather, there was an African who became something important in his, in his tribe, who was going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And he used to come and sit on a little stool in front of her and say, tell me about slavery, grandmother. And so I would listen. And she told him about she was a house slave. My grandfather worked with the horses they had. And she, my grandmother was a fiery little lady. She had threatened one, one of the master's sons once when he was gonna hit my grandfather with a whip. She grabbed his hand to stop him. She told me that they, things they used to do to the old missy to get special food and stuff from her. She told me about--she told him, not me, about how they whipped slaves for different reasons until they had blisters on their backs, and they would rub salt in the blisters. And she told me how some people escaped and were brought back and sold away from their people, things you hear about in slavery; all of those things she talked about. And she hated the people--her husband, my grandfather hated them. And he looked exactly like his master. He was very fair with blue eyes, and his master married a woman from the North, a Yankee woman. And they, and she taught him to read and write and, despite of the fact that it was illegal because anybody that looked so much like her husband, she said. And my grandfather hated that he looked like her husband, like his master. They had white relatives in Lincolnton that acknowledged the relation between them. At one point, the, the man worked in--I forget their names. The man worked in a bank, and he--I mean he had, he was like the manager of a bank or something important in a bank. And when the banks, Roosevelt closed the banks, his bank closed forever. And they were very poor. And the daughter, who was now a woman came to Washington to work in a census with--one year they take up census, she came to do that. And she lived with my aunt . But it was still a clan, big clan (unclear). And he had a half brother who was also a son of the master. They were the same height. And the brother was a very brown man with blue eyes, beautiful man, named Ben Carson. He lived in the same town. My grandmother thought that people should learn to work, and that's what I learned from her, that I--. When my, after my grandfather died--oh, and then I had an Uncle Bob who had infantile paralysis [polio]. And my grandmother nursed him through it, but he had one hand like this and he limped. And he was, he, he fixed shoes, old shoes. And he used to go, from our house, you went down across the creek and came up on the other side, and that's where the town began. And the first house was a house of prostitution for black people. And my uncle used to stop off there on the way home all the time. And my grandmother would fuss at him. And he would be sleeping late in the morning, and she would be fussing at him. And I remember the, the way she cooked with this big stove, and she taught some ways to cook. It was, and I remember how my grandfather brought big--at night when he came in from, he was still working the farm, when he came in, he would bring two or three watermelons, no, at midday, and put them under the house. And in the evening, he would cut them open and leave it sit, and spit seeds out. But if they weren't sweet, they went to the hogs. And they had a smokehouse where they killed the hogs in the fall and hung them, hams and bacons and things. He had a very, very nice farm, and he worked it by himself because his sons went to the university, and they all went somewhere else, except my Uncle Bob. My Uncle Bob got married when he was in his seventies (laughter). Speaker 1: What did his others--you said the other sons went to universities? Speaker 2: One died, one went to Cleveland [Ohio]. I don't know what he worked at, but he sent his daughters--he had two daughters. He sent them to the university. One of them married a man who became the secretary of the boxing commission, and the other one, and the, and the--and his daughter lives in New York now. And they were quite wealthy. They had--his father had an insurance company. And the other one, Uncle (Oath?), lived in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and what happened with him--we never heard from him. What happened with him, I don't know. But my Aunt Elizabeth had followed--my Aunt Annie got married, and she had children. She lived in Durham [North Carolina]. Her husband was a contractor, and then I also learned about black business. Her husband built houses, but the North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company ran everything in Durham. And you couldn't be a contractor. They cut off--he had a contract for several houses, and they cut off all the materials that he could have gotten. And he went bankrupt, so he, then he would work for them. I learned a lot in the South. This, this was--I taught in Durham. That's when I was living there. Story_ID: 17098 Speaker 1: What were holidays like? Speaker 2: At home? Speaker 1: At home. Speaker 2: We always got book--. Speaker 1: In the early years? Speaker 2: --for Christmas--. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, say that again. Speaker 2: We always got books for Christmas. I would get a doll, and I would cut the hair off the doll, I remember. But my mother always gave us, she gave us the "Book of Knowledge" and I remember I sat and read all the stories first and then I read all the poems. Then I read all the history. It something--about twelve books. And then she gave us--what stories were those? It was, it's somebody's stories, I forget, I'm, I'm real bad with memory, with names right now. Somebody who, whose books always had a, had a surprise ending. I forget who it was. But we got a set of those books one Christmas, I remember. And then we got some books on animals another Christmas. She always gave us books for Christmas, and they were nice books to read. We read a lot. My brother, I'll tell, talk about him later. What did you ask me? Speaker 1: You, you were talking about what the holidays were like--? Speaker 2: Oh, well--. Speaker 1: --when you were growing up. Speaker 2: --I always had, I remember I always had an exotic breakfast because we had tangerines and dates and figs and things like that, that we didn't have ordinary--and a box of chocolates. And I would get everything together the day after Christmas 'cause my mother was cooking all day Christmas. Let's see, there was--my aunt came to live with us, my Aunt Bernice. She had a job in Washington [D.C.], a government job. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: I don't remember. She came to visit, to live with us. She left in--lived in the, she had the other bedroom on the top floor. That's why my mother and my sister and I slept in the, in the bedroom, front bedroom, and my brother had the little back bedroom, I remember, after the bathroom. He had a little back, back bedroom. Then my aunt was a, was a--how can you say it, a young lady, a flirty young lady. That was in the twenties [1920s]. I'm sure it was in the '20's [1920s], and like she would have a dress with fringe on it. And she loved my sister better than she loved me, and she always gave my sister things, and always fussed at me. But my grandmother used to give me nickels and say my poor little granddaughter never saw her father, go get an ice cream cone. And that would make my sister and brother very angry with me. And they would tease me. I remember standing at the window with my nose on the glass, watching to see when my mother was coming home because, so they would stop bothering me, almost every day, I remember that. We had very, very nice Christmases. Halloween, Halloween, all of those. For Easter, my mother would make something for us. I remember once--we never had any money. I remember once she bought some pongee silk curtains, big ones. And she made us dresses, silk dresses and made--one was trimmed with red, in red, what is that called? Hem stitching, that she cut in half and that made picot [fabric]. And we would get new shoes, that's for the year. We would get new shoes and a new hat for Easter. And then we would go to Rock Creek Park with Easter eggs on Easter Monday. Story_ID: 17099 Speaker 1: And when we got a little bit bigger, my sister and I would go to the swimming pool and when we came back or before we went to North Carolina. But this is when I'm now in high school. I went Lucretia Mott [Elementary School. Washington, D.C.], and when I was in the fifth grade they started--I don't remember what, the school. I remember that I made, my friend, my best friend was a real fighter. And when any--she protected me. I think maybe that's why she was my best friend (laughs), and I'm ashamed to say. But I remember I was--I used to play on the playground. It was right across the street, after school. And once they made me queen of the something or other, of the playground. And my mother had a pretty white dress she gave me, and I went to playground before at 12:00 o'clock [p.m] and got it all dirty. And I was in the bathroom trying to wash some of the dirt out of it. And I think I got to the thing a little bedraggled, but some boys were sticking sticks in me behind. It was painful being queen of the, whatever it was. But in the fifth grade, they opened an opportunity class. And a lady, I forget her name, Miss Lewis or something, taught the opportunity class. And we learned things like algebra and French. And they were--I was from, I was the youngest. And they were from the fifth, sixth and--fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth grades, about thirty students. And it was very interesting, like I remember learning the French national anthem and we sang it. And we did a lot of creative work. Speaker 2: What was Mott Elementary School like, starting in the--? Speaker 1: Mott? It's named for Lucretia Mott who was a abolitionist. What was it like? Speaker 2: Yes, do you remember going to school in the first grade? Do you remember the teachers? Speaker 1: I remember Miss Haines. I went to Miner Teachers College and it was the Miner Normal School [now University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] then, from the first to the fourth grade. And they transferred--that was closer to my house. And then they trans--it was across the street from Howard University. And then, and, and Mott School was down the hill from Howard, Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. They changed to, to Mott School, Lucretia Mott School for the fifth grade. And I had been in the fifth grade a half year when they put me in the opportunity class. And I remember algebra even from then. But the teacher died in the middle of the year. And we were--first somebody, a substitute came in, and she embarrassed me tremendously because she would give us work for the fifth grade that I hadn't had, like fractions. And I would try to work a problem, and she'd put a big ring around it and my name and a big zero. So they put me back in the fifth grade. And I learned the fifth grade looking on somebody's paper, what I didn't know. But I skipped a year, and I shouldn't have--I mean that was bad too, to catch up, you know. Story_ID: 17100 Speaker 1: So when you at Lucretia Mott Elementary School [Washington, D.C.], you lived in the same neighborhood in D.C. that you'd grown up in? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Do you remember, can you describe for me that block that you lived on? Speaker 2: The block had on one side a row of houses, up to the alley, to the opening of an alley. They were all together. They were nice houses. They were all built at the same time. And to be like that, they looked a bit--a little bit better. And then from there on, there were some stores, some rickety stores, one-story stores. Now, my side of the street, there were some houses, about four houses built together. And then there was, were these two houses. And the one beside us, you--three houses, four houses. The one on the side of me, you went down the steps to go in the house. It was a half a, a half a story lower. And ours, we had a front porch over that, so we went up the steps, up the steps. And the other three houses were the same--two houses were the same as ours. And then there was an apartment building, a red brick apartment building. And there was, and it had a big green lawn in front, not very well kept. But that was between eleventh and Sherman Avenue, and there was a streetcar line at the, on 11th Street. And we used to--. Speaker 1: What was the street called? Speaker 2: The street? Speaker 1: Yes, what was the name? Speaker 2: Lemont. Speaker 1: Lemont. Speaker 2: Um-hum, Northwest Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: So do you remember the community? What, what did the community feel like during that time? Speaker 2: Well, we, I don't know. We played with the children. We weren't friends with any--except the lady next door. And we had a big backyard with a cherry tree and plum trees. It was a nice house. It was a little house. It looked big to me then, but when we went back a couple of years ago, it looks quite small. The community, we didn't have anything to do with the community. Speaker 1: Were there any community--? Speaker 2: My mother was, my mother was interested in, the friends were people in her church, which was at 15th and R [Street, Washington, D.C]. Speaker 1: What was the name of the church? Speaker 2: It's a Presbyterian church, but I don't remember the name. Speaker 1: So were there any community leaders in the community at the time? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I had nothing to do with it. I just went to church on Sunday. And then they said that I should, that I should join the church, and everybody had had some experience, some religious experience, but I hadn't had any. The church was boring to me. I didn't have any religious experience, but I said I had, and I got a new dress, and only, and the only difference, they gave me a little envelope and I had to put a nickel in each side on Sunday. And I didn't like that either. And when I got into college, I read, what's his name, [Sir James George] Frazer's 'Golden Bough', and I find about all the religions and where they all came from. And I stopped being religious. And that was that. Speaker 1: So what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Sounds and smells. I remember the man that used to sell tamales and the man that used to sell those things that you scrap ice and put stuff on it. And I remember the store on the corner. There was a store on the other side of the street on the corner, with some Jewish people who were very nice. Then I found out later they were Communists (laughs), when I was grown. We had an account with them, and my mother would pay them, pay off 'cause I remember, people used to--my mother used to bring people home to eat on Sundays, people that she met that she thought were lonely. And what was I gonna talk about next? Speaker 1: I was going to--you were just talking the sights and sounds and smells that you, that remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, the, the horse smells at my grandfather's stable and the Houks' stable. I spent a lot of time in the stable playing, the smell of horses. My grandmother's cooking, North Carolina food. Sights, oh, we used to go down to watch the fireworks on the fourth of July. Story_ID: 17101 Speaker 1: So when you were Lucretia Mott Elementary School [Washington, D.C.], you'd spoke about one teacher that was, was your favorite. Can you talk about her again, and give me her name again? Speaker 2: I didn't have a favorite. Speaker 1: You didn't have a favorite teacher, okay. Speaker 2: The one in the opportunity class, I liked very much, but I don't remember her name. I can see her face, but I don't remember her name. Speaker 1: What--did she have any influence on you would you say at the time? Speaker 2: Well, she made me want to learn, to learn because these were things--the way she taught, you know. I mean some things you had to memorize, but not much. We would do, she would do creative things like have us, have us talk about things. I remember one girl went through how you, how you do a facial; that you push up and you don't pull down, and I remember. I, I don't, I even--I remember their faces. I don't remember their names. But I remember we talked about what we'd like to do and we'd discuss it, and I learned from other children in her class, which made me want to learn other things, you know what I mean. I remember her name. In high school, I had--my room, my homeroom teacher, Ms. Sally Croome, she taught Spanish. She was my favorite teacher in high school. I went to Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C]. It was a very famous high school, a lot of famous people came out of Dunbar High School. Speaker 1: Can you name some of them? Speaker 2: Well, the senator from, first [black] senator from Massachusetts [U.S. Senator Edward Brooke]. There was an article in "The New Yorker" once that I read about all the people that had come out of Dunbar High School, but I don't remember the names now. Speaker 1: What was it--? Speaker 2: This, what's his name? One--two of them were, were psychologists here in New York City. The young, the man was very important in the bill they passed to equalize public schools. I'm trying to think of his name. He was the one that made an experiment with little black children with dolls, why they wanted white dolls [Dr. Kenneth B. Clark]. Speaker 1: Right, and I--. Speaker 2: I forget his name. Speaker 1: I forget his name also, but I know exactly--. Speaker 2: One was Ulysses Lee. He edited a lot of books, the first one I remember, on culture of African American people. They, they were in my class. I'm trying to think of who else. I can't remember it now. But my class, the, generally, they went to a university, Howard University [Washington D.C.] or some other university. Very few of them stopped school at the high school level. Story_ID: 17102 Speaker 1: What type of a student were you? Speaker 2: I was a good student. We had things in high school, I think that the equalization of schools could, shouldn't have been that you mix the schools up, and you, and, and you dropped a lot of subjects because I remember negro history that we used to have, and we used to sing the Negro National Anthem [Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing]. And we had a lot of pride in black people in my high school. We used to shop, I remember we used to go shopping. We would get on the 11th streetcar, and see, we had a way of saving money. We'd--somebody would go to, the end of the line was a block up. They'd go up to the end of the line and get on the streetcar and ask for a transfer--no, we had--I'm sorry. We had cards you bought that you rode for a month. So we would have cards. So they would get on with the card. And they would hold it out the window like this, and somebody at the, and then one of us at the next stop would get that card and go on. We had two or three cards. And the other thing we used to do, we used to get on, go down and get a transfer. And we would go to a market, and they sold--my mother realized they sold trashy food or second-day food or something like that in our neighborhood. You know, the big, like sup--the supermarkets, but they weren't supermarkets. They had fresh, fresh food, and it would be second-day food that they would send there. So we would go down to O Street all the way down to get, to buy food. And then we would come back on, and get a transfer and go over to U Street and go to the movie. This was Saturdays, we'd go a movie, and we'd come back out and get, use the transfer on the 14th Street, and we would go up, and then we would walk over three blocks to our house. And that was, with four of us, that was a, a lot of money that we're saving. Story_ID: 17103 Speaker 1: We will continue to talk about what type of child you were growing up. Speaker 2: Introverted. I played with other children, but I used to like to sit by myself and read. Mom taught me how to knit. I used to like to do things by myself. Speaker 1: What were your dreams at the time, aspirations? Speaker 2: I didn't have any 'til I got to [Paul Laurence Dunbar] high school [Washington, D.C.]. When I got to high school, I wanted to be an artist. I had a teacher, Mr. Haley Douglass, had some, relative of [grandson], to Frederick Douglass, who taught art. And I wanted to be an artist. I took art, all, the whole time I was in high school. You were supposed to take it one year, but I took all the time I was there. I liked it very much. And I was real good at it. And I had a very good--the teacher that I liked best and I learned the most from, I even forgot what she taught, maybe it was English. I don't remember, but she was a person that made you want to learn. And there was no--and she had no problem with discipline or anything. You just went in her class, and you learned. And, and it was English, I remember now. She would give us things to read and report on. And you wanted to read them, you know. I mean it wasn't like dreary, like this is my homework, and I'll have to do it. What was her name? I don't remember. Speaker 1: But this is at Dunbar High School? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So when you were at Dunbar High School, were there, did you, were there other teachers that influenced you also? Speaker 2: The art teacher. And Miss--I think her name was Neal, I'm not re--I don't remember. She taught me--this was from (pause) I graduated in 1927. I went to Howard [University, Washington D.C.]. First I went to Carnegie, to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to try to get into Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. That was a place I heard had a very good art school. And I had a cousin there. I don't remember who it was. It was somebody that we didn't ordinarily, we weren't in contact with. But my mother looked her up, and it had nothing to do with my uncle. We, but they told me when I went that they don't have, they don't have Negro children at Carn--or Negro students at Carnegie Tech. And I thought, well, that doesn't matter. I always thought that I could do it, even when I was little, I can do it. So that, so I said, well, I'm, well, "I'm gonna be a student." And so I went. And we had two weeks of, you know, they give you, you go to class, and they give you an assignment, and you do it. And at the end of the class they hold up the things, and they say, go over, critique, and how many of you like this, and people would raise their hands. Well, I always had a lot of hands raised for my things. And they had them in, they had an attic where you had a locker. And your work was beside the locker, and all of the things you did. And I was going up there one day, and I heard one teacher say to another, "It's too bad she's colored". And I thought that they meant when I got to be a, I mean as a professional with a career, I would have problems. But they didn't. They meant that I was having a problem right there because they didn't let me in. They told me that I wasn't accepted. So I went home, and my mother [Mary Carson Catlett] sent me to Howard University, and that was when the question of how do you pay the university came up. So she paid one quarter. And she said, you have to go from there. So I had to get a scholarship, and I did, until Mrs. Lois Jones, Ms. Lois Jones got angry because I changed from design to painting mid-quarter, and she gave me an I [incomplete]. Had she given me a D, I would have had, kept my scholarship, but she gave me an I, and I had nothing 'cause that was like a zero. Story_ID: 17104 Speaker 1: So I got a scholarship--and swimming was my sport. I got a scholarship as a lifeguard in the swimming pool, which interrupted my classes a lot. Speaker 2: When had you taken up swimming? Speaker 1: When I was in high school. Speaker 2: At [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.], there was a swim team? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was in the--that's when we didn't go all summer to North Carolina. We used to go to the, the swimming pool right in front of Mott and behind the playground there. And then I got a job when I was about fifteen, I got a job as a lifeguard. And what I did--this was a big pool,(unclear) swimming pool. It's on Georgia Avenue near Howard University [Washington D.C.]. And it was a big pool. And my job was to take care of little kids and to teach a group of girls, and girls how to do, perform so in, as a group, even though they couldn't swim in shallow water, you know, to raise their hands and walk, and then they would paddle and do little things. And then I, then I went into the Red Cross to examiners school. I used to go to swimming meets on the East coast, and then I went to examiners school one summer in Durham [North Carolina], where we had canoeing and what is it? Speaker 2: Rafting? Speaker 1: Um? Speaker 2: Canoeing and--? Speaker 1: When you go on a board with waves. Speaker 2: Surfing? Speaker 1: Surfing. Speaker 2: (laughs) I forget, I forget the simplest words. Surfing. Speaker 1: Surfing. Speaker 2: And lifesaving, and what to do with people and first aid and all of that. A whole group of people were there, staying at the university. It was an exam--and then I was a Red Cross examiner. And then I worked every summer as a lifeguard and saved my money so that when I went, not--that's when I started saving it. And I saved it all through university, Howard. And then I taught two years in Durham [North Carolina], and I saved my money, and then I could go to graduate school. I had enough for thirty-five dollars a month (laughs). Speaker 1: (laughs) Speaker 2: People don't believe me. Story_ID: 17105 Speaker 1: When you were at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.]--is when you decided you wanted to be an artist? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Why did that, why did you decide at that time that you wanted to be an artist? What about your life, that had happened before that, led to believe in this moment and at Dunbar, that you wanted to be an artist? Speaker 2: 'Cause I liked to draw all the time. I liked to work with clay and paint and so forth. There weren't--I didn't have any, I didn't know any black women artists. There were some in Washington that taught art. And there was Alma, Alma Thomas, who became very famous in modern art. But I didn't know her. And I used to go--my mother used to take me to New York sometimes to visit art galleries and museums--. Speaker 1: How old were you then? Speaker 2: When I was in high school, and museums and we would see, we would go to one theater and see a show (laughs). Speaker 1: So did your father's [John Catlett] woodwork at home influence you at all? Speaker 2: No. It was a, a board about this long that had an eagle and something else, a bas relief on it. It was on the mantle piece. All of those things, with moving and so forth. Story_ID: 17106 Speaker 1: My father had a brother who was a problem. When my father [John Catlett] died, he was under some kind of a bond, peace bond or something. And my grandfather left the house to my grandmother and my father, when my grandmother died, and my uncle a life interest. And he, he worried my mother a lot. He got married, and he moved in next door to us. My grandmother paid down on a house for him, and he didn't keep up the payments. And he lost the house, and he wanted to move in with us. And there wasn't room. He married a woman with a lot of children. And my mother had to go look for--one day, he took the screens out of the windows, one June day, and he was, came in and opened the door to move his furniture in, and moved the, the--the parlor we had, he was moving everything out of the parlor, a little piano and stuff. He was moving it into the other room and bringing his furniture in. And my mother had to find somewhere to move us out that very day. And she did. We moved to Eleventh Street when I was--no, we moved to Westminster. That was the first time. And it was a big house and she rented the top floor. And the next time my grandmother--well, she paid down on another house way away, and the same thing happened. And she worried my, my mother to come back and stay. She was by herself, and we moved back. And the same thing happened again. And my grandmother had stroke, and my uncle said, it was--so then we moved again to Eleventh Street. And then my grandmother had a stroke and died, and my mother bought his part of the house so that we wouldn't have any more problems. And that's the last I knew of my uncle, Uncle Jim, my father's brother. He was a--what do you call 'em, people that get paid to fight in a war? Speaker 2: A soldier? Speaker 1: Mercenary. Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: Mercenary. Speaker 2: He was a mercenary, in some war. I don't know what. And he drank a lot. He was a real nasty man. He yelled a lot. Story_ID: 17107 Speaker 1: Now, is a good time for us to go back a little bit because you had some things you wanted to share about your brother? Speaker 2: Oh, my brother [John Catlett] was very mechanical minded. He liked to do, you know, he built a little radio, you know, with a, a crystal that you moved around and the earphones, and when he was in high school, he was at Armstrong High School. And he, he had straight A's for four years and two months before he was to graduate, he dropped out of school. And mother [Mary Carson Catlett] wanted to know why. And he said that he could look up, he could find out what he wanted to learn the same day. He didn't have to wait 'til the next day while the teacher went and looked it up. So she had the minister come talk to him about continuing his education, and he left home. He was sixteen. And he went to New York, and he got a job on a ship as a radio man. And he was big for his age, and he worked the rail, like down--and he worked on a tunnel in California, and he worked in Mexico on the railroads. I didn't know he spoke Spanish until he died. And one of--the Depression came--oh, he was, he would write my mother. And she said, "If you're making so much money, send me some." So he sent her money, and she brought a lot of silver. And he came home. I had just finished college. He worried me, he says, "You have a degree now, where's your job?" He would, got a right--right away he got two jobs. And he was, one of them was something. He invented a little thing, a long thing--it had to do with the typewriter. It had a long thing on it, a bar, which it had the--so he made a little machine to make the bar. And I remember, I used to go down in the dining room where he had the machine and put a piece of bar in, and step on something and it would bend the bar. And I got ten cents for everyone I bent. But he worried me so. I didn't have a job. I was at Howard [University, Washington D.C.] doing graduate work, taking some courses. And so he worried me so that I got a job in the high--in a elementary school rest--dining room. I used to cut cheese and ham and make sandwiches and stir when the lady had--the pot was sticking, she'd have me stir it. So it was me that made the, the lumps on the brown stuff. And it, but every day I would take some of that home. And since my sister [Sara] was working the census, my brother was working, and my mother was working, I would come at 3:00 o'clock or 4:00 o'clock, cause we had to cut the cheese and stuff the night before, with whatever was left over; a big thing of spaghetti or I don't know what. And they would come home, and say, "What do we have today?" So I was responsible for dinner then. Then I got a job in Durham [North Carolina], so my brother was, he liked to do things with--he was working for the Navy, making some instrument to measure real little things. He was making the instrument that made, that measured. And he married and his wife, his--they had a baby. And his wife had a child by her first marriage to Katherine Dunham's brother. And, and she had him, and then they had a little boy. And I was in New York then working. And they called me to tell me that he had died. One Sunday he asked my aunt, how do you cook something inside of a pig. And my mother wouldn't tell him. See, he had some kind of--he had been living in work camps and places. He something wrong with his digestive, digestive system. She said, "You shouldn't eat that. I think he had an ulcer maybe. And he ate it, and my aunt told him how to cook it, and he ate it. And he had--and he got sick, and he was in bed sick. And his, and his wife was working, and she came home one day, and he was really sick. And she could--so sick, I think he had hemorrhage or something. She called the fire department to take him to the hospital. And then she called my mother 'cause when she got to the hospital, he wasn't there. And my mother knew that, 'cause she was a social worker, she knew they'd taken him to the pound, where they took unknown--because they didn't even know his name. The firemen came in and got him and went so fast to the hospital. When they got to the hospital, he was already dead. And all these people came to his funeral, and we had no idea--a lot of Mexicans and people that spoke Spanish, and then a lot of white people came. And we had no idea that these were all of his friends, you know. But I remember he made, before he left, before he was sixteen, he made in our house on Lemont Street, a railroad track--oh, no, this was after he came--this was year after, later. He made a railroad track because I had been at [University of] Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] then getting a masters. And I told him about the, an express train that ran through Iowa all together at that time, instead of different cars. And he built one. He used to make trains about this big. He would build the little trains and run them around the tracks, and around the furnace and he cut the door in half so the (laughs), so the little track could keeping. We had to stoop down to get in there. He liked to do things like that. And he liked to--he made a lot of money, but he had it all in different banks. And he would buy, he said, "You pay so much for a pair of shoes, and I paid that much for three pairs of shoes. So everyday I have on a real, a different pair of shoes, and they last much longer than you." I said, "No, they don't." He said, "But they look better (laughs). We would have these arguments. Story_ID: 17108 Speaker 1: And we would have political arguments. My sister [Sara Catlett] wasn't interested in this at all. We would have political arguments about who should be president and this and that, my brother [John Catlett]. Speaker 2: How old were you when you'd have the political arguments with him? How young were you? Speaker 1: Oh, I had finished--oh, that was, I guess around twelve. Speaker 2: Talk to me about that. Who--what was, what were the arguments about? I mean what did you think about politics at twelve years old? This is in the twenties [1920s]. Speaker 1: I thought that people ought to stop having wars, and he was telling me why it was necessary (laughs). And I thought that white people shouldn't oppress black people. And he said--he would always take the other point of view. And he said, "Black people don't have it together. Everybody's looking out for himself. And I said "White people, everybody's looking for himself too." And I don't want to go into the arguments, but this was the kind of arguments we would get into. And where was the United States going (laughs)? And what else did we argue about? Why we had to live in another part of the city? Why couldn't we go to the theaters? I was curious about a lot of things. Speaker 2: Where did that curiosity come from? Speaker 1: I don't know. I guess from a lot of reading. O. Henry, maybe that was O. Henry. Did he write books like that, stories like that, about Latin America and stuff, and that's, that's who, the books, the books she gave us to--a set (unclear). And my sister would sit and listen to the radio. And we would have these real heated arguments. But he was eight years older than I was. No, he was six years older than I was. Speaker 2: And you could hold your own with him in the arguments? Speaker 1: Hmm? Speaker 2: And you could hold up, with him being six years older, in the arguments? Speaker 1: I don't know. We would sit and think, yeah, and he would always have some, some answer, and some word maybe that I didn't know. I remember osmosis was one of the words I didn't know that he was talking about. Speaker 2: So did you look up to your brother at, during that time? Was he a role model for you? Speaker 1: --Even though I didn't agree with him ever. Story_ID: 17109 Speaker 1: Who were some of your other role models at that time? Speaker 2: I don't know. What's her name? See, I'm trying to think of a name and my mind goes, right blank. Harriett Tubman. We had Negro History then. Harriet Tubman and Sojourner Truth. And that was the [Civil] war I was talking about, see. The white people that wanted slavery, and the white people that didn't. I thought Abraham Lincoln was a great man (laughs), that he got rid of the slavery because he didn't think people should have slaves, and slaves shouldn't exist. And I realized later, well, later on, you get into what's what, you know. And I admired the women that were trying to get the vote. I remember that. And just about three months ago, I was reading a book by Angela Davis on women, and I find out that these suffragettes were racists, that they wouldn't let black suffragettes into their organizations. Even in the organization they wouldn't have anything to do with, because they were afraid the white Southern women wouldn't come in. I didn't know that. Story_ID: 17110 Speaker 1: My sister wanted to be a dancer, and but she started too late. But my mother [Mary Carson Catlett] let her have dance lessons. Oh, my father [John Catlett] also played music, if I didn't mention it, a guitar and violin. And we studied the piano, my sister and I. My mother bought a little--she had big piano. But it was too big, when we moved into this apartment. So she turned it in and got a small piano, I mean a lit--a smaller. And I forgot what I was talking about. Speaker 2: Your sister. Speaker 1: Oh, she wanted to be a dancer. So she went into physical ed. And my sister was, my sister always liked herself better than anybody else. I don't think my sister was a very nice person. She, she married a man from Jamaica, was it Jamaica? I don't know, from the West Indies, who had come--he was a Spanish teacher. He had come to Howard [University, Washington D.C.] to study medicine, and he couldn't get in medical school. So he was, went into dentistry. And he drove a taxi while he was in school. And they had a little boy, a little older than my youngest son. And she was teaching in the junior high--oh, I shouldn't--and she was with these other, these kind of people that I don't like, I mean that I don't get together with; people that make doctors, black doctors and lawyers and people, that think they're superior to other people because they're making more money or they have a career or something like that. And they buy a big house in--like, we went once to a Christmas party with her when I was in Washington, when I was living in Mexico. They go to this party and they have, it's--every house has a--all these blocks of houses, you know. It was a white neighborhood, and these were black people that lived in the white neighborhood. So every house had a, a Christmas tree with blue, little blue lights. But one house had Christmas tree with four, had four Christmas trees with little blue lights. And I said, I know that's where we're going. And they had carpeting and gray carpeting wall-to-wall in their house, when that was new. And they were getting drunk. And her husband--they were dentists of (unclear), and her husband was a taxi driver who was in dental school. And they were having a very good time getting him real drunk, and then they took him out and left--he started making a lot of noise. And they couldn't have all that noise living in this white neighborhood, so they took him out and left him in an alley, not my brother-in-law. It was another man, I remember now. And I told my brother-in-law, and got him, and we went and looked for him and got him 'cause it was cold. People like this, my sister, my sister liked people like this. And I don't know, a lot of things had happened with her, and finally she put my mother [Mary Carson Catlett], she was gonna put my mother in an old folks home. My mother lived with them. And we had her come to Mexico. And when, and, and he was--they put him in, he, she went to Jamaica--no, it wasn't Jamaica. What's, what are the other islands? I'm trying to think. Anyhow, she went, and she didn't--that's where he was going back after he finished, and she didn't like it. And so they took him in the army. It was the time of the Korean War, they took him in the Army. And he really became an alcoholic. And years later they got divorced, and he went back to Jama--Jamaica or wherever he came from and married somebody else. And he died (unclear). Speaker 2: That'll be a good place to stop--. Speaker 1: And then my sister got religion, and she got in the Jehovah's Witnesses, and they took care of her 'til she died last year. Story_ID: 17111 Speaker 1: We're continuing from yesterday. Today is July 27th [2005]. I'm Shawn Wilson with the HistoryMakers doing the interview. Nick [Neculai] Burghelea doing the videography. Today is July 27th. Yesterday we finished up by talking about your sister. Was there anything else you would like to add about your sister? Speaker 2: Well, my sister [Sara Catlett] in her, my sister ended up, her son died, and she ended up not having any friends. I don't know why, if that's why she went into the Jehovah's Witnesses. But they took very good care of her. And evidently, she was, she changed her attitude because when, when she died, and they had her funeral, they all came, a lot of people came up to me and said, I used to paint her fingernails. And another one said, and she used to make me, she made me a dress cause she sewed very well. And the other woman said, she did this for me and she did that for me. So I guess she got--changed her life with the Jehovah's Witnesses. And I was happy about that. And they gave her a big funeral with stretch limousines and a luncheon afterwards and so forth in Washington [D.C.]. Story_ID: 17112 Speaker 1: So thinking back over your life in [Washington] D.C. growing up before you entered school and during the summers when you took the trips, are there any special moments or special stories that stand out for you that will give us some sort of context to the historical period? Speaker 2: Well, we had huge--when we would go on the train we had huge boxes, boxes of lunch, which we started out eating as soon as the train started (laughs). I remember those, and in Washington I remember doing a lot of skating. I could never bicycle. And I was never good at catching balls. So my sport was swimming, and we would swim--I think I talked about it the last time. About our house, what I remembered most was, was the furniture and that my brother cut the doors in half so he could make trains, and watching the squirrels out of the upstairs windows and sitting on the swing--we had a swing on the front porch, sitting in the swing, and swinging in the evening in the spring and the summer was very nice. Speaker 1: Were you an artistic child before you entered first grade? Speaker 2: --I don't know about when I wasn't an artistic child. But I remember drawing. And my mother brought me crayons, and she brought--bought me paints and she bought me plasteline [clay]. And I didn't ask for it. She would bring it home, and I would work with it. And when I was high school, but you're talking about an earlier period. Speaker 1: Yeah, but go ahead, when you were in [Paul Laurence Dunbar] high school [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: When I was in high school, I remember doing jobs for the teachers, for the students at Miner Teachers College [now University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] 'cause they had to take an art course. And they wanted to--and they would tell me what they wanted, and I would do it. I began--I became a commercial artist (laughter). Story_ID: 17113 Speaker 1: So if we step back to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington D.C.], what, what stands out most for you about your years at Dunbar? Speaker 2: Oh, that's when I grew up, and I got interested in boys. And I had a boyfriend that I, who was much older than I was. He wasn't in school. He worked for one of the department stores. And I don't remember how I met him. I just remember him because he had a big automobile, tan automobile with red leather seats. And I would feel very important when he drove up at lunch time and took me for a ride sometimes (laughter). Speaker 1: And what grade were you in at this--? Speaker 2: In high school. Speaker 1: In high school--. Speaker 2: --when I was in high school. Speaker 1: Anything else stands out for you about--what about teachers at Dunbar? Speaker 2: Well, I told you that Ms. Sally Crane was my, and she spoke to us in Spanish frequently--I studied French. And I had three close girlfriends. One of them lived around the corner from me, and she was my friend. We both went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. The other two dropped out of school and got married. And we used to go on Friday evenings to something called--I don't remember, but it was at the Episcopal church, where, where we did things like knit and sew and stuff like that. And then we would come out, and the boys would be waiting for us. And they would walk you home or maybe if there was a party, we would go to the party. But we never got home later than 11 or 11:30 [p.m.]. We had to be home before 12:00 o'clock [a.m.], but my mother had to know where we were. Speaker 1: So, when you were at Dunbar High School and during your home life, did your mom talk to you and your siblings about going to college, the importance of going to college? Speaker 2: No, I just knew--everybody knew we were supposed to go to college. That's what the high--that was the attitude of the high school. And I feel very badly about it because they built another--it was a beautiful building. They built another Dunbar High School, and it looks like a prison. And the quality of education is much lower than it was when I was in school. I think a lot of it has to do with integration. We studied Black History when I was in high school. I don't think they do it today. Story_ID: 17114 Speaker 1: And when you say you studied Black History, was it a continuous study or, I mean it was, I'm assuming it was more than just Black History Week or Black History month [sic, Negro History Week in the late 1920s-1960s] Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, it was part of the curriculum? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that curriculum? Speaker 2: It wasn't part of the curriculum. It was part--I, I don't, I don't remember that we had a class Black History. I remember that it came up all the time holi--holidays and people's birth dates and when we were studying the Civil War and things like that. I mean I knew about, and, and in--and in English, I knew about black writers and in history, I knew about, we studied about Reconstruction, I remember. I don't think kids get that anymore. They don't know who I'm talking about if I say Paul Robeson, young people. The kids in my family do, but a lot of their friends don't. And we sang the Negro National Anthem [Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing]. I hardly ever hear it today. Once I did print for the Urban League and Melba Moore came and sang the Negro National Anthem, and she said, you "White people can be temporary Negroes and sing along with us," (laughter). But I think there's a lot missing. What else was at Dunbar? They had a swimming pool, we had a swimming pool. I used to use it. Speaker 1: Can you remember any historical events that were happening in the country at the time you were at Dunbar that may have had an effect on you? Speaker 2: No, I don't. There was a race riot in 1919, but I didn't, I was only four years old. I didn't know anything about that. My mother told me about that years later. Speaker 1: What did she say about it years later? Speaker 2: She said it didn't come all the way up here. It was more downtown. Downtown, in the black neighborhood and Southwest Washington [D.C.]. Story_ID: 17115 Speaker 1: So you graduated from [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington D.C.] in 1927? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And from there you went to? Speaker 2: I tried to get into, into Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Institute of technology, Pittsbugh, Pennsylvania], I told you about that. And I went back home, and my mother paid one semester, and what did we have? Quarters or semesters? I think we had semesters. She paid one semester because the next semester, I got a scholarship. Speaker 1: And this was at Howard University? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you got a scholarship in what? Speaker 2: I got a tuition scholarship. Speaker 1: Tuition scholarship. And your major university was? Speaker 2: I was in the art department. Speaker 1: What was the art department like at Howard University in the 20s [1920s]? Speaker 2: The apartment--the art department in 1927 and the same in 1931 when I finished, was two rooms in the eng--engineering building. The bottom floor was for engineering. The top floor had the art department on one side and the architecture on the other side. They had only one huge room that took up the same space. Mr. James or say, Wells, had the smaller room on our side, and Miss Lois Mailou Jones had the main area, the one side, one side principally, but the main area in the other room in the morning. And Mr. Porter taught there, in life drawing and painting in the afternoon. I'm, I mean--yeah, in the afternoon in, in the whole, whole area. And Mr. Wells taught printmaking and something else, crafts, I think. And then they had a gallery under the chapel that Mr. James Herring, who was head of the department was there and Alonzo Aiden ran the gallery. They lived together, the two of them on Randolph Street, and he had a gallery and his--they had a gallery in their home. That's where I had my first one-woman show was in their gallery. Speaker 1: Were you a student Howard University at the time? Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: Who were the other students that were in class with at, in the art department at Howard? Speaker 2: Lucille, what's her name. I don't remember her, Lucille, I don't remember her last name cause she changed her name to Malkia [Roberts]. And that's the only name we used. Randall, I think her name was. She was, she developed into a, a very fine artist. Henry Hudson, I don't know what happened to him. We both had some experience. Are we talking about college now? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, when I was, I went in the art department with, to study design with Ms. [Lois Mailou] Jones because I was gonna make--she persuaded me, I was gonna make, I was gonna earn a living as, designing the cloth and stuff. And that's what Ms. Jones did. So I didn't like her course. She was--we used to make little charts. When we were learning [color] value, for example, she would have yellow, yellow. And we would have to reduce the yellow little, by little, by little until you could hardly see that it was yellow--real pale. And then we would black, first we had black, and we reduced it to white. And the circles had to be perfect little circles. And difference had to be very slight, and all of that I could do, but I didn't think that was much design. What I learned from her that I used later on in life was to make a design for a thirty-six inch wide piece of cloth and to make a square, a thirty-six inch square, and to divide into four parts so that I could have--no, and another two--another quarter, nine inches, so that I could have a design that went, went continuous across and on both sides. That I learned because, and I use it to design cloth and scarves and stuff later in Mexico when I didn't have any money. But in, when, in my second year, towards the end of the year, the Public Works of Art Project, P.W.A.P., started under [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt. And all of the black artists in Washington--it was for, it was unemployed artists, they had jobs teaching. And they were Sunday painters and like Mr. Wells, did prints when he wasn't teaching. They all had jobs like that, in the high school and in other places. So, they wanted black artists who-- somebody wanted some black people in the program, and so they put me and Henry Hudson in the program. And we said what we were supposed to do. I was supposed to do a mural for the entrance to Miner Teachers College [now University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]. They had like a round room, and I was thinking about mural this high, let's see, about forty-eight inches high that would run around this room. But I didn't know anything about mural painting. So I would go to the Library of Congress, and I saw [Miguel] Covarrubius. And he got Covarrubius caricatures of black people in Harlem, which were very beautiful, and Diego Rivera and the three main artists, Mexican artists who were painting murals at that time, or had been painting murals, [David Alfaro] Siqueiros and [Jose Clemente] Orzoco. And I couldn't find books in the public library. These were books that you had to sign for in the, in the Congressional library. But I had never had any money, and I had never had any clothes because we were very poor. My mother was working and raising three children. And so we were supposed to take what we did during the week to the Cochran Gallery on Saturday morning. And I could now--I had now, I don't remember how much I earned, but something like twenty-six dollars a week. I remember that I had--everybody else would hang out at the, it was called some kind of inn, College Inn or something like that on Georgia Avenue. Everybody would hang out there, but I never went. I always took my lunch to school cause I didn't have any money to spend. But now I had some money, so I would hang out at lunchtime, and between twelve and one. And in the evening I would be there working until around 8:00 o'clock [p.m.] in the art department, and go home and eat dinner and work on my other university work, like, like psychology and sociology and other things, study French. And Friday would come up, and I had nothing to show on Saturday. So I didn't know that you're supposed to plan a mural. So I would be drawing something that was gonna be in the mural. I didn't even have a theme, as I remember. I can't remember any theme that I had. And I would take it, and then they would look at it, and then instead of going home and working on it, I would go downtown to buy a dress or something. And I didn't have enough money. I knew what good material was. I didn't have enough money to buy anything that I thought was good. So I would buy some cloth, and all day Sunday, I would make me some, a dress or a blouse or a skirt or something. And the only time I was really working on this mural was all night Friday night, till they fired me. And they always remembered that they fired me because I, and I remembered why, and I never did that any more. And also I learned that you have to be somewhere on time. Story_ID: 17116 Speaker 1: Well, I joined the sorority, and--. Speaker 2: Which one? Speaker 1: Delta [Sigma Theta sorority], my second year. And I had another experience. My friend, Margaret, who was also at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], was a dark brown color. And we were very good friends, and we were both pledged to the sorority. So then we went on probation at the end of the second year. And we weren't supposed to go to the movies, but one day Margaret and I went to the movies. And we sat way up in the balcony so nobody would see us. And that night they said some, some of the pledgees went to the movies. And who were there, and Margaret and I stepped forward. And so they put us off probation. And then they took me back on, and they didn't make Margaret. And I was initiated in the sorority, and I thought, I had thought that the sorority was people that had high aims--this was then, this was the Alpha chapter, high aims, and we had a graduate chapter in Washington. I thought that with, these people had high--these sisters had high aims, very moral, studied hard, were going to be important women and so forth and that it was a very special thing that I had been invited to join. We all had rooms, and what had happened was, it was more like, for me, it was more like being on top and segregating other people, like we were something very important and special and snooty. And what went on in the, in the Delta room was a lot of gossip about people on the campus. And later on when I was painting [Miquel] Covarrubias from his, I was painting right out of his book of caricatures of black people, I was in Harlem. I was decorating the walls of the rumpus room I think he called it, of the main abortionist in Washington. He had a lot of money. And I would see people, it was in the basement, and he had his, his office and so forth on the other side. And I would see people coming in and going in his, and abortion, it was something real bad, that you did, real immoral (laughter). It meant you had, that you had sex with somebody, and you got pregnant. And I had been warned against all of this by my mother. And I would see some of my sorority sisters going in there, and I got a real, a real anti-sorority feeling. Now, what happened was these, these sororities and fraternities had a big dance every year. And the Deltas hadn't had one, but we were always invited. Oh, the next thing was that--I'll get to that. The next thing was names came up to pledge people, and I put up the name of my friend, Margaret. And when the votes were counted everybody was blackballed, I blackballed everybody. And Margaret was blackballed several times. So I voted no. So they wondered what, what happened? And I said, I blackballed everybody because Margaret was a pledgee and if she's, I know that you're just keeping her out because she's a dark brown, and I don't know how she slipped in the first place past you all. But until she's voted in, I'm gonna blackball everybody. And so Margaret came on, and they were very hard on her, but she became a member. That was the first thing. I was disillusioned, that's the word. So I said, I'll have a part--why don't we have a, a ball. It was leap year. Why don't we have a ball? And they said, we don't have any money. And I said, I'll run the ball. So I did. I said, there will be, everybody will pay ten dollars, and everybody will get--we had about twenty members, what would that give you? About two hundred dollars to start with? I said everybody will get five invitations for your ten dollars. And any, and extra invitations will be five dollars each. So they fell for it, and I got a friend of mine who was a printer, I got her to do the, to print me some invitations, a whole bunch of invitations for about fifty dollars. And because we owed everybody invitations. We'd been going to these dances for years now, at least the time I was at Howard, and it was a very crooked thing that I did. And I was very ashamed of it afterwards. And I ate lunch on their money every day, and I bought me a real fancy dress for the ball, and I rented the, a ballroom and one of those things that goes around and an orchestra, and then the graduate chapter ordered invitations because it was the undergraduates giving the ball. And I got white carnations for all the men, boutonnieres and had the pledgees putting them on them as they came in the ball. It was a very lovely ball. Everybody was real happy. And I spent a lot of their money on me and Margaret (laughter). That's the other thing I remember about the sorority. And for a while I was, I, I mean I really didn't take, earn any points. Since then I imagine that the undergraduate chapters, the whole question of color is gone. The interest is in art and, and political activity and so forth and it's a very good organization. It's the kind of an organization that I thought I was going into. And I hope it changed quickly after I got of the, out of there (laughter). Story_ID: 17117 Speaker 1: The other thing I remember is that there was a whole anti-war [World War II] movement in Washington [D.C.], especially in the universities. And we had a club called the Liberal Club, so I joined the Liberal Club. And Miss [Lois Mailou] Jones had made me lose my scholarship, with not knowing how to, with not knowing how to do a mural and wanting to be an artist, I decided to change my major from design to painting, under Mr. [James Amos] Porter. Besides, I thought he was a better teacher. I liked his attitude better, and you didn't have to do little things exact. So she gave me--and I still had to take a course in design. And she gave me an I [incomplete], that made me lose my scholarship. I said that before I think. And not only did--that, I got very tired of people saying I studied with Lois [Mailou] Jones because I'd think that is what the design for cloth is the only thing I ever learned from her. Values, I learned from Grant Wood. And it was quite different. Speaker 2: What values did you learn from Grant Wood? Speaker 1: I mean values, of color values, the ones he had us making with little circles. It sounds so dumb right now. Story_ID: 17118 Speaker 1: We had a big meeting at Howard University [Washington D.C.] in the gym. And then we had one in Georgetown [University, Washington D.C.]. Now, these are black and white students mixed. And where we were supposed to have the meeting was a big restaurant. And when we went in they wouldn't serve us. So they moved to one of the universities--I don't remember what kind, and the dean came in and blocked us out. So then we went to something that the Quakers had, some building that the Quakers. This is all I remember. Speaker 2: And this is for the anti-war protest. Anti-war [Word War II]. Speaker 1: Did anything ever happen at the meetings? Oh, the United States went into the, into the Second World War. Speaker 2: I mean at the protests, anything happen? Did you, did you (unclear) (simultaneously)? Speaker 1: No, I mean they didn't arrest anybody or anything like that. And the song was, (singing) "Oh, Mr.[Franklin D.] Roosevelt told the people how he felt; they darned near believed what he said. He said, I hate war and so does Eleanor, but we won't be safe 'til everybody's dead." (Laughs) And we sang that. I remember, we sang that. And we talked about Nazism and fascism and the Italians and the Germans and, and it was the beginning, the really, really the beginning. This was the '30's [1930s]. And one other thing at Howard that impressed me greatly was the gallery under the chapel at Howard had, Mr. [James V.] Herring had exhibitions like reproductions like [Vinvent] Van Gogh. And they were done three dimensionally. So you had the feeling that you were looking a real painting by him because he squeezed the paint out, you know, from the tubes, and it made that--a varied surface. Then he had one of African sculpture that he got from the, what's the name of the museum outside of Philadelphia? And the man died and left it to Lincoln University. And they had a big scandal there, and I forget the name of it. Well, he got an African exhibition, African sculpture from there. And he had exhibitions like that of, not, not of local painters or anything like that. He had exhibitions of renowned artists or copies of their works so that you got to know them. And, and it was a, it was a good department as far as it went cause we only had three teachers. But now it's to have a whole building and, and to have sculpture. And I didn't have any sculpture. I remember the sororities. I remember the classes. He had started at Howard with architecture, and then they started--it hadn't been open very long, the art department. What else? Well, the football games. Speaker 2: And what was the campus life like? Well, my boyfriend then was captain of the football team which made me very important (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you remember his name? Speaker 2: His name was Glasgow (ph.) Mack, but that didn't last long. When I went in--because we were both working at the same swimming pool that summer. It's interesting, the manager of the swimming pool was [Dr.] Charles Drew. His mother and my mother were friends, and his sister and I were friends. He and his brother, Joe, Joe was a lifeguard. That was Georgetown. And my sister and I were both work, working there in the summer, and I was saving my money. I always followed his life, you know. And it was really heartbreaking when he died and so forth. But the fact that, that he put together the first blood bank, and then his blood had to be separated 'cause his, he was very white (laughs). His black blood had to be separated from the white blood. Did you know that? Well, he resigned. He was head of the Red Cross blood section. And that's what they were doing, were blood banks for the army. And he resigned; segregating blood? Well, I added something you didn't know (laughs). Speaker 1: You, got lots of stuff I don't know, yeah, but I didn't, yeah, segregated blood? Speaker 2: Oh, what else? The campus. Well, we had big football games. I used to go up to Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] when they played Lincoln. I'm not interested in those things anymore. The so--the social life, I really, I really stopped with the social life. Story_ID: 17119 Speaker 1: I got interested in psychology. I took a course in psychology that, one, that was behaviorism, and the professor--I don't remember his name, wanted to prove how much he knew, instead of teaching us. And I didn't even know what psychology was. I mean I'm taking psychology 1 and I don't even know what it is because all I'm doing is learning the nervous system and what, how, how it works and so forth. So I took a course in education, educational psychology, and that was how you teach and why and how. And some other courses I took that--public speaking (laughs). I remember that the first time I public spoke, I spoke publicly in that class--who taught it? What's his name? He went to Africa. I can see his face, I'll remember. Anyhow, I said, I went up in front of the class, and I said, my knees are shaking so I think I'd better sit down (laughs). And a, a very, very wonderful teacher. Now, that served me later on in life a lot, I learned in public, public speaking, so I could get up and talk without my knees shaking and without worrying what I looked like and so forth, thinking about what I was saying instead. And then I took some chemistry cause I thought I ought to know about paints. But I didn't, like I couldn't apply it at Howard. Mr. [James A.] Porter just told us to buy some paints, oil paints. And I studied water color with Lois. I still didn't like her way of teaching. She could come work on your work. And she gave one guy a low grade because he was too creative. I still don't like Lois [Mailou] Jones. Ask me another question. Speaker 2: Well, when you were at Howard, you were, you were in the sorority [Delta Sigma Theta sorority]. You were--psychology--were you involved outside of the war protests, politically at all? Speaker 1: Well, we used to do, the Liberal Club, we used to talk about different things. Speaker 2: What sorts of things did you talk about? Speaker 1: Well, we studied Marxism. We read, we read [James G.] Frazer's "Golden Bough". We, we read and discussed more than anything else in the Liberal Club, to open up our minds a little bit about what was going on in the world. Speaker 2: And what, what did you--what was going on? What were your concerns about what was going on in the world at the time? Speaker 1: At that time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, that time was the beginning of fascism. We were talking about why the Italians went into, went into Abyssinia [Ethiopia], things like that. Why, why nations made wars. We talked about world markets and things. I know what we would be talking about today (laughs); about, what's that law called? Speaker 2: The Patriot Act. Speaker 1: We'd be talking about that, and we'd be talking about why we are fighting a war in Iraq so we don't have to fight it at home, but the British are now fighting it at home, and about the big fear that has been created in the United States, instead of understanding. And they would be talking about that. This is the kind of thing we talked about. Speaker 2: So what about your third year, your last few years at Howard University? What did they entail? Speaker 1: Well, I spent them, I got real deep into studies. I stopped having boyfriends. I got a, a homosexual boyfriend so I, I wouldn't have to bother with hugging and kissing and all of that. And I studied. And I graduated cum laude. And I worked in the art department. I guess after I changed to painting, and I had been in the sorority a year, I got real serious. And it didn't matter what I had on (laughs), and whether I hung out. I used to go into the grill, University Grill, that's what it was. I used to go over to the grill sometimes late at night and get a sandwich or something, but sitting there gossiping about people, no. Story_ID: 17120 Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate Howard University? Thirty one [1931]. Speaker 2: Thirty-one [1931]. And looking back over that experience now, what stands out, what are some of the things that stand--stands out most about your education at Howard University. I got a good education. And I had very good teachers, E. Franklin Frazier, I studied sociology with. Speaker 1: What was that like? Studying with him, sociology? Speaker 2: Well, he had, he had written a--did you know his work? Do you know his work? Speaker 1: He had studied, he had written about racism in different areas like the United States and what happens in Brazil with black people, and about the so-called bourgeoisie, black bourgeoisie in the United States. He was a very famous sociologist, black sociologist. It would be, it's, some of the things he wrote about still exists and why. And I learned, cause I went into teaching, I learned a lot about that. Practical teaching, I learned while I was teaching in for, a man at Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia] named Lowenfield, when I was teaching there. Story_ID: 17121 Speaker 1: So when you were at Howard University [Washington D.C.], were you thinking about what type of career you would go into after graduation? Were you--? Speaker 2: I was gonna be an artist, but I hadn't gone into how I was gonna make a living. So when I graduated, my brother [John Catlett] came home. He used to worry me that he had two jobs, and I didn't have any. It was the Depression. He had two jobs, and I didn't have any. And so I asked my mother [Mary Carson Catlett] to get me a job. She was a social worker. So people would call her up and say that, and, you know, that--where could they get somebody to do this. So I got a job as an assistant in an elementary school cafeteria. And I would get there at 8:00 o'clock [a.m.]. The lady used to dog me. She--I had to wear a hair net. What else? I had to do things her way. So I sliced a hundred slices of cheese before I went home. And when I came the next day to make the sandwiches--it was real hard to peel off cheese when you got a hundred slices. And I told her, we either have to put in a piece of paper. She was, she wasn't open to any suggestions about work. You either have to put in a piece of paper or you have to make little piles. And you can't do this in one pile or two piles cause you spend half the time peeling the, one piece cheese off the rest of the cheese. And the same thing with the ham, the ham breaks up with it's all piled up like that. And she wouldn't listen to me. And I told you that I used to take stuff home. And she would give it to me like, you know, say this--I'm a generous lady giving poor woman something to eat. But I didn't care what she thought about me. I would take it on home, and we would eat it for dinner. That was something we didn't have to cook. And, but what stopped me, what I, what--I must have worked there about a month and a half. She had big tanks, I had to wash the pots. The dishes are put in the dishwasher, but the pots had to be washed in this big thing. So she would throw pots into these two big tubs, and would also throw these big knives in. And they floated. And I got cut a couple of times. And I was talking to Mr. Herring, and he said, come back and study. So I went back and did some graduate work, a couple of courses which came in real handy later on. Story_ID: 17122 Speaker 1: You went back to Howard University [Washington D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, a semester. And my aunt in Durham called and said, there's an opening for an art teacher that the art teacher was getting married, and she was leaving. So I applied, and they gave me the job. And the job was teaching four--four, seventh grades; two in one school and two in the high school. Art once a week or twice a week, I don't remember, teaching art in the high school, supervising art in eight elementary schools on Mondays. And I had to have, once a month, a meeting with the first grade teach--first and second grade teachers and the third and fourth grade teachers, once a month, and give them a--lesson plans for that month. And then on Mondays I had to go around and see how they were doing. And I got fifty nine dollars a month. So when Thurgood Marshall was going through the South, equalizing teachers' salaries, he came to Durham [North Carolina]. And we had a, some kind of professional girls' club or something at the country club. They had a country club in Durham for black folks. He met with us, and he told us how we could equalize--did I tell you this? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: How we could equalize teachers' salaries in the state of North Carolina. We had to get a test case, somebody--I couldn't be the test case cause I was a city employee. We had, the, the--this person would be fired. He was gonna, he was going to sue the state of North Carolina to give him a salary equal to the white teachers' salary. I also had a problem getting supplies. I would go in and see all these scissors and ask for so many, thirty pairs of scissors. And they would give me five pair of scissors or five scissors, things like that. But the--we should then the teachers to, North Carolina state teachers, black teacher, Negro Teachers Association, to back the, the test case with the salary of the teacher, which the teacher would pay back to them when we won the case. And then when we had that settled, we should come to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and they would give us a lawyer to fight the case. So we got Isadore Oglesby. He taught math in the high school. Speaker 1: What was his name again? Speaker 2: Isadore Oglesby. He taught math. And he was all right because he was gonna go to Iowa Univer--there was a couple from the state, University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa]. They were friends, and I used to read their, what is it, a little catalogue from the university. And they had a good art department, and I knew there was a famous American artist, regional artist, Grant Wood, teaching there. He was an Iowa painter. And that's where I was gonna go. We had, we got the test case. We had the teachers, State Teachers Association meeting. We went to the resolutions committee. We put in our resolution to sue the state of North Carolina to equalize teachers' salaries. When the resolutions were read and voted on, ours didn't come up. So I stood up--now, the president of the association of state teachers was a man who was president, he was a Negro leader. He was the president of the North Carolina College for Negroes [now North Carolina Central University, Durham North Carolina]. I knew him. His daughter was a friend of mine. I was at his house frequently. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of it. He was also the man that had everything closed when Langston Hughes was gonna go speak because he'd written something that this man didn't like. He was gonna speak at some church or something, and he got everything against Langston so that he had to--he couldn't speak in that city. I'm trying to think of his name. So I stood and said--I raised my hand, and he recognized me. And I got up and I said, "There's one resolution you didn't read." And he said, "we won't go into that now. Sit down, Ms. Catlett." And I said, "No, you don't understand." Now, see if I had had experience in things like this, I would have said, we want to equalize teachers' salaries, and then I would have had the people behind me. I mean who wouldn't want to join this. I'm getting fifty-nine dollars for all that work I was doing even though it was the Depression. And I said, "No, you don't, you don't understand. We had a resolution." And he said, "Miss Catlett, sit down or I will have you taken out." And I said, well, "You gonna have to have me taken out (laughs)." And he had me taken out, and I went out yelling and saying, you know, I said, we want to equalize teachers' salaries. And by the time I got to that, I was a scandal. I mean I'm going out yelling this with two men, helping me along. And so nothing came of that. So then Isadore said--well, he was going to Iowa any how. He wasn't gonna get a salary, so we could still use him, but Edmonds, Edmonds, Edwards, Edmonds something like that. I read about him in the hist--history of Langston Hughes, biography. So, Edwards, I think his name was. So he got to this man, this math teacher, and he came to us and said, I'm sorry, I can't be the test case because they would be bothering my mother. He lived with his mother. They would be bothering my mother, and I wouldn't be here and so forth and so on. That was the end of that. So we never got around to it. Story_ID: 17123 Speaker 1: After the first, my first year there, I wanted to quit anyhow cause I was tired of this going around--I found out then two things in Durham [North Carolina]. One was that the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company was a big business, and they controlled the city. When the banks, when [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt closed the banks, this, this company opened all the banks, the white banks and their bank. They gave money to open all the banks again. But they wouldn't have any competition in the city. If you wanted to sell a piece of land, you had to go through them. If you wanted to build a house, you had to go through them. If you wanted some repairs made, you had to go through them. And that was just on the building area. And if you wanted an apartment, you had to rent from them or buy a house; you bought the house through them. All of that, they controlled. Also, then there were a lot of men who preyed on the young women who were not married in the city. And I didn't want anymore parts of, of Durham [North Carolina]. I rented an apartment and some man was coming up the fire escape, knocking on my window in the morning. And I had to move out, in with a family. My aunt didn't have room for me. I had to move in with a family. And my mother said, "You can't let a city or a town conquer you. You go back, and, and you do something and, for the town." So I went back and painted a mural in the children's hospital. And that interested me, but I was still saving my money. And I went to Iowa. By that time, I had thirty-five dollars a month for, for the months I would be there. Speaker 2: What hospital did you go and paint the mural at? Speaker 1: Children's Hospital. It's not there, even the hospital's not there. The high school's not there--it's there, but they don't use it. They gave me an honorary doctorate at that university, Doctor--I don't remember his name. Speaker 2: So the test case--. Speaker 1: And I didn't like, I had to go around to these teachers on Monday mornings. I didn't like them. I would meet them Thursday afternoon and Friday afternoon, like Thursday, the first and second grade teachers. I would give them a program for a month, that was a good program cause I had had education and psychology at teaching. And I would go around, it's, it's raining. I got to go from--and I didn't have a, a car. I got to go from one hospital--from school, elementary school to another. And I found out that there are teachers who love teaching. And they're good teachers. And there are teachers that are work, working for a salary, and they're bad teachers. That's what I learned going around to these schools. And I would get up, well, I can't teach art, I don't know, even know how to draw a straight line, and stuff like that, which annoyed me. I'm gonna come way over here for nothing. And so the next time we met, I would explain, you know, how you do this and you do that, and so the--for example, there's a class--I used this later on in Mexico, there's a class of fifth grade, and they have to teach some kind of painting. And they don't--some kind of art, and they don't have any materials. So I said, well, let's do it this way. You divide the children up into four--groups of four. One will bring paints for the group of four. One will bring brushes for the group of four. One will bring jars. And they said, well, we don't want any water. Well, wait a minute, one will bring jars for water, and these are poor kids. They can't buy the other stuff. And somebody will bring newspapers to put on the desks so you don't mind the water. And I mean, if you're a teacher, you can push something like this. But it didn't work with them. It didn't work with them. So they were drawing with a pen. Well, get a pencil anyhow. And I'd go in, and they haven't done anything. "Well, we had a math test", and stuff like that. And I went back, and I lived with another family who were--a couple, who were very nice, and I had a nice, another woman was rooming there that worked for North Carolina Mutual. And she had a boyfriend who was married in the North Carolina Mutual. I just didn't like the whole attitude, and the man was principal, and he would go out at night and leave his wife at home. So the three of us would play three-handed bridge. But, and then there was a woman that taught in our school--I'm thinking about my education. There was a woman who taught in our school who I think was really illiterate. She was very nice. You know what she taught? She taught the, the--what's the company that makes socks? They make underwear now [ref. to Hanes]. Well, this company had given them six socks machines, and she taught the girls how to use the socks machines so that when they finished, they could get a job in the sock factory. It's a big company now. Speaker 2: Fruit of the Looms, Hanes? Speaker 1: No, no, no, what's the other you said? Speaker 2: Hanes? Hanes, that's it, Hanes. Story_ID: 17124 Speaker 1: You were ending the story about the illiterate teacher and the socks, the Hanes--. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I just finished it. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: You want me to go back and say it again? Speaker 1: Yes, please. Speaker 2: I don't remember her name. Well I will tell you that, Isadore [Oglesby], when he came back Durham [North Carolina] Doctor whatever his name was, made him head of the mathematics department at North Carolina College for Negroes [Durham, North Carolina, now North Carolina Central University]. And we thought it was a payoff for his resigning as a test case. I don't know why he didn't want teachers in Durham to have the same salaries. It was for his interests, I thought it was for his interests. They gave him two new dormitories, the state gave him two new dormitories. So--Dr. Shepard, that's his name, Shepard. So Dr. Shepard could say, I have two new dormitories. So you just make the teachers keep quiet, and we'll give you two new dormitories. This is the way it works. Well, there was a lady that taught there--I don't remember her name, Hanes socks. They put six machines in her room, and the girls came in to, to learn how to knit socks. So we had people coming in through the factory that already knew how to knit socks, and he wouldn't spoil a, a lot of thread with them learning. And this lady, I think, I really think she was illiterate, but she was the one who, when there was an election, took the teachers, a car full of teachers to vote and would bring them back and then take another carload of teachers to vote and so forth. And she lived on the corner of Fayetteville and some unpaved street, and she was a friend of mine. I used to go, I used to go to every friend that get a good meal, you know. I didn't have any money. One day we were driving and it was raining. And she drove this little part of mud to get in her driveway. And she said, I get very tired of this dirt in my driveway. So she called somebody and said, I want this street paved up to the end of my driveway so I can get in my house without getting mud all over me, my car. And then they paved it. And that impressed me. Also, the, the--what do you call them, the dir--the principal of the school, the high school, Hillside High School was another Negro leader. He was an old man that came and sat. And he had an assistant who ran the school. And there was a little boy whose father was the town drunk, and people would give money to him to show--white people, to show off. And he would make stories and sing and fall down in the street and all kinds of stuff like that. And they would buy him drinks. And this little boy had a problem. Later on they gave me, they built a room down below the second year I was there and divided it in half, and we had art in one half and, and what is it when you make chairs and stuff? Speaker 1: Shop, they call it, carpentry? Speaker 2: Carpentry, in the other half. I had to go in the carpentry shop one day and separate him from the teacher. The teacher said, "Get out of my class." And he said, "Put me out." And the teacher tried to put him out, and they were down on the floor, the two of them. They were both little, and I had to go in there and get in between them because everybody else was standing around looking. So this little boy had a problem. One day he came to school with a gun, and it was--the question was that, all the--they've expelled students like that. But the didn't, they didn't have anywhere to go, because the state training school or whatever it was, was full. So they just hung around the school and annoyed people. And they didn't want to put anybody else out in the street. So where did they put him? They put him in my class all day long. His name was Charles somebody. And he was very happy. He would sit in the back of the room and draw and then he would say, "Hot dog, look what I did!", and everybody would laugh, you know. But he was pretty calm, and, and I showed him how to do letters, and he would paint posters for the school when they had something. And I had problems with him, but, more or less, he was calm. And when I went back to Durham, you, you remember I said that I went to a, a Red Cross, a water school, it was in Durham at the university. Somebody was yelling at me, "Ms. Catlett, Ms. Catlett," and I looked, and he was up on a scaffold painting a big sign. And it made me so happy to see that he turned into something. He was painting letters on a big sign, up on a scaffold. Charles, I forget his name. He always was little. he didn't grow much. But that's what the school was like, and that's what the city was like. And I didn't like it. Story_ID: 17125 Speaker 1: What were you like as a teacher? How would you describe yourself as a teacher? Speaker 2: I was a good teacher. Every student--as a university teacher, every student I ever had--I didn't have anybody that got lost. Every student that I ever had is doing something in art, except one that got killed, a sculptor in Mexico that--he was helping a, he was, he had graduated, and he had a degree. He was working with a, a big sculptor. And he was coming home one Sunday night in his Volkswagen. And one of these great big trucks that do cement came in the other way and mashed his car and killed him. And I don't know whether the man couldn't see, but they were up high. I don't know whether he didn't see or what, but that's the only student. They--one is not a sculptor. One is, well, he, he works in the art school. One in the high school, two of them, when I taught in, in--where did I teach high school? New Orleans. One was, one is Samella Lewis whose been on the National Endowment for the Arts. One was Harold Cousins who was a teacher at Southern University [New Orleans, Louisiana], art teacher there for years. One was Young, I forget his last name. He taught in the high school in, in New Orleans [Louisiana]. All of them are doing something like that. And in Mexico, the same way. They're all working as artists or sculptors. One of them only does bull fighters and bulls, but he does them real well. Story_ID: 17126 Speaker 1: Let me see. I graduated in '31 [1931], no, yeah. And then I was at Howard for about--and teach, and working at that place for about a year. That was '32 [1932]. And then I went to Durham [North Carolina] to teach, like '33 [1933], '34 [1934], maybe. I don't know, anyhow, I finished Iowa in '39 [1939]. Speaker 2: So you went from Durham to--? Speaker 1: To the University of Iowa [Iowa CIty, Iowa]. Speaker 2: How did that happen? How did that come about that you decided you would--? Speaker 1: Oh, I was friendly with these two university teachers. And I used to their house--they, they had an apartment. I used to go to their apartment. They were two, two cultured people that I looked up to. Speaker 2: What were their names again? Speaker 1: I don't remember. And they influenced a lot of people in Durham that went to the university. They were, they were going back to the University of Iowa for their doctorates. And the influenced two or three people. Isadore went and I went, but seventy-five dollars a semester, with no out-of-state fee. And Grant Wood taught there, so I went to the University of Iowa. Story_ID: 17127 Speaker 1: And I got off the train, and there were some students--it was from Chicago [Illinois] to Iowa City [Iowa], there was some students waiting to see if any black students came, and I came. And I'm gonna stay in the dormitory--I told you this. I said, I'm gonna stay in the dormitory. And they said, there're no black students in the dormitory. And there're only three places you can stay, and they're all full. And so one of them said, well, Ms. Scott takes people. And so I lived with Mrs. Scott. I told you this. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: She had a shotgun house, you know, with the room after room after room, and at the back was the bathroom and the kitchen. Well, the first room was her room. She had a lot of trunks in her room. She had a little porch, and then she had the first room. And then there was a little room. And that's the room I had for ten dollars a month. And my room had a trunk. It had two doors to go through. One had, had a trunk and a bed, and on the other side was a table and a chair. And that was my room, and a window. And I had a carpenter make me a, a wooden thing with a shelf that I could hang on the wall, and I tacked some burlap around it. And I put my trunk in there, and my trunk had drawers. So I didn't need a dresser. And that's where I stayed for two years. And she took people that were going to the hospital. And she had two bed in the room after me, but she had a curtain across that room. But they would walk through my room cause I didn't have curtain (laughter). Want to hear something funny? So they took me to Ms. Scott's and we made a deal, and I was gonna stay there for ten dollars a month, cause I only had thirty-five [dollars]. I had it all budgeted it out. For so many months I had thirty-five--and seventy five [dollars] for tuition. So Mrs. Mrs. Scott said, I have to go see my son--her son was in the reform school. I have to go see my son. I got there on a Friday, Saturday and Sunday, I'll be back Sunday night. But here's the key. And I was the only one in the house. So (they?) had a party and then on Saturday night, a lady that rented rooms to men. And on Sunday a lot of men, cause we had eighty men and eight women--eighty men, black men, and eight women. So Sunday night, Sunday afternoon, I began to get men callers. And I put them out about 8:00 o'clock, and I'm sleeping in my bed, and I hear a lot of noise in the next room, and I get up and go in, and it's Mrs. Scott. And she's sitting on the side of the bed putting on her stockings. And she's very drunk. And I said, "Mrs. Scott (laughs), what are you doing? And she said, I'm getting ready to go home. And I said, you are at home. And she looks at me and says, then "who are you?" (Laughs) Oh, God . And I said, "I'm Elizabeth, I'm in the next room, remember me?" And she was looking at me, and I grabbed her and put in the bed and tucked her in real tight, and went back and got in my bed. That was my--and the next morning, she was fine. And she was very nice. Once and a while she would give me a little something to eat. But the way I lived in Iowa, I bought two, two books for food. One in a little place upstairs where I ate a donut and coffee in the morning or something like that. And the restaurant downstairs in the student union, and you go in and you get the food, and they take those little things out of your book. And so soon, sooner or later, my books, my book would, my book downstairs would run out, and I'd eat something upstairs, and that would run out. And I had no more books. So that there was restau--a black woman's restaurant called Vivian's. So I would go over to Vivian's and say, "Can I help?" And she would say, "You ran out of money?" And I said, "yes." And so I would help her serve these black students cause it was a long ways from the art department. We had an art building. It was a long ways to Vivian's. And I would have to leave at about 11:30 to get there by 12:00 o'clock [p.m.]. So I would eat, and I would serve all these students, and then I would eat. And then I would go on back to school. But I also had another (little?) group of black, four--three black ladies who played bridge. And I had learned bridge in this house in Durham when I was staying with this family. So I made the fourth on Wednesday, and they always had something real nice to eat on Wednesdays. And then, and then I sold a piece, a couple of pieces of sculpture. And that's the--and I sold my winter coat and bought a ski suit, which was warmer. I had made me a gray coat with the big fox collar. And I sold it, and I bought a ski suit, and I was fine. And the next year, when I went back I rented a room. I, I paid down on a room with a, with a family. And when I came back, my roommate was Margaret Walker (laughs). And I stayed--she was writing "For My People", that was her thesis. And she would read it, she would wake me up at night and read, read me her poem. And then she would say, is that better? And I would be so sleepy, I didn't even know what she was talking about. But I couldn't stand it, and after a while, I moved into a girls' house, somebody that came opened a girls' house. And I moved in there, but it didn't matter 'cause I was at the art school all day and all day Saturday and all day Sunday. They used to have parties. Story_ID: 17128 Speaker 1: So what do you consider to be the first piece of art that you sold because you said you made a couple of sculptures that you sold in Iowa? What did--? Speaker 2: No, no, no. We started out doing--I had never had sculpture. We started out doing a figure, an active figure and a passive figure. And I cast them in plaster. And then we learned how to build an armature and do a clay figure with a model. And then I wanted to do something in terra cotta and they didn't have terra cotta, but I got some clay from the, another university in another town close by, where they had kiln, and I made two or three figures in clay and fired, and those were what I sold. I don't even remember what they were. I'm talking about 1936, '37 [1937] or '37 [1937], '38 [1938]. Speaker 1: So '37 [1937], '38 [1938], what was influencing your work? Speaker 2: Nothing. I just did some black people. The first ones, the active and the passive, are in Samella's [Lewis] book. I don't remember. I had photographs of them. And I was in Wood's class, Grant Wood's class, painting class. And that's where I learned part of what's helped me all my life. He was a regional painter. He painted Iowa. He also painted the Daughters of the Revolution. And he came up to me when I was in his class, I guess to make me feel at home--there was a black guy in the class too, from the South. They paid--students who wanted to go to a white university--I don't know if you know this, could apply for a university in the North, and the government would pay their tuition and so forth and give them a certain amount of money to live on at a university in the North, so they wouldn't be bothering the state university in the South. You didn't know that. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of students did that. So he was one of those students. And Wood came to me and said, "Ms. Catlett, I was so annoyed with the Daughters of the American Revolution when they wouldn't let Marion Anderson sing in Constitution Hall." And I thought he said that to make me know that he wasn't racist, but he had painted a painting of the Daughters of the Revolution. Did you ever see it? It's a low painting like this, and there are--these three ladies with Wedgewood cups. And you should see these three ladies (laughs). When I was there, he was painting one called 'Parson Weems' Fable'. Parson Weems was the, was the one who started that George Washington cut down the cherry tree. So he had the drawing, and he had a curtain like this, that--he had Parson Weems, who was pulling back this curtain. And he put a little cherry ball fringe on the curtain. And then there was this little scene with George Washington, was a little boy with his axe or whatever in his hand, and his hand on his chest like this. And he had [Gilbert] Stuart's [adult portait of the] face of George Washington, that old, that old man. He had that on the little boy 'cause he said, nobody would know who it was if he didn't make it George Washington. He was working on that. So he taught us--then he asked me--oh, he gave this, there were a lot of students. And he eliminated some. We did a drawing, and he eliminated some of the students. Story_ID: 17129 Speaker 1: Now, this white guy had, wasn't very good, you know. So he asked me if I would help him. And I said, well, why don't you help him? And he said, "Because it would be obvious that I'm helping him. And I'm help--if I would be helping him because--and I let him stay in the class because I know that he didn't have the training in the South that a lot of the other students had. And he has possibilities, so I would like for you to help him. So I said, okay. He was a very nice man. The, the art school had a big studio on each end. One was wood studio and the other, on the other end was the sculpture studio. And they were down some steps from the main building. (aside) So--you didn't tell me about my hand (laughter). But it's, you know, it's all right. Dr. Longman, who ran the department--see, I learned about university politics there. Dr. Longman was the head of the department. He was also a racist. He prided himself that all of his art students who graduated got jobs, whose--got a, whether they got a masters degree, got jobs as professors or heads of departments or something like that. So he called me in one day, in my first year there, and he asked me if I could teach music. And I said, no, why? (mic interference) Because he said there's-- (aside) I won't bother that either. He said," There's a job in St. Louis [Missouri] for a, a junior high school where you can teach music and art." And I said, "That's all right, Dr. Longman, I'll find my own job." So then he comes back another time, and he says--the second year I'm there, I got a scholarship. He says, you can't get a master of fine arts degree. Now, he had a lot of graduate students there working, teaching first-year courses. And the money he save don them, he was paying [Grant] Wood, who was a big artist. So he had the sculpture teacher running the school because he was editor of Parnassus Magazine, this big art magazine, which what he worked on while Mr. whatever his name was, ran the school. So he called me, and nobody had gotten a masters, ever gotten a master of fine arts. So he called me in, and he said, "Miss Catlett, you can't get a master of fine arts degree." And I said, "Why not?" This is my second year. You need to sixty, sixty hours to get a degree. And he said, "You haven't had any printmaking." And I said, "I can't get a degree in sculpture because I haven't had printmaking?" And he said no. Okay, so I went on, I was set to finish anyhow. But we, we, the students in Mr. Wood's class worked out a play we were gonna give. And we were gonna have--ooh, I can't think of names now. We were gonna have a big artist like, what's the Greek that did (pause) Mig--Michelangelo. We were gonna have Michelangelo come up for his master of fine arts, and Dr. Longman would say, "you haven't had any lithography". And then we were gonna have the great Dutch painter, what's his name, come up, and he was gonna say, "you haven't had any clay modeling." And we had each one was gonna do, and all of this; you can't get a master of fine arts degree. But what happened was, I'm packing to go home. I'm gonna get my masters, master of arts degree. I'm packing to go home, and Grant Wood called me and said, "Miss Catlett, can you come over to the art department?" And I said, "For what?" He says, "We're gonna try to get you a master of fine arts." So I went, and he said, "Who are two other teachers because you need two--you need five teachers to get a master of fine arts, to speak for you instead of three." So I gave him the name of the--we had a--now, where was he from? I don't remember, Belgium, I don't remember. But we had a history of art teacher, who became (with emphasis) the history of arts. He wrote, [H.W.] Janson, he wrote the book, the art book, 'the History of Art' book. It's been the history of art book for years now in the United States. He had just come to the United States, some war victim or something. I don't remember. And he said--and he taught history of art, which I was very bad in. So we're all sitting there, and they're asking me questions. And all of a sudden Dr. Longman is so happy. He says, oh, "Miss Catlett, you can't get a master of fine arts. You only have fifty-eight hours. And I said, "Why?" He said,"You took two undergraduate hours." I took two hours of bronze casting in the engineering building. So he said, "You took two undergraduate hours. And I said, "Yes, but I had three undergraduate hours from Howard University when I came here." Oh, and he was so (laughs), so down fallen . He was a terrible man. We had a, we had a Picasso brawl, the students in the art department, a Picasso brawl. And everybody came in something around Picasso. And you know what he came as? He came as the white clown (laughter). People had a Picasso painting with the heads coming out and stuff like that. Okay, so--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: Whatever happened to the-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry, go ahead. Speaker 1: So they put, so he asking, and, and Mr. Jansen, how did she do in history of art? Oh, she was excellent, he said (laughter). And I think I got a C on the final exam. So they sent me out, and then they called me in and Wood said, congratulations, you're gonna get a master of fine arts degree. Story_ID: 17130 Speaker 1: And he [Dr. Longman, head of the UNiversity of Iowa art department] gave one [master of fine arts degree] to the sculpture teacher because he'd been running the school all year. And I had this exhibition on one side of the gallery, with bronze sculpture and, and terra cotta sculpture and plaster, and my thesis was a stone carving. And the sculpture teacher had, didn't time for all this. He had one cast figure in cement that he hadn't had a chance to patch, so it had little holes and lines where the molds joined together and everything like that. But what I learned from him was, he had a system of working. First, he had an idea, and he posed people and photographed them. He [Grant Wood] was the one that did [painting] 'American Gothic'. And he had--and he photographed them. Then he did a line drawing. Then he made a red, a red, you call it, you know, with lines one way and lines the other way. And he drew it, the drawing on that. And that he called 'dynamic symmetry' because they had to fit on the--and they made diagonal lines. He made diagonal lines from one point to another point all over this piece of paper. And then he did his drawing on that. And so the line might--the, the side of the face might come down like this, but with the line, it would turn a little. And it gave his work a lot of dynamic movement. Then, there he drew the size of the painting on a piece of brown wrapping paper, and there he got the [color] values. The brown was the middle value, the charcoal was the black, and white chalk was the white. And the, the values in between, he would make the chalk lighter or, or, and the black lighter or very dark. And then he would put that on a canvas, not on a canvas. He did it on wood with white paint on the wood. He'd, he drew it on there, and he painted it. And he only let us use ivory black, some kind titanium white, yellow ochre and an Indian red, but we had to get everything we could, every color we wanted from those four colors. And if we used those, then he'd let us use one more color, I forget what it was, alizarin crimson, I guess. So this was his way of working. And I learned, I don't work like that, but I learned a way, my way of working. I learned that you plan something. You see at Howard [University], I just would set up a, a still life and paint, copy it or put somebody, and copy that portrait and stuff like that. I was real good at that, but this way I had to plan a design. And then when I was married, my husband used an Italian way. It's called the golden system or something like that which is a way of dividing the canvas up, that the renaissance Italians used. But I use--I learned from him, you have to know what your materials are. You have to know what the paper's like. You have to know all of these technical things and what you can do with color. And now it's nice, cause you can do color on the computer, like you mix it with oil or water color, you can do it on the computer...