 Story_ID: 303951 Speaker 1: Ms. Gray [HistoryMaker Naomi Jean Gray], first of all, I want to thank you for letting us interview you. I know this is just going to be so fantastic. So thank you again. So we're going to get started. First, we're going to have to just kind of let people know who we are. So my name is Loretta Henry and I'm going to be doing the interview and we have-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Foster Stenson. Speaker 1: --Foster Stenson, who is our--going to be doing our camera work. And we have Scott Stearns, who's an observer. So first, before--when we get started, can you please tell us your whole name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My-- Speaker 1: Whole name (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) whole name Naomi, the other part of Ruth. I have a sister Ruth. Naomi, the middle name's Jean, J-E-A-N, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, and Gray is my married name. Speaker 1: Okay, could you tell us your date of birth and where you were born? Speaker 2: Oh. Five, eighteen, twenty-two [May 18, 1922]. I'll be eighty-three this year. Speaker 1: Okay, where were you born? Speaker 2: Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, today's date is? Speaker 2: Five, eighteen, twenty-two [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, today's date--today is March the? Speaker 2: This is March the 27th, isn't it? Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: Okay today is March 28th--30th oh my goodness, nobody knows what date it is. It's March 31st okay-- Speaker 2: It is March 31st. I could have looked at my watch. Speaker 1: --2005. Okay. And the location of this interview is? Speaker 2: At 1291 Stanyan Street in San Francisco, California. Speaker 1: Okay and that's your home, right? Speaker 2: That's my home. Speaker 1: Okay. And I know you're retired, but your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm just a community--well I'm identified as a community activist volunteer. That's really what I do. Speaker 1: Okay, good. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm very active in the community (laughter). Story_ID: 303952 Speaker 1: To get started, we're just going to ask you some questions (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --and they may seem kind of silly and what do they have to do with anything but we're going to ask them. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food, all of my favorite foods? I like soul food mostly. I brought--I was brought up on, you know ribs and yams and greens and macaroni and cheese and sweet potato pie, all the things that my parents [Rosa Henry Thomas and Simon Thomas] and my grandparents loved to cook. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Oh, I wish I could say--I don't like holidays, I don't like Christmas and I don't think I have any particular favorite time of year. When I lived in New York [New York], I loved the spring and the fall. Those were my favorite times of year, but I don't have any favorites now. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, red. And--I have a lot of red--and black are my favorites. Speaker 1: Okay and I know you travel a lot. What's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, my--here the last three to four years, I've been cruising because it takes less of a hassle, and there is this wonderful woman here [San Francisco, California] who started black people cruising about eighteen years ago and she has a jazz cruise every year, so I've gone on a couple of her jazz cruises, been wonderful to sit and see and hear all this wonderful jazz. Joe Williams you know he was on the last jazz cruise I was on and then shortly thereafter he died. But he was there for seven days and we had a great time, Shirley Horn and all of the greats--so it's a wonderful vacation for me at my age. You see families having family reunions, you see the children. You know it's really a great time. I enjoy that. Speaker 1: Oh that's wonderful. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh I don't know--I have a lot of them I guess, but I'm trying to think which is my favorite. I know there's one, don't walk behind me, walk beside me and as we walk together, we can accomplish a lot. But that's mostly what I think about in my life. Story_ID: 303953 Speaker 1: --Now we're gonna just kind of explore your family background a little bit, okay? So could you please tell me something about your mother? What was her name? Where was she born? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's name was Rosa, maiden name, Henry and then married name Thomas. She was born in, I guess Mississippi. I can't recall the town. One of the things in trying to find this out is that I needed to find out where in Mississippi, but I did determine that she was born in Mississippi and she died very young, at age forty-two. I was a junior in college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and she died from a surgery, an infection. There were no antibiotics, so that's what--so I remember my mother was a hairdresser and I remember when I was in college, I was doing folks' hair. It was so funny for a little fee. Speaker 1: Do you have any--I know she died during World War II [WWII]; do you have any stories about her? Speaker 2: You know the thing that I remember most about my mother that she always cared for people. We didn't have a lot but she cared for people who also didn't have a lot. I remember her if there was the town drunk coming down the street with his pants falling down, she'd get off the porch and go and pull them up and send him on his way. And that's what she was the kind of person, who believed in God, and she worshipped and of course she married a minister. So but she was, she was a very and very soft-spoken person and whenever she thought we should be punished, she said it would hurt her more than--to do this, and so she would leave it to my father [Simon Thomas]. Story_ID: 303954 Speaker 1: Okay, could you tell me something about your father? What was his name and where was he born (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name was Simon Serene. I think it's, S-E-R-E-N-E, Thomas and he was born in Summit County, Alabama, which is right next to Mississippi and then I guess he got called to a church, a couple of churches, one in Laurel, Mississippi and one in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. And my father was way ahead of his time because he fought--he was trying to fight for, not integrated education, but he felt that the black children should have equal education like they should have a school building that didn't leak or they should not have to use old school books. And but for his efforts, he was run out of Mississippi by the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] and he left Mississippi and went to Lookout Mountain, Tennessee, and left my mother [Rosa Henry Thomas] with five children, and we were all very small and made her way to where he was. Then my father, because we didn't have a lot of money back in those days and you didn't have the kinds of preachers you have with big churches and making big salaries and doing all of that. But he had pastored in one church in Barberton, Ohio, and then he was called to a church in Indianapolis, Indiana, which is where I grew up and remember the most, two churches there. And as I was going over my father during his life in Indianapolis, he married over five thousand people because he would--was allowed to go to the courthouse. He was making you know to get extra money so his kids could go to college and do as much as he could and as I was searching through things about my father, I had forgotten, but I didn't know it was five thousand, but that's what the paper said when he died that he was doing a lot of putting folks together. Story_ID: 303955 Speaker 1: We're going to talk some more about your background. Do you--have you been able to trace your family history back? Speaker 2: No, not really, that's one of the things that I've regretted. We--we've never had a family reunion and I think a lot had to do with the fact that I left home very early on. After I finished college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], I went back to Indiana to Indiana University [Indiana University Division of Social Services; Indiana University School of Social Work, Indianapolis, Indiana] to get my master's degree and it wasn't long after that that I left to go to New York [New York]. So I didn't spend a lot of time in Indianapolis [Indiana] and with the family at that, at that time, but I do know that we all worked together to ensure that when I finished college, another one finished college, and we all were able to help each other in that way. Speaker 1: Do you--could you tell us something about your grandparents on your mother's [Rosa Henry Thomas] side? Speaker 2: I don't--my grandparents--my grandmother is the only one that I remember and she's a Henry. And she came to live with us when my mother had to leave Mississippi. Well she came with my mother and the five children and stayed with us all those five years until she died in Indianapolis. I don't--she's part (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her name? Speaker 2: She's part Cherokee. Rosa Henry. I don't know Henry was her--it wasn't her maiden name and I don't know what her maiden name, but that was her married. She married a Henry, but I have no idea what her name was before. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know anything about your father's [Simon Thomas] side? Speaker 2: I only know that my father had a brother in Tennessee and that brother had several children of whom I knew some. The last one died recently at age eighty-three in Atlanta [Georgia], so I kept in touch there. But I don't know anything at all about my, about my father. I am sure when my father died. He died of Alzheimer's. That was before anybody--but he had all of the symptoms later as we talked about some of his--what was happening with him. And but I don't know and that's--this is going to help me to go and find out more about from whence I came, my family, my father, my mother, my grandparents. I know nothing about my paternal grandparents. Story_ID: 303956 Speaker 1: Could you tell us one of your earliest memories of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest member--memories of growing up, as I said, there were five of us, and I took piano lessons. I remember. And I used to go to church, and I would play the piano and I would sing. And I just thought I sounded so good I would just kept singing this song, 'I'll Fly Away,' and I'd bang away on the piano, and I would sing until my mother [Rosa Henry Thomas] would send someone up and say, "Would you go up and tell that gal that's enough?" And then I remember, you know, my brother [Edward Thomas] who would not--he was the only boy in the family. He would not let me tag along with him to anything. He didn't think that girls should be going with boys and he didn't need his sister tagging along and so. And then my oldest sister [Willa Thomas]--we were, while we were there together. As I said we were very poor and didn't have a lot and but we were a strong family unit. And I remember during the war [World War II, WWII], they had these community gardens. They would give people who wanted to raise you know food and my mother would march us all in lock step to this community garden. We didn't see anybody else going but us to plant greens and green beans and things and then when we had to go harvest, in the city [Indianapolis, Indiana], they had set outside these things. Those were really some of the things I, I remember going to church three times a Sunday, which I guess explains why I don't go to church today. Story_ID: 303957 Speaker 1: You had mentioned your brothers and sisters. Could you tell us their names and their birth orders, and then maybe something a little bit about each one? Speaker 2: Now, the oldest was my sister, Willa [Willa Thomas], and I did include that, but I can't remember exactly when her birthday is and when she died. I didn't take time to learn or to remind me of that, but she was the oldest and the most religious of the two. We had thought that my brother [Edward Thomas] might have turned out to be a preacher but no, it turned out to my sister who was the missionary and who did things for people. She'd go to pray with the, with the men in jail and she thought that--and she'd visit the sick and those in hospitals and at home. And I was telling someone you know I was reminded going through some of her papers that I don't know of anybody else who traveled the country, talking about leprosy and she did with United Church Women. It was something--it was a disease that you know has been eradicated but in those days it was still prevalent in some countries. Speaker 1: About what time was this? Speaker 2: This was in the early '40s [1940s] and she--after she finished high school, so she became the person who did a lot of work. She was a--she wrote the religious column for the Indianapolis Recorder which was the black newspaper and she set up the first international center for students from other countries who had come to Indianapolis [Indiana] to, to school and she felt that those people should have families in Indianapolis when they were away from their own families where they could go for holidays and things of that sort; and she got the Jefferson Award for her efforts in, in that way. But she was a--you know she did everything. She never had a car. She would walk or go by, by bus, cold weather, it didn't matter. She died of throat cancer and, and it went to her lungs, but she never smoked or never drank in her life. Speaker 1: I see. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was there when she died, but she was really--letters from you know heads of states now in her, in her papers that I was going through. And she and Senator Lugar [Richard Lugar], he was mayor of Indianapolis at the time, and Willa would always go to him when she wanted something, for anything and he recently remembered her. Yes, he did. He was sorry that he lost--that I was lost to Indianapolis, but he certainly knew about Willa. Story_ID: 303958 Speaker 1: And your next sibling? Speaker 2: The next sibling was my brother. My brother went off to, to the [U.S.] Navy during the war. Speaker 1: And his name was? Speaker 2: Edward Paul Thomas. He went off to war with the Navy; and when he came back on the G.I. Bill of Right--was it G.I. Bill [Serviceman's Readjustment Act of 1944]? He entered Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], where he practiced--where he finished there and then went to--what's the hospital in St. Louis [Missouri]? Homer Phillips Hospital [Homer G. Phillips Hospital], where most black physicians would go there or to Howard [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] for their intern and residency because they couldn't get into white you know hospitals and he finished there and then came home to Indianapolis [Indiana] to practice and as was a thing in our family, by that time, I had a little job. I was making eighteen hundred dollars a year and with my father [Simon Thomas] had noticed that a doctor had died and he had an office and equipment and everything so we got together and paid for that rent on that space so that when my brother came, he would have an office to go to to practice. But at that time in Indianapolis, he could not practice in the hospital, so that if he wanted to enter a patient, it had to be a white doctor who would enter, admit his patients, take care of his patients while they were in the hospital and then give them back. And he was--up until practically he had a heart--a series of heart attacks but when he retired, people just didn't want to hear that, and he practiced for fifty years in Indianapolis and they would come out to his house for them--for him to take care of them. And just before he died a few months I would call out and I said, "Where is he?" Well, he was out making house calls in his eighties, still taking care of his patients until the day he died. He married a, a woman who was from Ark- from Oklahoma and they had, let's see, three boys and one girl. Story_ID: 303959 Speaker 1: And the next sibling, the third one (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The next one was me. I was the middle child, and then my sister, Doris, Doris Rozena, R-O-Z-E-N-A, Thomas. And Doris and I were at Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] at the same time. I finished ahead of her and then when she finished, she decided she wanted to go to law school and she went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and was part of that team with Thurgood Marshall, who developed those--you know for the--what is it, Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and those students he worked with then and they were part of whatever they were doing to get ready for that case. And then she decided--then we went to New York [New York] and then we decided that--she decided to come to Los--come to Los Angeles [California] because she wanted to just come to Los Angeles I guess, and she went to work for the Urban League. And she worked for them and then she was brought--then she came up here to visit me 'cause I was here [San Francisco, California] on a visit for Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] and liked it and decided to stay. And then some of the people around town decided that Phil Burton [Senator Phillip Burton], who was an assemblyman, didn't have any blacks and they really gave it to him, so he employed her as his aide while he was in the Assembly [California State Assembly]. Then when he went into college--I mean into [U.S.] Congress, he carried her with him. She was the first black woman to work for a white congressman on the hill. And she worked for Phil Burton for twenty-one years. She was really a very astute politician. I mean she really was and was considered one of the most powerful women in this town because of her association with Phil, who was very powerful as a congressman, and she kept Phil out of the Jones--Jim Jones situation, whereas every politician in town was you know bowing down to Jim Jones. Incidentally he came from Indianapolis [Indiana]. He had a church there--a Peoples Temple [Peoples Temple of the Disciples of Christ] and then he, he left for some reason, had to leave Indiana, but my brother [Edward Thomas] was his physician. And my brother had told me, he said you know he's someone--he's, "He's nuts." She said I'm must--he said you know he can talk to anybody else he said, but he's very mentally disturbed and so when those people died at Jonestown [Guyana], the press called and wanted to get information from my brother about Jim Jones, and he said, "No, that is confidential information between patient and doctor," and refused to talk to them about it. And I remember that, my sister had of course Phil was always grateful that she didn't tie him in like Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] and Dr. Carlton Goodlett [Carlton B. Goodlett] and some of the others who got linked up with, with Jim Jones but that was part of the, you know, the kind of history and so that was my brother having practiced medicine and was very beloved there. Story_ID: 303960 Speaker 1: And then my youngest sister, Ruth [Ruth Thomas], went to a nursing school in, I guess, Chicago [Illinois] and met this man and married him, and had four girls, which she eventually ended up rearing herself pretty much with family help. I helped her a lot, but she worked for--as an admittance clerk for the city hospital in Indianapolis [Indiana] and that's where she you know that's where she worked. Her daughters, all four of them, except one who is here, Sandra [ph.], was the first aide to Terry Francois because Terry Francois was the first black supervisor here [San Francisco, California] and she worked for him and she's very much like me. She's a go-getter and she and I sort of grew up together. And now for the last, I guess, fifteen years, she has been the head of the minority- and women-owned business out at the San Francisco Airport [San Francisco International Airport, San Francisco, California], worked for the airport commission, where she still works, and it's her job to see that minorities and particularly blacks got concessions at the airport and other things like that. So that was Ruth and her, one daughter, who is Gloria Long [ph.], who never got married but she's about a size ten and about little bitty person, but she's a principal at a school in Indianapolis. The other Naomi, one daughter Naomi, works in the health field in Indianapolis and Jeannie [ph.] is a lost soul. Story_ID: 303961 Speaker 1: I forgot to tell--say about Doris [Doris Thomas] she adopted--there are some pictures up, she adopted this little girl when she was three, was the first single-parent adopter in the state of California. Speaker 2: Oh, my. You also mentioned that your sister worked on the Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] case, the school desegregation. Did she say--mention anything Mr. Marshall [Thurgood Marshall]? Speaker 1: Oh, she used to talk about you know about him and how smart he was because he was teaching at the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] at the time, and how in awe they were of him, and how smart he was, and how he used them in developing this case. Whatever they did they were the jurors or the judge, or whatever, but they were in on, on the beginning of that prior to the filing of that, of that case. Story_ID: 303962 Speaker 1: Could you describe the street you lived on, the community, the street that you grew up on, your community? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a black community, you know, 'cause we had segregated communities. In Indianapolis, in Indiana most people don't know that was the birth of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]. And I remember as a child the Klan coming riding through our neighbors. The whole thing was to keep you know black people in line, to be sure that they didn't get out of line as a threatening kind of thing. We had a small house and during that time, we didn't have inside, you know, plumbing or anything like that. And we had this little house and we all lived there jammed up together. But we had a lot of friends and I remember as a child we would play with other kids in, in the neighborhood and I remember how I didn't understand why I couldn't go to a white school in Indianapolis, an elementary school and had to go walk past that school to another and the same thing for the, for the high school, which was also segregated. So a great deal of my life was spent under a segregated system until Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came along and this whole thing began to change. Even as I worked in, in this country, I moved around in a segregated situation. I remember coming across town from, from New York [New York] to San Francisco [California] in the Pullman car and that's where they had pulled the curtains and I had all of that. Those were some days. But that's, that was the last of the, of the siblings. But that's where we all lived, played, worked and fought-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) together. Story_ID: 303963 Speaker 1: When you think back, are there any sights or sounds or smells that when you come in contact with them that instantly takes you back to your childhood? Speaker 2: Oh no the only thing is, is my you know my [maternal] grandmother's [Rosa Henry] cooking. She used to do all of the cooking like smothered pork chops and you know she would make all of these wonderful soul dishes that we are not supposed to eat now, which causes us a lot of problems, but I remember that as being the thing that we knew that grandma, when grandma cooked, it was gonna be good and I always remember she taught us how to cook and what to do. Story_ID: 303964 Speaker 1: We're just going to go back for a second because you had mentioned before that your father [Simon Thomas] had left Mississippi because of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then you went up to Indianapolis [Indiana] and then you mentioned that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's the home of the Klan. How did you father react or what was--could you describe some of the situations in the North? Speaker 2: Well you know he never talked too much about it. He knew that that was part of what black people would experience or could experience; although he's never forgotten what happened, any little property he had accumulated, he lost, like I'm sure many black people in the South did when they had to flee or go somewhere and--but he talked about how he--you know, as he called them the evil doers and he always was a Republican until he died. He said he would never be a Democrat because it was the Democrats who did that to him, you know 'cause the South, the solid South was Democratic and then when the Civil Rights Movement came along you noticed they changed to Republicans. They became the, the Strom Thurmond party of states' rights. And--but I never heard him say that he had a shotgun or that you don't come here, I'll shoot you or anything because he was not a violent man but he didn't dwell on it and he didn't talk a lot. We talked about what the Ku Klux Klan was and why, why did they not like black people and as we called us Negroes or colored people. We were very confused about our own identity and are still to this day. Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We don't know who we are and we don't know our history and, which is why this project is so important-- Story_ID: 303965 Speaker 1: Could you tell us a little bit about Indianapolis [Indiana], what was the racial situation there? Was there lots of integration? Speaker 2: Not much, no, almost no, no integration. Blacks had their side of town, couldn't attend--couldn't swim in the city swimming pool, couldn't go to the theatre except up in the bal- well, we weren't allowed to go to the theatre and it's the home of Madam C.J. Walker, as you probably know, and that's where she built her fortune, right there in Indianapolis. And there is the Madam C.J. Walker building [Madame Walker Theatre Center, Indianapolis, Indiana], and that's a landmark that has a--it had a theatre, it had all kinds of things, where for, for black people. And I remember--now we were pretty much there may have been one or two families who were able to move out. Now, when my brother [Edward Thomas] got to the place where he wanted to buy a home, he went outside of Indianapolis to the next township, and he bought up a lot of property there in that township. They didn't have any lights, nothing out there. And so what he did was to subdivide that property. He built a home there. He subdivided it and sold it to other black people. So it became the place where middle-class blacks lived on Thomas Wood Trail and that's, that's what he did. But, no, there were, there were no intermingling of, of blacks and white to any degree that I remember 'cause I certainly had no white friends when I was there. And the only time that I remember was when I finished college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and went to Indiana University [Indiana University Division of Social Services; Indiana University School of Social Work, Indianapolis, Indiana] and that's when I began to see, you know, more white people, but--and then I became a board member of Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] in Indianapolis but I--because he couldn't find another black to do it except me, I said, "Sure." Story_ID: 303966 Speaker 1: We're gonna talk a little bit about your education. Could you tell us when you went to elementary school? What was the name of it? What kind of a student were you then? Speaker 2: I wish I could remember what the name of the elementary school was. I really don't remember that elementary school. 'Cause those are things I guess I just never thought about. I'm like my uncle, it's been so long ago, I can't remember all of those things, but I know I went to Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana], which was the only high school where blacks attended and I graduated from there and knew a lot of my, my teachers. I knew my principal, Mr. Lane [Russell A. Lane] and Mrs. Yarborough [ph.]. Yeah she taught me, she taught me French and other languages and she moved out. She had two daughters who lived in this area and she eventually came here and that's when I got to see and we used to visit and talk and it was wonderful. But I was involved in, in activities you know at the school, but we learned. We were taught. And I was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and I'm trying to think of other things, but that's where I formed a lot of our--my friendships with other blacks at that school. Sometimes you wonder what integration did to particularly to the education of what we are seeing today. You don't find teachers as committed as they used, but our teachers were. And you know, it's interesting I just can't remember anything at all about my elementary school coming up. Speaker 1: What kind of student (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably was on the south side of Indianapolis [Indiana] but I don't remember. Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? Were you a serious student? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was pretty serious because you know our teachers made us study. They, they said this is what you had to do or they flunk you and you'd never be able to go to college, so you'd have to do well in school. So, yeah, I was a, a serious student and liked to read and participate in various activities. I don't think we had any scouting activities during those years so that, that was not something that I was really involved. I did go back to Indiana in nineteen--around 1990 to make a speech dealing with the--about education at, at an event by Crispus Attucks High School. Story_ID: 303967 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], what were your dreams and aspirations? What did you think you were going to do with your life? Speaker 2: Well you know I really wasn't sure but I knew I wanted to go to college but wasn't sure that my family could afford it and then I, I found out. I first went to--spent one year at Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] and Etta Moten's [HistoryMaker Etta Moten Barnett] daughter [Etta Traylor] was there and all of the black upper and middle-class families were there. I was the only one that didn't have anything, so I had to work you know and times I had to work in the dormitory cleaning and doing all of that kind of thing. Then I realized this isn't for me. There's no one here I can relate to in terms of my own background. Then someone said, "You need to go to Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]," because it's a school that was set up for free slaves and then eventually they brought in Native Americans into that but, so then I could work and I could study. It was a work study situation and I said, "That's for me because I can work, study and get myself through college." And so that's, that's what I did. I was able to succeed in doing that. And I worked for a visiting professor at Hampton as his secretary. I had learned typing in high school, those kind of skills and so I worked for him as his, as his secretary, doing--helping him with research and I decided--he was a sociologist, and I decided I wanted to take a minor--a major in sociology and a minor in psychology because I guess I wanted to be a social worker. I decided that that's what social workers are they help people and that seemed to be my calling and as was for many members of my family, we were all in there whatever we did it was helping people. And so that's what I remember about that. Story_ID: 303968 Speaker 1: What was Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] like when you were there? Speaker 2: Oh it was wonderful (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it? Speaker 2: We had--it's a beautiful campus, right on the Chesapeake Bay, all of us worked in one fashion or another. There were very few, I remember the only person was Olivia Speed [Olivia Speed Bailey] from West Palm Beach [Florida] and her father [Henry Speed] was a big numbers runner, so he made lots of money. And so we just thought, Olivia was rich. She just had everything. But we were all there together and those were friendships you know. We bonded. We always knew we didn't have to have a lot. We didn't have to have all this fancy clothing or anything because we were all there together doing the same thing and that's where I learned about Negro history from Mrs. Higginbotham [ph.]. I will never forget her. She really taught us Negro history and who did what and she made us work at it and, and that's how I learned about our history, and who was doing what (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the things you learned? Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington had gone to Hampton first before he moved over to Tuskegee [Tuskegee State Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Albama] and but Hampton today, it's, it's, it was always a beautiful campus and it had the first--the oldest black museum in the country and John Biggers who was a well-known artist there and his works are always displayed there and we had some interesting people and you form these friendships that to this day, I still keep in touch with Hamptonians, you know, my college roommate and other people I knew, friends of my sister's [Doris Thomas] who she knew. So it was--Hampton was, it was such a beautiful place and we all had to go to chapel at Hampton and we were just as mischievous as most you know people, students. We did things and went off campus when we weren't supposed to and went downtown and did things like that, but that was part of being a part of things. Speaker 1: Were you in a sorority? Speaker 2: We didn't have sororities. They thought that sororities were just something that--they have them now, but I finished there, we had what we called clubs. And I was a member of the Phillis Wheatley Club and then there was a, there was a Calliope Club but most of those turned out to be Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], which is what my sister is and I am an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], but that was after I left Hampton, I was initiated into a graduate chapter. But our, our clubs, then I guess we had to be initiated into to, to be a club member had to be asked to come in, but it was very similar. I found out later to what you know sororities and so they are on campus now. I don't remember that they had any clubs for the, for the men and the boys at Hampton. And they had a choir and I thought I could sing, but you know it didn't work (laughter). Speaker 1: So do you play an instrument? Speaker 2: I did. You know, I played the piano and then I don't-I've lost all touch with that. I don't know how to hit the right notes under any circumstances. Story_ID: 303969 Speaker 1: You finished Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], you moved to-- Speaker 2: I went back to, to Indianapolis [Indiana] and entered for two years. Speaker 1: About what time was this? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What was the time? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty--I finished Hampton in 1945. I went back to, to Indianapolis and entered for a two-year program at Indiana University School of Social Work [Indiana University Division of Social Services; Indiana University School of Social Work, Indianapolis, Indiana] and I got a job and so I went to school and I worked and I was going through stuff, and there was a letter from the dean of that school saying how proud they were of what I had achieved and what I had done. Mary Houk was the dean [sic. director of fieldwork] of the School of Social Work there and during that time, I was also doing volunteer work. That's when I had first got involved with Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] there. So I had a commitment for this fellowship that I had to work for at least a year, but during--after I finished, I had to work for a year in Indianapolis, and then--but I did my field work in Chicago [Illinois] in this hot summer in this shipyard smelling and I mean the--where they killed the meats. What do they call it? Speaker 1: The stockyard? Speaker 2: Yes, stock--yeah where they butchered all the--they always put those places in black communities. But I had a, I had a relative there. I don't recall much about her now and who she was related to. I think it was the Henry side of the family and not the Thomas. But I spent six months doing my fieldwork in Chicago at the United Charities of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and it was there that I met this wonderful, they were white, Jewish, and they took a real interest in me and then later, they went to New York [New York] and reestablished and I became I think the first black on the Council on Social Work Education [CSWE] that was in New York--housed in New York. Speaker 1: So how did you find Chicago? Very--was it very different from Indianapolis? Speaker 2: Oh yes, Chicago was a big city, you know. It was a big city with and a large black population there, lots of restaurants and a lot of you know jazz places, yeah. It was, it was quite different but, but I had to spend my time focused, of course, on what I was there for and that's what I did, work with families in Chicago as part of my fieldwork training. Story_ID: 303970 Speaker 1: And then after Chicago [Illinois], you said you went to New York [New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah I went back--I had to go back to Indianapolis [Indiana] and then it was two year, graduate course [at Indiana University Division of Social Services; Indiana University School of Social Work, Indianapolis, Indiana] was for two years; and I went back there and I finished and I stayed there for another about a year and a half and then I decided I was going to New York because, Doris [Doris Thomas], my sister had already decided to go to New York. And I thought, well that's the place to go. So I got on the, on the train and off I went to New York. Speaker 1: When you were in graduate school, were there a lots of other black students? Speaker 2: There were a few but not many. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to New York and you fell in love with New York? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I went to work for two different agencies, both of them dealing with foster care and adoption. And I worked for those two agencies as a case worker dealing with families who were troubled and so I worked about a year and a half before I learned about this job at Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] as a field consultant. So I applied for that job and got it. Speaker 1: Could you describe some of the activities that you were involved in with Planned Parenthood? Speaker 2: Well, as, as a field consultant, I traveled around the country to consult with local family planning clinics. I think I touched practically every state but Mississippi and Alaska in my travels and was developing, and growing, and my job was to work with minority families, in particularly women, to try to educate them about family planning as, as the thing to you know space your families and my buddy and I, there was another black woman working there, she decided you know we used to go up to Harlem [New York, New York] and hear Malcolm X and so she said, "You know, I know what they think about those blue-eyed devils and birth control is genocide and all of that, but don't you think we ought go anyway and try, try to talk to Malcolm X and see if we can get something out of him," well we did. He let us you know invited us up to the mosque [Mosque No. 7; Masjid Malcolm Shabazz, New York, New York] to talk with him. But he didn't certainly change his mind about it, but it was, it was an interesting thing and then Whitney Young, who was the executive director, he had been at the dean of, of the social work at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and then Whitney came to New York as head of the National Urban League and I got involved with them. I served on, on one of their boards at one time and he founded--I remember we all went up to Harlem one day to an organizing meeting for the National Association of Black Social Workers [NABSW] and--but during my Planned Parenthood thing where I did a lot of work in the West Indies, I started consulting in--with programs in Puerto Rico and Trinidad and Tobago and Bermuda. The Bahamas is where I met that wonderful doctor W.E.B. Du Bois and I--Jamaica and I would go to consult with them around their different programs and how to set it up and to talk about educating and that was a hard sell 'cause men just didn't want to hear nothing about this and even to this day, they don't want to hear anything. The liberating thing for, for women was the development of the pill, so the man didn't know what was happening. He had no way, but used to remove the diaphragms and you know all that kind of thing and no idea about condoms. My friend reminded me--I talked to the other day during that time, I would go down to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], I lived with the boys in the dormitory but I would discuss with them sex education and marriage and family. That was really quite an experience and I also attended some of the original SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] meetings and I was there when that group of the young people who were going off to the Freedom Ride, the buses and because my--the professor who was--I had worked for at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] had gone back to, to Morehouse because he was a professor in sociology there so he brought me, brought me there. Story_ID: 303971 Speaker 1: There were a lot of very interesting things that happened to me while I was at, at--working for National Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America]. I would spend a week or ten days for five years living in a migrant camp in Florida for the purpose of talking about health and health issues at family planning and we would have the best time, the women, the migrant women who worked so hard following the crops and whether they were pregnant or not, they still had to get out there and hard labor, back breaking labor. But we would talk--there was--one of the women said well she guessed she would have seven children because her mother did it. I said, "Well this is not an inherited thing. You don't inherit this from your mother. You can only inherit this from a man." And she would laugh and think I was so funny and but they would bring fish from Okeechobee Lake [Lake Okeechobee] and vegetables because I lived with the public health nurse there and I remember during that segregated time there was a white guy at the State--Florida State Department of Health [Florida Department of Health] and I had worked with him on some projects and he wanted me to go out to this place where these migrant workers were, all black and of course, they would import for the other labor like cutting cane because those black folks weren't getting in there with those snakes and stuff and cutting cane in the field but they would bring them in from Haiti and in from Jamaica and one of the things that happened that, eventually AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in that little place, had the highest incidence of AIDS of any place in the country and that was because when the gay men would go to Haiti and have relationships with those men and that was the onset of you know before we knew a lot about AIDS as a, as a--such a difficult problem. But we developed a, a card for those migrant workers and their children because they would immunize these children over and over again as they traveled up the road. So they then had a little wallet card, they didn't have a wallet, but a card and say just put it where you have your little papers so that if you have to go into a clinic or a hospital, they will have your health history and know what has happened to you so that you are not you know being treated again or children immunized again. And that was really--and that subsequently I presented a paper at the International Planned Parenthood Federation in Singapore talking about my work living with migrants and developing health and family planning programs. Story_ID: 303972 Speaker 1: Other things happened. [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis sent out a call. I was always on the call of everything. I was able to get [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height for instance to be one of the first black people to associate herself with family planning and she was head of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] in New York [New York] and Minnie Gaston, A.G. Gaston's wife, and then Dr. Carlton Goodlett [Carlton B. Goodlett] and I seem to remember Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] at that time also or so but we had started out with an advisory committee, minority advisory committee, and then we started putting people on, on boards. He--so that when he sent out this call, I got on the shuttle and five hundred of us, he said, "We got to get the plan." There were seven black [U.S.] Congress people and Shirley Chisholm was one so we all went to Washington [D.C.], have this meeting to have Ossie spell out the plan for these black congress people. What they gonna to do to help black people and that was really the beginning of the Congressional Black Caucus. And I always kind of laugh when I start thinking about all these things that I used to get involved with there and just, things just happened. I had a lot of good experience when I went to the South. I had to go through--drink from the, if I wanted to drink from the colored fountain and the same and the white fountains or the colored bathroom because I lived and worked through that kind of--my first time when I came to California, I noted the date, I don't remember when, and I had set up seven regional offices in the country and I staffed all of those offices and one was out here. So I had to come out here once or to visit. I used to come out whenever I could and the person who headed this office was a, a white woman and she had to go down to Pasadena [California] to do some work, and I had to go down there to give a speech or something. I don't remember for what, but I told her to, he said now what you have to do is check me in when you check in just say I'm coming. I got down to Pasadena and they said, "I'm sorry we can't, we can't let you in here". And I said, "I don't know why because I have a reservation and I should be able to come." And Miriam was still there. I said, "I'm rooming with Miriam Garwood." "Oh," he said. He didn't know what to do about that, but anyway I was admitted. I was registered at this hotel in Pasadena in the early '50s [1950s] and the men who worked in the restaurant always wondered, "How'd you get in here?" I said, "I walked in the front door like everybody else. That's how I got in here." And, and you know traveling as a black woman, I discovered that it was easier even going through the South because the people who were associated with Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] were the people you had to watch 'cause you didn't know what they had in mind for us with this birth control and population control and all of this stuff and we knew that women were being sterilized after babies and without their knowledge and their consent and so that was my calling to look out for these, for these women and so when I had to visit, those were the women who made arrangements for me to stay in the local hotels. And I said, "No, if you can't let other black people in, I don't want to stay." I integrated a number of hotels around this country as I traveled. Story_ID: 303973 Speaker 1: We're just gonna go back a little bit, you're working with Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] and this is during the '50s [1950s] and I know during that time, Planned Parenthood was not accepted by a lot of people. Can you describe some of these--your experiences that you had with people trying to get them more aware of the Planned Parenthood (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, my focus really was on getting more blacks and other minorities. In fact, I employed two Spanish speaking people to--for the Spanish speaking population but my job was to get to black women who were having all these problems, the high incident of mortality and maternity, and child mortality and to try to educate them. And I knew the problem that would be because the min--black ministers weren't going to cooperate and there were an awful lot of other people just didn't see that I should. But I was able to get the National Urban League and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I remember coming out to San Francisco [California] to an NAACP meeting, at which Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was gonna make his first appearance out here. Well, the Urban League and the NAACP were at loggerheads. They said the Urban League said we are the war department and Urban League--I mean they were the state department. They operated and the NAACP was the war department and here comes this Young Turk and he came out and it and really did throw people for a loop. And but he came out, Martin did, and he spoke to a large number of people out here. And then an interesting happened that was pre-jet you know and Thurgood Marshall had left to go back east to Washington [D.C.] and we heard there was a plane crash, and everybody-I mean it was awful. Was he on that plane? Who knew if he was on that plane? And finally we got word that he was not on that plane. The plane that crashed was one doing sightseeing around on the Grand Canyon [Arizona] but he was going straight ahead. But it was a really oooh, it was a time for us out here waiting to see what had happened to Thurgood. And so I came back--you know and I just continued doing my work and bringing people in, going to conferences with an exhibit. People would come up and I'd have my exhibit and giving speeches where I could and just to get people knowledgeable about the importance of healthcare for us. Story_ID: 303974 Speaker 1: So I think after eighteen years working for Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] made quite a dent in that and when I had left, I had organized that was in the end of, no the first of the '70s [1970s] about '71 [1971]. I had organized over two hundred family planning clinics and we were really working on getting public monies and getting the federal government. There was a whole another team of people doing that, but whenever I was needed to testify or do something like that, I was there on behalf of poor women who couldn't speak for themselves about what they wanted and they all let it be known that this is something they wanted; and this abortion thing you know using of hangers, wire hangers to try to abort and more deaths. You know I said this--but I had to be very careful to be sure that they were not use abortion as a method of contraception. That was very important. I watched out for that and sterilization. Now, one of the people that the organization gave to me to look over and see that he did the things that needed--you know he--they--the Mott family. You know the Motts owned GM [General Motors Company; General Motors Corporation, Detroit, Michigan]. They had a son named Stewart Mott. I was reading an invitation Stewart sent me when he came to New York [New York], so they asked me to take care of Stewart and, and indoctrinate him into Planned Parenthood. His family was looking for something for him to do constructive, this young Mott, a millionaire. And I remember going to Flint, Michigan, to talk with, with this young Mott and also to set up a program in family planning there and he invited me to his house for lunch. So I went, and he was opening--he said, "Here are all these different soups here said so open--pick out the can you'd like to have and open it up and we'll have soup for lunch." And I always thought about Stewart Mott and this young millionaire, didn't know what to do with himself, but we became you know really good friends and I would see him a lot, riding his bicycle on Park Avenue in New York. I said, "Oh there goes the money." But no he--it was very interesting. Another person I met in association with my working in Planned Parenthood among a lot of others was Patricia Neal, the actress, who had had this stroke. And I had been in Jamaica working on a project down there, and I had met her through the Jacobs, who had--were the ones in Jamaica who had set up family planning in that country. And when she--I visited her once when she was in London [England] because that's where she lived outside of London, but when she came back to New York for a big fundraiser because she had this massive stroke and they didn't know if she was gonna recover from it, but she told somebody I want you to find Naomi Gray [HistoryMaker Naomi Jean Gray] wherever she is because I want her to come to this thing that they were having at the Waldorf Astoria. And so somebody located me and said, "Patricia Neal would like you to come." So I went and of course, there were all these actors and actresses and all these people. I didn't know them and they wanted to know who I was. I said, "I'm just a friend. I was invited and so here I am." And she had--whenever she would come out here, she'd have a friend. She'd always call me and once came by here for a visit. Story_ID: 303975 Speaker 1: Was there a lot of resistance to Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Just the--because the church was very much against it and anybody would be deprived of-- that's why they had to have such wealthy, non-Catholic people who were involved and would raise some money for Planned Parenthood, the Pillsburys, and the Marietta Trees, and people like that who, who didn't have to fear that they would run into difficulty. But no, it was very, very difficult to get poor women information and because nobody wanted to talk about it. But eventually we--there were a lot of people like social workers and others and nurses who, who could see the benefits and the value of this for poor women, and they would work with me and they would invite me out to speeches and for spreading the word about you know this--the organization and what they could do. I had a--that was the Planned Parenthood and there are other different stories I can tell about being with them and I did some work in India and as a result of being in Planned Parenthood and Japan. And so I was traveling over, all over the world, spreading the word (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did you leave? Sorry why did you leave and why did you leave the organization? Speaker 2: Oh remember, I told you they fired me. They, they realized that I was sitting on the power structure of the organization, you know where there's--it's a membership organization and those people in that field were the ones who, who praised me the highest. They just you know whenever they wanted me to come, I got loads of letters from them saying you know they're so glad you let Ms. Thomas [HistoryMaker Naomi Jean Gray] come out here and she did such a great job. So when they wanted to give me a new job, and it was an ex-congressman who from Michigan, who had come on as head of organization, as president of the organization, and I guess they got together and decided you know we need to take her away from that particular job and give her something like inter-organizational affairs, where I can just work with organizations and not with people that I had developed all these relationships in the field, south, west, north, east, and all over and I said, "No, I didn't want it." So they said, "Okay." And see in those days, I was making twenty-seven thousand a year, which was a lot of money for anybody in those days but they were going to bring in somebody white to take on this job. So I sent a letter. I got one of the local branches to send out a letter to all of the Planned Parenthood members in the country, and all hell broke loose. Aileen Hernandez got involved, of course, she was with NOW [National Organization for Women], Dr. Carlton Goodlett [Carlton B. Goodlett], I mean my sisters, my sister said they will not do this and she really got busy with people out here. Well when the dust cleared, I was put back in my job and the president was fired for firing me. Story_ID: 303976 Speaker 1: But you know I thought that I was really having--enjoying New York [New York] all those years, having lived in Harlem [New York, New York] and then in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] and have such wonderful times. And so I decided well I'll start my own business and that's what I did. I started Naomi Gray Associates, a management consulting firm and I was doing consulting for the government and in a number of different areas. I did something for the President's Committee on Mental Retardation and I did some work for HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and some work for [U.S.] Environmental Protection Agency, and Department of--but it was [U.S.] Department of Health, Education and Welfare [HEW; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] and they changed. That was a long time ago. And I did some work for them. And one of the really interesting--oh, during my days at Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America], I worked with a lot of Indians. Native Americans. I would go to reservations out in Pierre, North Carolina [sic. Pierre, South Dakota], and with the Sioux and then with the Navajos and they would always--some of them would laugh. They said, "You know when I see you, I see white." I said, "No, I'm black." "No, you're not. I see white. You're just like the white man." We, we would go around in circles on this but we were you know turned out to be great friends and I'll always remember the Urban League was reaching out to the Native Americans and brought some of the tribal people in for a national conference. They tore up the hotel. They ripped out the toilet and they did all of these things. It was amazing and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why? Speaker 1: --and so I used to visit them out there on, on the reservations and finally got them involved and I would hold these different conferences and invite them to be a part of it. But my experience with the Native--with Native Americans because one of them, I have the most beautiful squash that nobody else. It's not another one like. It's all coral. It has no you know like but he did this ring for me too, this young Indian man. I had a project for my company with HEW and it was to talk to young minority males about their responsibility as, legal responsibilities, as fathers, and what would be involved if they you know went out here and impregnating these girls and their responsibility. And I had to train them. The project was down in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I was here but I had--I employed two young black males, one Chinese and one Native American to work on this project and it was their job to go--these were young men who were in Upward Bound [Upward Bound Program] in these colleges. I had them trained, brought in these professors and then I had this midwife to do a training of them and all the methods of contraception. And of course, they had to demonstrate to me they knew what they were doing before I let them go out, out to the street. The funniest thing was using a broomstick to teach them how to put on a condom because they didn't know how to do that and but I would come out to go down to L.A. and the Chinese and the black would meet me. He would do his outreach in his Porsche and he would meet me, he and his Chinese buddy would meet me at the airport in the Porsche and people would look, "What's going here?" And but I was able to--they would always call and I'd go down at least once a month to see how they were doing. But one day they called me, the little director I had and said he said that they had arrested the Native American. Turned out he had been at Wounded Knee [Wounded Knee incident] and they had picked him up and I said--and he said--I said, "Okay, the first thing we have to do is get him a lawyer you know and then we go from there." But he--I think we were able through those young men down, through a lawyer to get him--to keep them from sending him back to Pierre, South Dakota. So that's--so that was just an extension of some of the things I had already been doing there, and then I came here and got involved. Story_ID: 303977 Speaker 1: How large was your consulting firm [Naomi Gray Associates]? Speaker 2: It was as large as the contract. Sometimes I could have as many as fifteen staff and other times, it would be five and it would depend on what they were paying for the job I was doing and so I kept that until about five years ago. Speaker 1: I see. Then you retired. You've been very, very active in San Francisco [California]-- Speaker 2: Yea. Speaker 1: --and you were the health commissioner. Could you tell us something about what it was like to be the health commissioner for San Francisco? Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting because there had never been one. This is really a commission town. There is a commission for everything. But the voters vote. There was one supervisor who felt that there needed to be because there was no one overseeing health, and under the health department [San Francisco Department of Public Health] came the Laguna Honda Hospital [Lagunda Honda Hospital and Rehabilitation Center, San Francisco, California] which is the largest skilled nursing facility in the country, San Francisco General [San Francisco General Hospital; Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center, San Francisco, California], and ten or twelve health clinics and other kinds of programs and so it was passed by the voters during [Senator] Dianne Feinstein's time. Two hundred people applied for seven seats on that, on that commission [San Francisco Health Commission], but she appointed me as a consumer representative, and I tell you giving me that slot was very interesting and we got in right at the outbreak of the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic here. It was just at that (unclear) and the first thing that Dianne said to us, "Close down the bath houses." 'Cause they were going strong and here was this epidemic that had struck here and so we got busy and then I said, "How does this affect black gay people and what are we gonna to do for them?" And I was told the numbers were not there. I said, "But we don't need to wait for the numbers to be here." Then they started a program that I was the only one to vote against it for this needle exchange program and I said, "You know, is that all you got to give us, needles?" I said, "No." That went all over the country. I had every reporter in the country calling me about this needle exchange. And I said, "No, we need something more than that," 'cause they were talking about drug addicts were and I said, "We don't know how we're going to stop them from sharing needles." And to this day, they claim that it has cut down. Maybe it has but they still share needles or sell them or do whatever. It's--but I worked very hard. I used to go down into these hotels down there to see about black people who had AIDS. I was really getting into this and I would go by, by Cecil William's church and Glide [Glide Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California] and he and I say, "I need an escort" and he always provided me escorts to go into those hotels down in the Tenderloin [San Francisco, California]. I worked on that. Story_ID: 303978 Speaker 1: And then I'd said I wanted to be chair of the budget committee [of the San Francisco Health Commission] because we had half billion dollar budget, and whoever distributed that money was very key. And I turned down being president of the committee because I said, "No, I wanna be budget chair of this committee to see where the money goes and who gets the money and how I can change their contracting practices," where blacks weren't getting contracts for some of the things that were being done. Of course, the health department [San Francisco Department of Public Health] staff and people fought it, having a commission, but I was overseeing the money so Phil Lee [Philip Randolph Lee], who used to be the chancellor at UCSF [University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California], was president of the commission because Dianne [Senator Dianne Feinstein] had appointed all of us and he said, "You're smart. You knew--you got where the money was." And I said, "Well I learned that many years ago many years ago at Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America]. You find out where the power is and then that's where you go." And so I did a lot to change a lot of the contracting practices, more money for health programs for, for minority communities that weren't getting them and started early on with the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] thing. I started working on, on that in 1991 with the Ph.D. Benajet [ph.]--what was her name? Benajet. We did a study and wrote a report on AIDS in San Francisco [California] and just the realities and new solutions of what we were going to do. In 1988, I went to Cecil Williams and I said, "Cecil, what can we do to get the black churches tuned in to this whole thing because we know that they have gay people in their congregation. They play the piano or they direct the choirs. I know they're there." And he said, "Well, why don't we have a conference?" I said, "Okay, I'll go to a foundation and get enough money so that we can have this conference on the role of the black church in the fight against AIDS." Well, we couldn't find a church over here that would allow us to have that conference and Cecil, you know his relationship to the church, 'cause he's done so much more than they do, so he found the--a church [Allen Temple Baptist Church] in Oakland [California], Reverend Green [ph.], as I remember was his name and we--and I organized that conference, J. Alfred Smith [Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.] and a whole--some of those people came and that was the beginning of trying to open up the doors to the clergy to try to get them to see that they had a role to play in getting this information to, to black people. We can't sit around and wait. Well, we sat around and waited, but I did. I kept pushing and shoving and calling together black people of all persuasions that led to the formation of the Black Coalition on AIDS [Rafiki Coalition] here. And they still aren't doing as much as I think they ought to do. There is still denial, and but we just have to keep moving and getting information out because, you know, our young people and women and men are dying from this disease. And so that was something I started and was able to push on the health commission to keep that in the forefront of how we have to be taken care of too with prevention and education. Story_ID: 303979 Speaker 1: Did you work with, on sickle cell anemia also? Speaker 2: Sickle cell anemia, we did and I have a friend in Detroit [Michigan], her husband's retired now, a pediatrician. And they had a program here. It wasn't a very good program. I set up for Dr. Whitten [HistoryMaker Dr. Charles Whitten] who is a pediatrician and has done a lot of research and a lot of work on sickle cell. I set up the first national organization for sickle cell disease [National Association for Sickle Cell Disease] for him because I was the only black in the country who had ever worked for a national organization and who would know how to do that. And he--even though he's retired, he's still working on, on that. And yes, it was. They had a chapter here and it was primarily one person. San Francisco General [San Francisco General Hospital; Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center, San Francisco, California] had a program out there. They had a program here for young people they sent to camp, who had these episodic times. But yes, that was definitely one of the things we worked on. Anything that affected you know black people. Story_ID: 303980 Speaker 1: And then you were also involved with the school board, the San Francisco [California] school system [San Francisco Unified School District]. Can you tell me a little bit about your involvement with them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well, we you know San Francisco, I don't think Oakland [California] ever had a consent decree, a federal consent decree that they had to integrate the schools and the superintendent [Waldemar "Bill" Rojas] we had before Arlene Ackerman who is the black superintendent. I don't think she is gonna last too much longer, but I started out about in the early '90s [1990s], asking about what happened to the money. A hundred million dollars--$30 million a year came in from the state that was to be used to improve the education outcome for African American children. Then the Latinos said, "Well, why just African Americans?" They wanted a piece of this okay so they included those children and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] wasn't doing its job. It was not overseeing what was happening. The money was coming and our kids weren't learning, and we were focused in on--and then we were bussing. I said, "I don't believe that buses gonna help these children learn sitting beside some white kid in Pacific Heights [San Francisco, California] who don't wanna there. All it can do is to keep parents from the school who come for the kids. It's a one-way bussing and you weren't bussing kids in because the schools out there were so bad, but still our kids weren't learning and I discovered, I used to go out and watch the buses and some of the kids never got on the bus and they would hang out in the street and I am convinced to this day if we had really pushed to keep those children in school, we had no truancy program, or anything, we wouldn't be having the problems we are having there. Speaker 1: What were some of the problems that you noticed with the kids 'cause they weren't getting on the bus? Speaker 2: I had--I would go out and watch the buses. I would go out and then I had a grandmother who had a child out there and I was working with parents out there trying to get them involved saying, "You gotta go to school board meetings; you gotta speak up for your children and you gotta let them know whether you like or don't like this and but if you're not there, they won't pay any attention to you" and so Dr. Raye Richardson (unclear), she and I--and then I got linked up with three professors, three black professors at State [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. They wrote me. It was very interesting because they wrote me, called me and said one of the black professors was due for tenure and they weren't gonna give it to 'em. "I think maybe you can help us with that?" Well, I got busy. I didn't--I wrote a letter and a copied it all everybody I thought should have it and sent it to the chancellor and she got tenure. I made them think that I had the whole--we were all coming out there. But, so, so I got them involved and I did set up a scholarship, an endowed scholarship for my sister [Doris Thomas] at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] for which I will soon be raising some money to endow it, but I really worked hard out there, and I just think that our kids weren't getting a fair shake. I went public on the NAACP for what they weren't doing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 303981 Speaker 1: You have had this very, very exciting life and it's you know still every day is more and more exciting for you. Are there any other organizations that you've been with (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. There are a lot of organizations. When I first came here, I joined a group called BOWOPA--not BOWOPA, but Black Women Organized for Political Action and were the ones that published that book about the '70 Soul Secrets of Sapphire' [Carolyn Jetter Greene]. I worked with them on issues because I feel also that politics is very important when it comes to impacting our lives and we find people who don't know their congress persons, they don't know the senator. They'll call me and say and I'll have to tell them, "Here are the people you call." They don't know their state assemblymen, they don't know state senator and I said, "You know, it's really important that you do this," and--but it's, it's a constant you know education process. I had--it was [HistoryMaker] Barbara Lee who brought me into the Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] campaign when he was running that first time. She asked me if I'd work with her on his campaign and I did with her. And then my sister [Doris Thomas] used to offer me up to everybody. Oh my sister, she'll do that. And I have worked for one, two, three, four mayors doing something, all volunteer, you understand, no money. And one of the last big things I did was I chaired the economic and development planning taskforce for the Western Addition, Fillmore [Street, San Francisco, California] and we wanted to recreate some jazz, something like it was in the '60s [1960s] when all of these people would come in here you know and play jazz when we had the hotels and they had all the businesses. Well, we knew we couldn't do all of that but we did work and came up with the Fillmore Jazz Preservation District and I worked on that for six years under Frank Jordan and Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown]. And so we, we did get a jazz club in. We had just gotten some restaurants and so you know it's (background noise) it's--I guess eventually can be--we can take you know get some people in. We thought we could bring in the Blue Note [Blue Note Records] and we had them all kind of signed up but you know when you're working with redevelopment, it's not easy to do those kinds of things so. But I think we're, we're--as I can understand, they're trying to move ahead on getting some more businesses and jazz venues into that Fillmore district. Story_ID: 303982 Speaker 1: When we came into your home, there's this wonderful book that you have all your guests to sign-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and all through this interview, you've mentioned so many famous and wonderful people. Is there and--a few people that stand out in your mind that you'd like to tell us about? Speaker 2: No, they're all you know-- Speaker 1: They're all wonderful. Speaker 2: --wonderful people, all in their, in their own rights and people who had come from other parts of the country and I just wanted and then I forgot about that book until you all appeared today. I said this is something worth going in my book. I have, I have kept track of a lot of things that I have done over the years and so this gives me an opportunity really to focus in on doing some things that I wasn't able to do before, you know about family and work and my volunteerism. I believe in volunteerism and I believe in bringing in young people to, to mentor them for jobs. I do mentor a lot of them. They, they call me. They come by. They want to talk about this, that and the other, but if they wanna get me involved, I say, "No, I paid my dues. It's time for you to do that. I'll help you do that. I can only do one or two things at a time." But there are some wonderful young women. Some of them are on the health commission, not the health commission, on commissions. One is on the fire commission and so that we have a, a range of things that we--that I get involved with in mentoring and answering questions. I guess I have--if anyone wants a telephone number of anybody in the world, they call me for that number and I do have a whole bunch of them. But when you make friendships over the years, you sort of maintain them-- Speaker 1: Is there anything--? Speaker 2: --and keep in touch. Story_ID: 303983 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you started, you always wanted to do, but you haven't been able to do it and you're still looking forward to doing something? Speaker 2: No, I'm not looking forward to anything else (laughter). I have done I think what I'm looking forward to getting more other people involved and particularly young people in developing leadership, which we don't have here in San Francisco [California]. I don't know about Oakland [California], but over here, we really have lost the leadership. I was president of the Black Leadership Forum [San Francisco Black Leadership Forum] for about four years and, you know, we were really out front there and but I keep my finger in the politic of things. Recently, I was shocked to read that, that we had unregulated cannabis clubs. Thirty-seven of them and I said how could that be because I remember I supported medical marijuana and I remember going to the first club that opened here but it was promptly shut down by the feds. Everybody was going in there puffing. The place was so full, I could just inhale and, and so I was really stunned and I shot off a letter, e-mail, to the mayor and to the president of the board and I said, "What are you doing?" I said, "You're going to deprive people who truly need this by not having any eligibility requirements, no oversight, we don't know who is running these clubs or you know what kinds of--what do we require from them to be helped, a doctor's statement or what?" So now they put a moratorium on, on anymore clubs now until they can figure it out. So I have talked to one of my dear friends and who has multiple sclerosis and I was talking with her and she goes to Oakland. So she gave me some ideas of how they're you know changing but I mean I got a card--I'm a card-carrying member of the cannabis club and you know I thought, you guys better tighten this thing up. Well, you know, you're the health commissioner, you can have this. I said, "No, but, you know, the feds are gonna come in here and close you down." And, of course, they did. And that's what they're now saying. I told them in my e-mail, I said, "The feds, that's what they're looking for." I mean they don't like San Francisco, all this gay marriage stuff and now you're gonna have unlimited marijuana clubs, and where nobody, no requirements, anybody, anything goes and people are making beaucoups of money. I said that's not the way it should be. It should be under some sort of a health umbrella and there'd be somebody who is overseeing so that all the feds need is to come in and take away from the people with glaucoma and with multiple sclerosis and other things who really depend on this. Story_ID: 303984 Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: It's, it's--my greatest concern is the disparity in healthcare and the lack of education among, among our youth. We're losing generations and what is going to prepare them when everything is being outsourced and yet we're not training our young people for the things that they can do. And those are really my worries. And I think that a lot of the crime and the like shooting all of that we see today is a result of these kids not having anything to do at the--hanging out and getting into trouble. That's, that's my real concern. Not all of our children--we have some wonderful children and they are doing well. And I try to help them and I keep a bank of scholarships and I refer those to fam- to parents who are looking for help. So that you know keeps me busy with my email and all. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 303985 Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, what stands out the most? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. I think, I think what stands out the most for me is the work I did with Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] that prepared me. I was naive. I didn't know a lot, but I developed things along the way. And I felt very good about my connection to all of these people whose lives I had some influence on and had helped them to, to move ahead, and to help them. I remember this--one of my greatest joys is when I--oh I co-founded a foster care agency [Sojourner Truth Foster Family Service Agency, San Francisco, California] here when I found that the 75 percent of the children in foster care here were African Americans. And I know this was the result of the outbreak of the crack epidemic, which really had an impact and influence on the lives of our, our families and I was doing all of the placing of these children in foster homes and I just decided we didn't need to send them to Oakland [California] and wherever they were sending them away from family and community. But one of the children that I placed out of a homeless shelter was a thirteen-year-old, whose mother was on drugs and had disappeared and hadn't been around for about three or four days, so she called her social worker and said, "I don't know where my mother is." So I picked her up, put her in a foster home and found out this child had a three point grade average. Here is a child in a foster home--or in a homeless shelter homeless was making this and she used to tell me she loved to read. And she said, "I get a good book and I can wipe out all this nonsense that, that surrounds me. So it was my--I was determined that she was gonna go to college. So I worked with the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and got her a full four year scholarship and it was a great occasion. We had lots of press. We had a lot of people who were interested in her and she's working at a program in Oakland now. But you know that was taking a life and trying to help this child make something. And I just wish I were able to continue to do more of that, but I really can't. I had to concentrate you know on what I can do here and then raising a lot of noise as I do with all of them, political, many of them. I shoot 'em off. I write letters to the editors. We can't get our people to write letters. They publish my letters. Here she comes. Yes, this is important, put it there. And I had a very good friend of mine who is on the editorial staff of the Chronicle [San Francisco Chronicle] and anytime I said, "Listen, I think we need an editorial on this, it's important that we get this out here." But I've had a fun you know very interesting life and I've enjoyed all that I've done and it was part of my heritage, part of my growing up. Story_ID: 303986 Speaker 1: What values do you consider to be the most important? Speaker 2: Well the most important value for me is family you know. That's, that's really important. Doing as much as you can for other people and trying to make a difference in areas where you can and spending the time because we don't do a lot of volunteering and you know I tell you we can't get paid for everything and, and then making noise. I just make a lot of noise with politicians and everybody. I think it's important. You gotta speak out and you gotta stand up for something. And I'm not afraid to do that. Story_ID: 303987 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Oh I don't know, whatever. Good person. Naomi Gray [HistoryMaker Naomi Jean Gray] never kept her mouth shut. You could always count on her to stir up something. You know and you know if you don't do that, nobody listens. So you have to, you know, let your voice be heard on issues that are important to you and your community and that I think is what I have thought most about. Speaker 1: Okay, I think you've done a wonderful job. Thank you very much. This is a lovely interview (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're welcome, thank you. Speaker 1: I've learned so much, thank you. Story_ID: 303988 Speaker 1: Doris Thomas on the left, my sister, Doris, I'm in the middle and my sister, Ruth [Ruth Thomas] on the right and that was taken I think in the late '60s [1960s] at the time I had gone home for the funeral of my sister, Willa [Willa Thomas], back in Indianapolis [Indiana]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Let's see what is? I know--oh I don't know who that other young man is. 'Cause I don't know his name. I can't remember. I don't know who Wayne [ph.] is. I can't remember, Ed. I can say and friend. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: When was that taken? That was taken in the '40s [1940s]. My brother, Dr. Edward Thomas, on the left, I'm in the middle and a friend of ours named Wayne. I don't--can't remember his last name, but that was taken in the late '40s [1940s] in Indianapolis, Indiana. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: What was the date on that? Does that have the date on the back? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay, I was lecturing. Naomi Gray [HistoryMaker Naomi Jean Gray], that's me lecturing at a Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] meeting in 1969. It could have been anywhere in the country. I don't remember where I was speaking at that time. Speaker 2: That picture was from I don't--can't give you the names of the people. I'm on the far right, but we were having a meeting with some people including the mayor of the--in the Ivory Coast. We had gone there on a sister city trip with former mayor, [Senator] Dianne Feinstein. Speaker 1: That had to be--the young man on the left worked for Planned Parenthood, the woman in the middle, I don't remember her name. She was a board member and I was on the right. I think we were waiting. That was the late--the mid--early '60s [1960s]. We were waiting to go on a program, radio program in New York [New York]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That had to be in the, in the late '40s [1940s]. That photo was taken in the late '40s [1940s] in the office of Reverend Cecil Williams who is sitting on the table, the pastor of celebration of Glide Memorial United Methodist Church [San Francisco, California] here and on his left there with the big afro is [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and then standing directly behind Cecil is [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and then to the far right is my sister, Doris Thomas, and this was taken in, in San Francisco [California] at his church. You want me to say that again? Speaker 2: This was a very recent one, about two months ago, taken with Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi, who is the leader of the Democratic Party. She is the minority leader of the house and to her right is Fred Ross [Fred Ross, Jr.] who is political soulmate and we all did a lot of politics and I'm on the left. This was taken at a recent meeting that the congresswoman had on social security. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a picture of me with my [maternal] grandmother [Rosa Henry] who was eighty-seven years old in my apartment in New York City in 1959. She had come to visit with me accompanied by her great-granddaughter, Sandra Long [ph.], who at the time was age thirteen. My grandmother lived in Indianapolis, Indiana. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yes this picture was taken in the--I was visiting from San Francisco in the early '60s [1960s] and that's my sister, Doris, on the left and her adopted daughter, Tandy, Tandy Thomas [ph.], who is now thirty-eight years old and myself, Naomi. We were at the Chinese, at the Chinese parade, New Year's parade in Chinatown. Speaker 1: That's the phone of my brother, Dr. E. Paul Thomas, taken in I would say about the mid-'60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Yes, this is my oldest sister, Willa, W-I-L-L-A, Willa Thomas, who lived in Indianapolis and that was taken somewhere in the mid-'60s [1960s]. She was a missionary. That's how I would describe her. Speaker 1: This photo was taken in 2003 at a--at the office of the Sun Reporter, the black newspaper here. On the left is Paul Lemon [ph.] who had worked very hard in the mayor's campaign. That is Mayor Gavin, our current mayor, Gavin Newsom and I'm on the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yes, this photo was taken in 1984 at the swearing-in--my swearing as the first--one of the first health commissions in the city and county of San Francisco and I was having my accepting the honor of working as the member of this first commission, with senator, then Mayor Dianne Feinstein to my right, and I see our former city attorney Louise Renne and Dr. Werdiger [ph.] who was the newly appointed director of public health and a lot of our friends. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yes, this was the photo taken of the members of the San Francisco Health Commission along with--I'm trying to remember who all those people were. Dr. Richard Sanchez, Sandy Morey [Sandra Morey] who was the secretary to the commission. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, the man on the back row standing right is Dr. Richard Sanchez, a pediatrician. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Back row, far right yeah Dr. Richard Sanchez. In the back row, in the middle, the woman was Sandy Morey who was the secretary to the commission and to--in the second row, top was Dr. Ed Chow [Edward A. Chow] and I don't remember the rest of all those people. Names leave me. Yeah I know I can't but it's--I don't think I wrote them down. I had a bad habit of not writing people's names on the back...