 Story_ID: 228686 Speaker 1: We're going to start out by slating the interview. My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. And with me is Matthew Hickey who is the videographer, and Larry Crowe is the observer. I'd like to--so we're going to slate. I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, full name. Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, G-W-E-N, I-F-I-L-L. Speaker 1: And I want to have your--do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: I don't use it. Speaker 1: Okay. I'd like to have today's date. February 8, I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay. Today is March 8, 2012. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We're sitting here in Shirlington [Arlington, Virginia], Virginia, which is the headquarters for WETA. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: I was born September 29, 1955, in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a journalist. Story_ID: 228687 Speaker 1: So I want to--we start out by asking five favorites. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They're just People magazine-ish questions. I'd like to have your favorite food? Speaker 2: Gravy (laughter). You can put gravy on anything and it's great. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I love the spring. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Anywhere in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have to think about it. What I'm trying to do is actually conjure up the complete, correct saying of the Bible verse I'm thinking of and it's escaping me, but it'll come back to me-- Story_ID: 228688 Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your father. If you could tell me his name, and then I want you to tell me what you know about his background. Speaker 2: My father was Oliver Urcille Ifill, U-R-C-I-L-L-E. He was born in Panama in the Canal Zone, and he moved from there, met my mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] in Barbados, and immigrated to the United States in the 1950s. He was many things. He was a strong black man. He was a race man. He died in 1991. He was an ordained elder in the African Methodist Episcopal [A.M.E.] church. When he came to the--he always wanted to be a man of the cloth, a clergyman. He tried many other things along the way, but when he came to the United States, he became affiliated with the African Methodist Episcopal church. And it was through the good graces of the A.M.E. church that he was able to rear and raise six children over the years. And we lived from parsonage to parsonage to parsonage as a result. And I'm still a strong A.M.E. today because of my father, but more importantly, I'm probably a strong race woman because of my father. He was kind of fearless. For a man who immigrated to this country from another place, for a black man in this society and for a West Indian and an African America, which wasn't always welcoming to West Indians, he always refused to say no to take-- let me rephrase that. He always refused to take no for an answer. He taught us how to be proud of what we were. He taught me how, if someone used the word black as a slur, that I should say thank you. He taught me black was beautiful before everyone else caught on. He also taught me not to have a chip on my shoulder about it, to not try to ignore race or treat it as something that was a negative, but as something that was a positive. He taught all of his children that. And he did that as--he thought of himself as a Garveyite in some respect. He, like a lot of other black preachers, marched with [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. My mother feared he would be deported because he was always doing these things which bordered on civil disobedience. And part of what drew him to the African Methodist Episcopal church was its history and it's rootedness in being--and speaking up, and the fact that it was founded by free black men who were dragged off their knees praying at St. George's Methodist Episcopal Church [sic. St. George's United Methodist Church] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and they retreated to Richard Allen's blacksmith shop to create their church, their own thing. And so we learned from that lesson that if they won't let you, you can do it on your own, and you can do it with God's blessing. So he raised me to be a strong, God-fearing woman who, even though, the oddest thing about my dad is that he was kind of a sexist. He really wasn't really down with the idea of woman in the pulpit for a long, long time in his career, his life. But it never occurred to him to tell his daughters there weren't things they could do. So we just internalized the message of you can do whatever you want and ignore any kind of subliminal messages about what women are supposed to be. And lo and behold, he ended up raising sons who were feminist and daughters who were feminist. And I don't think that's what he intended, but that's the message he ended up sending. 'Cause so often with parents, you send these messages which are by your actions as much as by your deeds, and my mother sent that same message. Story_ID: 228689 Speaker 1: What do you know about his [Ifill's father, O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] growing in Panama? Did he share much of that with you? Speaker 2: What we--the stories we heard about his growing up in Panama--I have to say one of the things I love about The HistoryMakers is that it speaks to one of my great regrets, is that I didn't get more of their lives on tape; my parents' lives on tape, because I think the stories they tell as you know in families are--over the years, you look back and say, "Is that really the way it happened or is this a fable?" We'll never know. But the story, as I understand it, he grew up as a son of a single mother largely, because his father died when he was young. He had one brother and one sister, Olga [ph.] and Lester [ph.]. They were very grinding poor. They grew up in the slums of Panama City [Panama]. They were--they never had anything extra. But somehow, maybe it's because they were the children, the offspring of people who chose to come to Panama to work on the [Panama] Canal as originated. My grandmother was born in Barbados, and like many Barbadians and Trinidadians, they all went to Panama to work on the canal, and that's how the black population in Panama came. And all my cousins are--a lot of my cousins are Panamanian and a lot of my cousins are Barbadian, depending on which side of the family they're on. So he grew up in this grinding poverty, and I guess that may have put the idea in his mind that there was a way to get out and there was someplace else to go. Also, having access to the U.S. Canal Zone that he had access to an American way of life and knew there was another way to do this. This was the time when immigration was still considered to be a good thing, when we were welcoming immigrants to this country. And I do think the immigrants' experience is so different from the native-born Americans' experience, and that's part of the distinction between native-born African Americans and West Indian-born African Americans. In order to move to another country, uproot yourself and create a new life for your family, you have to be bold, and you have to not take no for an answer, and you have to know that there's something better that all this sacrifice is worth. You don't take it for granted. So I think that his upbringing as an upward--upwardly mobile African American or African Caribbean American drove what happened to him once he came to this country. Speaker 1: When did he come? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know the exact year. My brother-- Speaker 1: Well, was it in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: It was in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. And I was reading that there was more immigration during the '50s [1950s]. It had stopped in the '40s [1940s] and then came in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. My oldest brothers and sisters were born in Barbados in the 1940, '44 [1944], '45 [1945], '46 [1946]. Then the younger three of us were all born here, 1954, 1955, 1958. And so that gap of time was when my parents were separated, when he came to this country and set things up and then brought them here. So that's basically how I tell the time by when we were all born. Story_ID: 228690 Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother, her name and-- Speaker 2: My mother's name was Eleanor Edmay Husbands Ifill. She was born in Barbados. She died in 1995. She was an interesting woman in ways that I didn't appreciate, obviously, growing up, because they don't talk, you know. Our parents didn't really talk about these things. But she met my father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] when they were both--this is the story, and I think it's true--they were both playing in this Salvation Army band in Barbados. There're photographs of them in their Salvation Army outfits. He played a horn and was, you know, the shy, youngest, not quite youngest daughter of eight kids--ten kids. And she--when she and my father got together and got married, they immediately had these children, and he moved to the [United] States. And so for a long period of time, eight, nine years, she was a single mother. She was raising these children without the father present, even though he would go back and forth. So by the time she then followed him and came here, and the youngest three of us were born, she had learned how to be independent, too. She was a working woman. She was a seamstress. She made her living that way. She made her living that way after she came to the United States working for the Singer sewing company, and only stopped working when my youngest brother [Richard Ifill] was born in 1958. And after that, she became a stay-at-home mom. She became the first lady of the church, and she was his main support for a lot of that time. Much of that kind of work wasn't appreciated in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. These were just women who seemed like they had nothing to do when, in fact, they were robustly raising children, incredibly providing the kind of backstop that these powerful men needed in their lives, and as I suggested earlier, by example showing me the things I could do. In lots of respect, I sometimes look back and think to my--that my mother, a traditional homemaker, should have encouraged her daughters to stay at home and do what she did. Instead, she looked at her example and thought, "My daughters can do so much more." And so never in all of her life did she ever say to me in her seventy-six years, "You really ought to get married now, young lady," or "you really ought to stay at home." She really took joy in the accomplishments of her children, and I think especially her daughters, because she saw the possibilities that they could pursue that she felt were closed off to her. Speaker 1: Now, did she talk about her growing up in Barbados? Speaker 2: She did. She grew up with a very stern mother, and also a father who dies relatively young. I never met either of my grandfathers. And I did meet both of my grandmothers, and they were right. They were stern black women who were very responsible and who you did not cross. Loved the grandchildren, but they were tough on their children. And so she grew up with mostly sisters, but also with some brothers, but also with a keen sense of responsibility. There's something about the upbringing in a British colony, which kind of put a little--stiffened your back a little bit. That's what Barbados was. It was very true to the Queen. And they saw themselves much more as British than anything else. So coming to the United States was not a natural path, necessarily. Everybody went to Britain. In fact, I had cousins and aunts and uncles who lived in Britain. So it wasn't necessarily--it was atypical to the way that we would have been raised or she would have been raised had she grown up here or if we were children of the American South or children of American slavery. People sometimes say to me, "Oh, you're West Indian. You're not a child of slavery." And I say, "Well, the only difference was cotton. It wasn't cotton. It was sugarcane." We were definitely working as indentured servants and as slaves in the same way in the West Indies as people were here. Story_ID: 228691 Speaker 1: Now, who are you more like, your mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] or your father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.]? Speaker 2: This is a dilemma. This is a deep dilemma. I'm a lot, people will tell you, I'm a lot like my father. I am physically like my father, certainly in every way. I have the, you know, long fingers and the nose, and, you know, I look like my father. If he'd walk in, you'd go "Ah, okay." I've got my mother's cheekbones, which I think is good. I like to think I have my mother's gentleness. I try, I try for my mother's gentleness. My father, I liked his boldness, and I try to emulate his boldness. I try not to emulate his impatience with the world around him. I think it helps to be a little impatient, but not so much so that you don't get as much done. And I don't like loose ends. My father was a great--he's a great one at knocking down the door, walking through it, and then leaving the loose ends to be swept up. But on the other hand, he--then got things done. He would move into--we'd move into a town and he'd see a church that was falling down that he'd been assigned to, and he would rebuild it. You can go throughout the Northeast and find A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] churches which plaques saying it was renovated at this date or that date with my dad's name on it as the pastor of the church where that happened. So he would do whatever he wanted to do. He knew he wanted to take his children to Europe. He had no money to take us to Europe. He put it all on a credit card, he took us to Europe. We went on a ten-day tour when I was thirteen, and from that experience, I got kind of a seminal understanding of the world that I wouldn't have gotten with a less imaginative man who didn't mind going into debt in order to open his children up to this possibility. My mother was very supportive, and in some ways I learned who to be as a woman from her, and I also learned how not to be, because I think sometimes she was meeker than she needed to be. In order to be married to this strong man, she had to do what women do, which is, "Okay, this is the fight I'll fight today; and this is the fight I won't fight." That's not who I was because I had enough of my father in me (laughter), so I wasn't very good a sitting back. But I like to think that she was nurturing in a way that I try to be, and that she listened in a way that I try to listen, and then heard in a way that I try to hear; and that informs the way I do my job. My job is not--my dad's side of me would be the part of me that asks the hard questions and pushes and pushes; and my mother's side of me is the part who listens to the answers and does something with that. Story_ID: 228692 Speaker 1: Now you--your siblings, give me your siblings' name and birth order. Speaker 2: The first, the oldest is my brother Earle [H. Ifill]. He's the one of the six of us who followed my father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] into the ministry. We were very happy when he accepted the call. That means none of the rest of us had to. Earle, E-A-R-L-E. He is the presiding elder of the Atlanta [East] District of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, and he is actually very funny and very, very much my dad's son. The second child is Oliver [Ifill, Jr.]. Oliver is retired. He lives in Albuquerque, New Mexico, with his wife Maria [Ifill] and he has two daughters, Christina and Kim, Kimberly. And then the next in line is my sister Maria. And my sister Maria [Ifill] Philip lives in Silver Spring, Maryland. She just recently lost her husband, so she was married to a man by the name of Oliver Philip, and she was a state department [U.S. Department of State] Foreign Service officer for much of her career. She just retired a few years ago. Before that, she worked in the [U.S.] Social Security Administration, as did my brother Oliver before he retired. Then there's the gap. And then there is my brother Roberto [Ifill], who is an academic and is now the newly appointed dean of students at St. Mary's College [of Maryland] in Maryland, in St. Mary's [City], Maryland. And so he lives here as well in suburban Washington [D.C.] with his wife, Gisele [Becker], who's a choral conductor and a music professor at [The] George Washington University [Washington, D.C.]. And then I come, then it's me. And then after me was my younger brother, who died in 1984, Richard [Ifill], who was a college graduate from the University of California at Santa Cruz [Santa Cruz, California], and died in a drowning accident in 1984. Speaker 1: So there're really two sets of kids in some respects. The ones who were Panamanian-born and then the ones who are-- Speaker 2: Barbadian-born. Speaker 1: Barbadian. I'm sorry, not--okay. Barbadian-born and the others. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So was there that sense within the family? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting because I was eight by the time, say--we're roughly ten years apart; so I was eight by the time my sister, who's ten years older than me, she was off to college by then. So we grew up almost separately. Speaker 1: Wait a minute. Not all of you are ten years-- Speaker 2: Well, we're roughly ten years apart. My brother-- Speaker 1: All of you? Speaker 2: Well, my brother, who is a year older than me, my brother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who was a couple years younger-- Speaker 1: Okay. I see. Speaker 2: --it's rough. But there was--there's roughly ten years apart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I--so they were out of the house by the time we were in double digits pretty much. But, interestingly enough, we have become as adults, to find much more in common than we probably had as children, because you're raised differently by parents when you're the first and when you're the last, and, you know, we're probably--there's probably more leniency on one end and more-- it's more strictness on the other. But as adults, and especially since the loss of our parents [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr. and Eleanor Husbands Ifill], we have bonded very tightly as surviving siblings. And, as a result, really like each other a lot and get along pretty well, which everybody can't say about their adult siblings. Story_ID: 228693 Speaker 1: Tell me your earliest memory [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], of growing up. When you think back, what is-- Speaker 2: You know, earliest memories are often prompted by evidence of photographs. I mean, I remember keenly, be--but a photograph prompts it, a picture of myself in a Halloween outfit at elementary school in kindergarten in Staten Island where we were living; Staten Island, New York, we living at the time. And I'm wearing a mask and a little frilly dress--I don't know what I was dressed as, but it was me and some other little kids. And I remember very keenly, like, the feel of the dress, the feel of the mask, the day that we took the picture. I remember keenly church, because we were at church every single Sunday, and we were like--I remember the dresses I wore, partly 'cause we were really so poor. We really--we lived in public housing when we lived in Buffalo, New York, for instance. And that's because there was not a parsonage that was fit for us to live in. And so when you grow up having lived in public housing, you know what poor is. You know what it's like when you can't get another pair of shoes, so you put some cardboard in them and you get scolded for doing hopscotch 'cause you've worn your shoes out faster than we can afford to replace them. You know what it's like to wear the same version of the same outfit to school most days of the week and be mocked for it by other little kids. And you know what it's like to, because we moved every couple of years, it's not like I grew up in one place and I can say I have a hometown that I think I identify with and I have a memory of that town, because we ended up going--making new friends everywhere we went. In some ways, that was a great thing looking back on it, because it taught me how to be thrown into any new environment and figure it out and befriend people. And that comes in handy in what I do and how I live. But also, it meant that we didn't have--form the kind of lasting friendship relationships from childhood that some people have that roots them. And we had to remake ourselves. Our best friends became each other, which is another reason why we're probably all so close. So few other people had exactly the same experiences we had and lived their lives in the way that we did. But I also think that we when you grow truly poor as opposed to theoretically poor or people who say, "Oh, we were poor but I never knew it," we knew it (laughter). We knew we were poor. We knew that we could only get one gift for Christmas or we knew that we had to eat everything on our plate because that was all there was. I mean, we were keen about it, but I don't think it defined us in a limiting way. It meant that there were things that we could get if we worked hard to get beyond that. And we had been exposed to just enough of it that we knew there was something else we could do, within limits, to get out of our poverty and out of our situation. Story_ID: 228694 Speaker 1: When you were born, was your family living in Staten Island [New York]? Speaker 2: I was born when we were living in Queens, New York [New York]. And then my father's [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] churches took him from Queens to Brooklyn [New York, New York]. We lived in Staten Island by time I was in kindergarten where my youngest brother [Richard Ifill] was born. We left Staten Island and moved to Buffalo, New York. Lived in Buffalo, New York, for four years. We actually lived in public housing in Staten Island, too, but it was nicer public housing, so it didn't feel so bad. We lived in Buffalo, New York, and then we moved to central Pennsylvania, and lived in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, when you were living in central Pennsylvania, how old were you then? Speaker 2: We moved to central Pennsylvania--we moved to--ten. We moved to Chambersburg when I was ten in fifth grade, and then we lived there for two years and then we moved to Steelton, Pennsylvania, which is just outside of Harrisburg [Pennsylvania]. My father was pastor at Monumental A.M.E. Church [Steelton, Pennsylvania] there, St. James [A.M.E.] Church [Chambersburg, Pennsylvania] in Chambersburg. And we went to Steelton and lived there for four years until my junior year in high school [Classical High School; Springfield Central High School, Springfield, Massachusetts]. We moved to Springfield, Massachusetts, where I went to Bethel AME Church [Springfield, Massachusetts], where I went to junior and senior year of high school, graduated from high school in Springfield and went to Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. So Springfield was a longer period of time. Speaker 2: Springfield was only two years for me. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: It was only my junior and senior year in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: My parents, however, lived there for many years after I went off to college. So I was still going home to Springfield for--they may have lived there ten years-- Story_ID: 228695 Speaker 1: So I want to take you back to your childhood, and I would like to have you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: I remember very keenly growing up, West Indian food. I remember codfish. Ugh, I hated it. I remember rice and peas all the time, because my father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] demanded that he had rice and peas every day. So even if we got a little macaroni and cheese on a special day, he still got his pot of rice and peas. It's the kind of thing you don't appreciate growing up, 'cause it's just always there, that kind of food. But only after I got away that now I smell it and I go, "Memories of--" you know. When we have Thanksgiving today, we may have the best gourmet food on the table, but we also have our fried plantains and our rice and peas because that's just who we are. And so I--and I also remember getting to--my father's closest brother, his only brother, Lester [ph.], had ten children. And so we all get together, and my father had another dear friend in Brooklyn [New York, New York] whose name was Cleveland Blazes [ph.], and he had children. And we would go to New York [New York], and we would just hang out with them at the holidays. The adults were always downstairs being loud, uproarious, playing games. We were always upstairs being loud, uproarious as much as we were allowed to. But, as a result, we bonded in a different way. It was a very, very deeply West Indian experience. The more they got around each other, the more they all fell back in the accents. And even though I was born here, I can hear it coming out with me. To this day, my cousins and I get together and we can--we create it, because it was such a--it was a kind of a seminal moment. And those are the moments which shaped me. I remember less keenly, probably--I don't know. I don't know if I'm different from the other children in my family this way. I probably am, but I remember less keenly the disappointing parts, the parts we were disciplined, and the parts with either of things we couldn't have or places we couldn't go. I remember being unhappy that we were being transferred from one school to another just when I thought I had finally made friends. But those parts don't stick with me as much, I guess, 'cause in the end I don't feel it hurt in the long run. I think it helped in the long run, even the things that I hated at the time. Story_ID: 228696 Speaker 1: What about you? How would you describe yourself as a young person? So you're next to the last child, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: So what are you--you know, I find that around that seven to eight year period are sort of formative, but what are you like around that time? Are you quiet? Are you-- Speaker 2: You know what's funny? I think of myself as quiet. But now I talk to people--when I got started working at the '[PBS] NewsHour,' I got a letter one day from my fourth-grade teacher, who I remember because she was my fourth-grade teacher. I remember her name. But she saw me on television and went back in her files and somehow was able to put her hand on two little workbooks that I'd written, one in which I said I wanted to be a ballerina. I don't remember this at all. But I recognized my handwriting and I recognized the workbook. And she said--she sent it to me, "I always knew you'd turn out to be something more." I don't know how she knew that, because a) I didn't think I was going to turn out to be all that; and b) how did she remember me all these years later, and how was she able to actually put her hands on it. I must have left an impression on her in a way that she was able to say, "[HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, I had that student." Out of all the students she had, I somehow stuck in her mind. So that tells me that I left an impression that I wasn't aware of. I thought of myself as an awkward and quiet and very serious child. I remember when JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot thinking to myself very profoundly, this is a big day, and I am witnessing history. I remember thinking this at nine years old and kind of processing it that way; not oh, my goodness. I don't know what's going on. I was very sober-minded about it. And I was a child who believed what people told me. If I was getting to the point where I didn't believe in Santa Claus anymore, my father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] would show me the newspaper that showed--they always had these phony pic--wire service pictures of the sleigh coming over the North Pole. And I saw that and it was in a newspaper. I thought it must be true. So I believed in Santa some more. But I also believed in it because I loved newspapers. And that was the beginning of my love affair with wanting to ask questions and write it all down. My brother also thought that our skepticism about Santa Claus was rooted in the fact that we lived in a high-rise building and we had no idea how he would get in; that maybe he was getting into the garbage chute. How did Santa get into our house? But that--we were enough to be skeptical about these things. But in the end, I decided I wanted to believe in him longer than I should, because I thought that was believing in possibility and I still am that way. Story_ID: 228697 Speaker 1: The family, the family structure. So are there chores to be done within the family? You know, what is the dinnertime? I mean, what are the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh we did all--did it all. I mean, there was not, obviously, anybody else around to take out the garbage or sweep the floor and wash the dishes. And we all had our turns. And it was divvied out. And the older we got, the more responsibility we got. I remember learning to cook by watching my mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] cook, but I didn't actually do the cooking. She did the cooking, and she wasn't a great--she was not really fond of cooking in the way that I am now. But I came to understand it was because she had to do it every day. It was chore to churn out three meals a day for that many people; whereas, I get to cook on an optional basis and for me it's more fun. So, once again, witnessing the way people live is more powerful than even what you are told to do, what you're expect--what's expected of you. Speaker 1: Now, church, let's talk--when did your father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] come to the ministry? That's--'cause you had said that he did some things before he (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: He was a minister before he became an African Methodist Episcopal [A.M.E.] minister. I can honestly not tell you what the date is of his ordination. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. But you were growing, you know, the--a minister's child. Speaker 2: Mm-mm. Speaker 1: So, tell me what are the expectations, and what are the, you know, what's happening within the household, and what is happening on the Sunday morning? Speaker 2: Oh, the expectations are incredibly high. It takes a village started with a preacher's kid somewhere, because there's a village out there watching everything you do, everything you say. In our community, there was no such thing as, oh, I can't touch that child because he's not mine. Everybody thought they had the right to discipline you if they saw you--much more so if you were the preacher's kid. You were supposed to be, and we were raised to be sober and act right and be right, and if we were misbehaving in church, my father thought nothing about calling us out by name from the pulpit, "Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwen Ifill], Roberto [Ifill], is there something you would like to share with the congregation." (Laughter) He would call us out. And so, you know, when that happens, you've been humiliated that way, and then there's the potential for a spanking once you get home that's harboring over your head, you learn how to just sit still and behave. So there was a lot of that. There was a lot of--my brothers were both acolytes, and they were in their robes and carrying the cross and being part of it. We were all members of the choir. We all became singers and musicians as result of being engaged in church activities. And, frankly, we weren't allowed to go hangout at kids' houses. We were not allowed to, you know, be in the street at all. So our only social outlet was church, whether it was Sunday school or the Young People's Division of the [Women's] Missionary Society [of the African Methodist Episcopal Church], or anything that we did, that was our entire--that was our entire social milieu. So this idea that somehow we wouldn't do it didn't happen. We just--we were raised strict, and that's what--and there're two ways the preacher's kids turn out; they either rebel against the strictness the minute they get out of the house or they stay disciplined. And pretty much, we all stayed disciplined. Speaker 1: All of you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Nobody really went crazy. Speaker 1: Now, the other thing I have a question about, when--what songs remind you of--I know you're still in the A.M.E. church-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --but what songs remind you of church back then, you know, in your father's church? Speaker 2: You know, I--my father was a high-church kind of guy. We were not, like--we're not Baptists, please. We are not Pentecostal. We were A.M.E.'s, and so we sang a lot of high-church anthems. To this day, when I--there are certain songs I'll sing lustily in church because it reminds me of the kinds of songs that we would sing. 'Am I a Soldier of the Cross?' "The Power of the Lamb. And, Would I blush to own His cause, or something, to hear his name." [sic. "A follower of the lamb? And shall I fear to own His cause, or blush to speak His name?"] I just--these songs were the songs that remind me of that. Only as I became an adult did I become members of churches which were far more rollicking, gospel, drum-driven, horn section; and that's the kind of worship I enjoy now. But the worship that we had when I was growing up was very much anthem driven; the senior choir singing 'Jerusalem,' and these big anthems. And I still enjoy them now, but that was what we got. My father played the organ. At his funeral, we sang the Hallelujah Chorus [from 'Messiah' George Frideric Handel], I mean, we did it all out, because that's who he was and that's how we were conditioned to be. Speaker 1: I think I read someplace where he would come out of the pulpit and help direct the choir (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. All the time. He would direct the choir, he would play the organ, he would sing a solo if he had to, and then preach. He did it all. He was a very musical--we would sit around the table in our house, we played dominos a lot. That's another seminal message of my childhood. We played a lot of board games and family games. And we would play dominos in a vicious, vicious way. But when we sat around the table, we would often start singing. My mother would be alto, I would be soprano, my brother would sing tenor, my father would sing bass. So we would sing in harmony as we played or as we did anything. And those--that's--those are memories actually I kind of miss the most. Story_ID: 228698 Speaker 1: We were talking about the hymns or the hymns of the [African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.)] church. Are there any roles that--I mean, I'm just trying to understand, because, you know, you hear about preachers' kids. Are there, like--what are the dynamics behind--are you expected to have, you know, the candle lights and, you know, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. We're expected to be active in the church. I don't know that that's the same any more. I can tell you the church I go to I've been going to for years, I don't think I even know my minister's kids at all. But we were raised in a way in which we were expected to be an extension of his ministry. No question. Story_ID: 228699 Speaker 1: The [African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.)] church, is it African American or is it more Caribbean focused, the churches that your father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] is running? Speaker 2: Oh, it's very African American. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me about, though, your--the messaging, if there was messaging around your Caribbean ancestry, and--or did that--you know, because a lot of times (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I think my sister [Maria Ifill Philip] and I would disagree about this. I think of myself pretty clearly, straightforwardly as an African American. She thinks of herself as an Caribbean American and resists the notion of defining--at defining herself by race or skin color. I don't care. I've--I mean, she knows she's black. I mean, she's not in any kind of denial, but she doesn't like that term African American. She feels--I think she feels that a race is a part of her--authentic part of her heritage, because she was born in Barbados. I was born here, and my socialization all was here, and the churches we were raised in were all here; and so my experience was, I feel, authentically African American to the extent it was anything. And that's-I never--we never had a lecture where, "Don't forget your Caribbean heritage." We never got anything like that. In fact, the key to immigration in those days was assimilation. It was being as much like the world around you as anything. And this idea of basically being culturally bilingual, even though that happened, we all do that. We all speak one way in public and speak another way around our family and friends. But it wasn't anything that was driven home as a point that we had to adhere to. Story_ID: 228700 Speaker 1: Do you remember one of your father's [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] moves, you know, being particularly hard on you? Speaker 2: Probably the most difficult one, he went to--when he moved to Pennsylvania from Buffalo, New York, he had to go ahead of us because he had assigned--was assigned to a couple of almost mission churches in Pennsylvania, and there was no place for us to live. So we stayed behind in Buffalo [New York] for, I don't know long it was, at least a year, while he moved off-- Speaker 1: You know what year this was? Speaker 2: We moved--we left Buffalo in 1965. So probably between '64 [1964] and '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And that was fine just because your mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] is feeling the burden of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We were just separated. That's all. Speaker 1: Separated. Okay. Okay. Now, are you--who are you close--who were you closer to growing you're your father is stern. Are you more--is your mother the one you're closer to or not? Speaker 2: It was really situational. I think--I don't know. I think that because my mother was around all the time, I probably was closer to her; and my father was, you know, you hear the gravel in the driveway, you know that Dad is home, and everybody would. No, he didn't like us listening to music in the house, and so if you were listening to the radio, he would turn it off the--you turned it off before he got in. I mean, there was very much--he was very much the disciplinarian and the stern, strict one. But I also remember him as being incredibly loving. So it wasn't that we weren't close, just that there was a different nature in both relationships. Story_ID: 228701 Speaker 1: So would you say that you lived in your head some? That's what I'm just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think we all lived in our heads some. I think that's part of what happens when you're--I mean, we were smart kids. My brother and I were the closest, my brother, Roberto [Ifill] and I are the closest because we're closest in age, but also we just had the same experience--he's brilliant. So I would follow behind him in his classes, and his professors would go, "Really, you're related to him?" He's the economics Ph.D. in the family, so he's very smart. And, but yet we had shared the same experiences growing up. If we--one of us came home without the other, we were scolded. We were supposed to walk home together, go to school together. And if we were seen separate, someone along the way would have reported it to my mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] before we got home. So, as a result, we lived in our heads because we were close to one another, but also because when you don't have friends outside the family, as many friends outside the family, you find a way to entertain yourself. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: We read a lot. Speaker 1: So what were some of the books that you liked reading? Speaker 2: I liked reading adventure books involving girls, like Beverly Cleary had novels that I really liked because heroines were young girls who were doing kind of cool things. And that was--but I was not a Nancy Drew type, even though I don't even knew who Nancy Drew was. But I don't remember, for instance, growing up being exposed to that many books by African American authors or anything like that. We spent all our free time, because this is the place we were allowed to go, in the library. And we thought the library was this magic place, 'cause you could go, you could take all the books they would let you take, and you could actually take them with you, read them, bring them back. So we would--we would just scarf up as much reading material as we wanted to and stay there as long. All the way through high school [Classical High School; Springfield Central High School, Springfield, Massachusetts], the place where I would go--where I would escape or where I would--I wanted to be a librarian at one point. I decided that that was something I knew how to do. I figured out the Dewey Decimal System. And my first job in college [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] as a--my first work-study job was at the Boston Public Library [Boston, Massachusetts] where--and I discovered that I hated it (laughter). And I could not possibly do anything quite that docile. But I--libraries still live in my mind as this wonderful place to escape, where we were given permission to go. Story_ID: 228702 Speaker 1: When you are ten, you're living in where? Speaker 2: Chambersburg, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: But that's after--you were nine when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] died? Speaker 2: I was nine--let's see; 1963, well, maybe it was--yeah, I'd just turned--1963. I was eight when [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy died. And then--and Martin Luther King died when I was thirteen. Was I thirteen yet? I was still twelve. Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], I turned thirteen that year. Speaker 1: Okay, thirteen. Okay. Do you remember where you were when you got the news? Were you in school? Speaker 2: When King died? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. I think we heard about King at night, because he was giving--does that make sense? He gave the speech then night before. Speaker 1: Right. I thought it was. Speaker 2: And then he died the next day on the--so where would I have heard about that? I was twelve, I was in Steelton [Pennsylvania] by then. Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's funny. I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. But do you remember Kennedy died--? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --where you were? Okay. Speaker 2: I was in third grade. That's funny I remember that so much more keenly. I remember that because I--they let us out of school early, and know-it-all that I was, I told--all the little kids were saying, "Oh, we heard that they broke into the White House [Washington, D.C.] and shot President Kennedy." And I said, "No, they didn't, 'cause I heard this morning on 'The Today Show' ['Today'] that he was going to Dallas [Texas], so it can't be true." Well, turns out both things were true. Parts of both things were true, and what strikes me that I remember so keenly about it was my father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] crying on the couch when we got home, and I'd never seen him cry. And that made--that's why I was having these deep thoughts, because I remember thinking to myself, this is a big deal if Dad is crying. And I remember--I'm going to go back. I'm going to carve up back the memory about King, because that doesn't make sense, 'cause he was shot and we didn't know he died right away. We didn't know he died--or what am I thinking about? Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy]. I remember someone waking me up and telling me about Bobby Kennedy too. Anyway. Speaker 1: So when he--so the reason I'm asking this line of questions because, you know, you described your father as very, you know, much a race man and so I'm wondering what discussions, you know, that he was also, I think, calling--talking about things from the pulpit--I'm not- Speaker 2: He wore a dashiki in the pulpit. My father was a race theology man, and he had no problem with preaching about that. He also--you know, people forget that when King died, his most-his, his glory days were almost behind him, in that people had started going, Really? I remember my father taking us to Washington [D.C.] to see Resurrection City and to take us around a tour of the camp, which was, at the time, one of the last vestiges of the glory days of the Civil Rights Movement, when they just basically took over the [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.], something that would never happen now, or maybe that's what Occupy Wall Street is about now, in which they just--they said this is the poor people's march [Poor People's Campaign], and we're going to remind you there are poor people in America and the problems haven't been solved yet. And my father purposely put us in front of that to see it, to be clear that we were aware that this movement was still going on, that this struggle wasn't over, and that it was a responsibility inherent in the fact that the struggle continued. But the struggle wasn't completely around King at that moment. I mean King's assassination refocused our minds on what the struggle had been. We had begun to move away from it a little bit, and there were more charismatic, sexier leaders who were on the horizon at that point. But when he was killed, all of a sudden it kind of--it braced you. All of a sudden it refocused your mind on what this had all been about and what had been accomplished and what had not yet been accomplished. I mean, he was--he was down there on behalf striking garbage workers. That wasn't--we weren't--we had looked away. We weren't looking at that. We were shocked to hear he was even in Memphis [Tennessee]. What are you--what was he doing in Memphis? We didn't even know anymore. Story_ID: 228703 Speaker 1: So what's the discussion occurring around the dining room table? Are you--'cause I remember, you know, in our household there was, you know, all these things were sort happening; you know and your parents [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr. and Eleanor Husbands Ifill] were discussing it, and so I'm just wondering is that--how are you being formed? You know, how is your mind being formed about events, you know, that are occurring in the world at a time that, you know, you're young but very aware of what-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But part of it is we really read the newspaper every day, and we watched the news every night. So, part of the reason I'm a journalist today is 'cause I remember we got the afternoon paper, I remember reading it. Every place we lived, we got the newspaper. We read it. We were--we took it in. I loved the idea that someone somewhere was asking questions and getting their name on a story and to tell the story. And then we watched '[The] Huntley-Brinkley [Report]' growing up. I mean, we were very keenly aware of what was happening in the world around us, and when we would talk about it at the table. And then my father would throw provocative ideas onto the table so that we could fight with him about it, so that we could--I don't think we were even conscious of that's what he was doing at the time. He would say something outrageous, and we'd say, "That's not true." But it would force you to think through what you believed and backup your arguments. So we, you know, my brother was a star on the debate club. I don't think it's an accident that he knew how to debate, because he learned how to do it at the table. And we all, in that sense, still kind of do that when we get together at Thanksgiving. We still talk about current events. We still--everyone still has to be a little bit literate about that and we find a way to be. Story_ID: 228704 Speaker 1: --What are those discussions about in the family? Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting. I guess, I was the one who wanted an afro, but my parents [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr. and Eleanor Husbands Ifill] weren't for that. They thought that as a little bit much. On the other hand, we really were encouraged to talk Africa, and we really did wear dashikis, and we really were aware of this--all the events surrounding blackness in America. I mean, I don't think you get to be kind of self-aware as a black person unless you find another way to debate these issues. I mean, it's one of the reasons why people say to me now, "Oh, I'd like to be colorblind." And I tell them, "Well, then you must be blind because here's my color. And the only reason you have a problem with it is if you think it's negative," which usually causes them to go "Oh, well, yeah." Because if it's a positive, you'd like to talk about it, right? And I think I got that very profoundly by being taught without a whole lot of rhetoric, that what I was was a good thing. And that we, in spite of America's disenchantment with us on so many levels, could achieve here--you know, like, my parents were great patriots. They--my father was very much an Africanist in that way but, he was a great patriot and loved to sing patriotic songs and anthems, and he could belt them out. But he also was keenly disappointed in all of the things we couldn't be or were denied in this country. So it's always to me been a line that, if that's possible to walk, to be proud of your country and dedicated to it and patriotic and still push it to do more and to live up to its ideals. Story_ID: 228705 Speaker 1: So in junior high, you are where? At what-- Speaker 2: In junior high, I'm in Steelton, mostly in Steelton, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: In Steelton, Pennsylvania. Okay. Now, how large is Steelton? It's this-- Speaker 2: Ten thousand. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the time. I don't know what it is now. Speaker 1: Okay. And the black population there? Speaker 2: (Snaps) Very little. But there was a big steel plant there. And because there was a big steel plant there, which has now since closed, it was actually a source for a lot of work for African Americans. So there was an [Benevolent and Protective Order of the] Elks Lodge, and there were multiple black churches, and there were black funeral homes, and there was a robust black community. But we were used to going to schools where we were not in the majority, and that was the case--every place we lived. Speaker 1: Okay. And what kind of student are you at this point? Speaker 2: I'm--I was always kind of a solid B student. My brother was the A student, I was the B student. Speaker 1: And, now, when you then--are there any subjects that you're--you know, gravitating towards more? Speaker 2: Anything that involved writing and anything that involved logic, I was pretty good at languages. But anything that involved arithmetic or math, I ran the other way. And to this day, most journalists I know don't do math for reasons. None of us can balance our checkbooks because numbers completely alienate us. So I was always drawn to creative subjects. Speaker 1: Now, and then you leave Steelton and then you go to Springfield [Massachusetts], right? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So in Springfield, do you--is there anything in terms of your development there? And, you know, both--you were there for when you're--your junior and senior-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember--my brother and I always say that if we had not moved to Springfield, then we would have probably ended up with completely different educational profiles, because it--the expectations for us were greater in the New England school, where you were exposed to the Ivy League and exposed to a different kind of scholarship. And it was, in Central Pennsylvania, where if you were really, really, really good, you could go to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania]. So we, which there's nothing wrong with Penn State, but we did-- Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was never considered to be even within our reach. So when I got to Springfield, I remember one of the couple of things about Springfield. One of them was that it was actually riot there when I was in high school [Classical High School; Springfield Central High School, Springfield, Massachusetts], and my father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] was somehow involved in it--not involved in the race riot, but involved in trying to calm it down. And I remember it coming right to steps of our high school. So there was a lot of--the tensions were real, still even then; by now, 1970, '72 [1972]. But the other thing I remember about Springfield is that I had a guidance counselor, who, when I said I wanted to apply to college, said, "Mm, okay. Yeah. Well, whatever." He dis--actively discouraged me from applying to anything beyond the state's school, which I would automatically be accepted to. I always call it to this day, my Mr. McDuffy [ph.] rule, because Mr. McDuffy basically suggested to me and to my brother [Roberto Ifill], who went on to go to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], but he suggested to both of us that we should set our sights a little lower; that perhaps we aren't the kind of people who could succeed in those environments. And we knew enough to walk away from him and to go seek what we wanted anyway, and not to believe it when someone told us we couldn't achieve--the only place we could learn that was at home. That's the only place we could have learned it. I think frequently if young black kids were told that every single day (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Right Speaker 2: --and don't have the home upbringing to tell them, no, to walk away from that discouragement. And so for that reason, if nothing else, my parents didn't have to preach it to us, they lived it. And we knew when to resist someone else's implication that we were not something enough. And that's why when I got accepted to Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts], which is where I wanted to go--it was my first choice, it was my last choice, I'm still stunned to this day that I only applied to two colleges (laughter), and somehow got into my first choice, and they gave me a full scholarship 'cause we had no money; we had no money. I made more money in a week than my father made in a year. And when we got to Boston [Massachusetts]--when I got to Boston, my brother went Dartmouth, it was a brand-new world open to us all of a sudden; not only of education, but of the kinds of people we met and the kinds of libraries we could go to. Story_ID: 228706 Speaker 1: Why was Simmons [College, Boston, Massachusetts] your first choice? And how did you even learn of Simmons? Speaker 2: I learned of Simmons because by then I knew I wanted to be a journalist. I'd wanted to be a journalist since I was nine years old, and I discovered you could write and have a deadline and someone would put your name on it and publish it. I just thought that was very exciting. And I'd realized that I was--I didn't think I was inventive enough to write fiction, so I wanted to write what I saw and what was around me. So by the time I got to college, I was thinking of where I wanted to go to school, I only looked at colleges for journalism programs. And I wanted to be away from home but not too far away from home. Boston [Massachusetts] is about an hour and a half from Springfield [Massachusetts], so I knew I could get home if I wanted to, but I wanted to live away. I was a little hesitant to go to a women's college because I thought that would be kind of a drag. In retrospect, it was great, because I went to a women's college in a robust city where, if I wanted to go out and party a little bit with dudes, they were just down the street. Well, no. They would come and find us, actually, at Simmons. And--but the beautiful thing about going to women's college ultimately, is we got to be the lead in everything. We were the heads of the organizations, we were the ones whose hands went up in class, we were--women hear us roar. This was the '70s [1970s]. And, as a result, we never felt like anybody was putting limitations on us or that we had to shrink, become shrinking violets 'cause the guys were running everything. And, as a result, I think--I run into people all the time who I went to college with who went to other women's colleges, and we all agree that being in a women's college put us in an environment where we were prepared to lead in a way that didn't have to be beating it home. We just knew the expectations were there. Speaker 1: So who is the [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill who arrives on Simmons, you know, Simmons campus, and what is the campus that you arrive onto, you know? Speaker 2: I'm on a small urban campus, I have a big afro by then because my mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] finally let me do it, I am skinny, I am completely unaware of the world in that I don't know that many people; I don't know how to hangout; we didn't party, so I wasn't like--I couldn't hang out with the black kids that much; they gave me a roommate who was a couple years older than me, so I didn't make friends in that (unclear). By the time I got through my freshman year of college, all the black kids I found later thought I was snooty and didn't want to hang out with them when, in fact, the only kids I knew were the ones in my immediate dorm and my major, who were all the white girls. So I did something about that, and I moved into what was known as the black dorm, which is to say five black kids lived there, 'cause there weren't that many (laughter), but I made a whole new set of friends. Speaker 1: So what year is this? Speaker 2: This is my soph--this is the second-half of my freshman year, '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, you moved into--okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I made friends who I've made for life and, but it wasn't an either/or. I didn't think you had to only be friends with white kids or friends with black kids. I got to know everybody and got to get involved in groups like the singing--our glee club and other things, which allowed me to cross all kinds of lines, as well as the Black Students' Organization. We would do it all. And for a lot of African Americans students at this and other colleges, it was a complete culture shock to go to a majority white environment that had grown up in mostly black schools. But for me, because I had not, I knew how to cross the lines. At my weekends at church, there were all black folk, and my weekends at schools were mostly white folks, but it all came together. Speaker 1: Which is an advantage really that you knew both worlds. Speaker 2: It is an advantage. But I had to learn from scratch a lot of stuff. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Like, you know, how to hang. How to hang out with the black kids and really know--learn all the lyrics and figure out how to be, and I had to learn how to date. My father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] didn't let us date. I had to learn a lot of things when I got to college. So it was a crash course in being a grownup. Story_ID: 228707 Speaker 1: So this is a freeing time [at Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] in many ways, which college is like that, you know, it's, you're- Speaker 2: As it should be. Speaker 1: Right. As it should be. So who, so you--first of all, I want to ask about how is Simmons' journalism program, and who did, you know, who are your mentors in the pro--what teachers? I know-- Speaker 2: Simmons had a communications program (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but no, it was a part of it, journal--they also considered communications to be graphic design and public relations, and so I knew I wanted to be a newspaper reporter, but I decided to--but they had an internship program, so I could try different internships. So I tried an internship in advertising, I didn't like it. I tried an internship in P.R. [public relations] and I didn't like it. I tried an internship in television and I really hated it, which tells you how life comes around. And then I tried my first job in a newsroom and I knew that's where I wanted to be. My first job actually working in a newsroom was at the Boston--the Bay State Banner, which is a black newspaper. You didn't get paid for this, but you got to show up and be in--and write things and be in a newsroom environment. And I got a sense of the rhythm of that. And then my first paying job in a newsroom was when I worked at the Boston Herald American [Boston Herald] which later became my first job. Speaker 1: So now are these internships--are they during the school year, are they during the summer? Speaker 2: The Boston Herald was during the summer, the others were during the school year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they partly were for credit. Speaker 1: Now who owned the Bay State Banner? Speaker 2: Mel Miller [HistoryMaker Melvin Miller]. Still does. Still does. And so, and still takes complete credit for my career, which--he's fine. That's fine. He can. And--but I--but my mentor at Simmons was a professor by the name of Alden Poole, who was a retired newspaperman, who would just come to class and tell us stories--wonderful romantic stories about the newsroom and had a very, kind of ruthless idea about how to teach us what journalism was, which is, I'll give you all the facts, you tell me what the lead of the story is, and you get an A or an F. There is no in-between. You're either right or you're wrong. Well, experience has taught me there's a lot of in-betweens. There is no just right or wrong way to tell it, but it was a very good and focusing way to teach young people how to take a lot information and distill in a way that was understandable to a non-native speaker, as it were. And so I learned a lot from him, and I learned, and he'll tell you to this day, "I didn't know how she was going to turn out when I first saw her. She really wasn't that good at the start." But you know, I learned then and now you can always make yourself better. Story_ID: 228708 Speaker 1: What other things are happening with you during the college [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] years, though, you know, that you're sort of developing or experiences you have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stuff I can't talk about, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I'm not going you--I'm not going to tell it all (laughter). Well, you assumed I was a different person when I left than when I got there (laughter). Okay. It was just, you know, stuff (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. So, now, let me ask you, were you active in any organizations? Speaker 2: I was active. And we had a--we not only had a black student union, but we also had a black student newsletter called Vantage Point, and which I was the editor of. And we asked--we also started our own alternative yearbook called Our Little Black Book, which I thought was very clever, in which we just put out our own little yearbook just with artfully taken pictures of all the sisters on campus with longer explanations of who we were, what we wanted to be, which was almost like a marketing tool in some respects because it was just us. And I don't even know how we paid for that. I don't know how we did that, but we--I don't even know how we knew to do that, but it was a nice bonding experience for all of us. And everybody was included, whether you were involved in the Black Students Organization or not. Speaker 1: Now many were there? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. Gosh. In our class, forty? Twenty? I don't remember. Speaker 1: How large is Simmons? Speaker 2: Simmons was, then, about 4,500 students. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It's not that big. And our graduating classes, I don't think, were ever more than about four hundred, so. Story_ID: 228709 Speaker 1: What year, though, do you work at the Boston Herald [American; Boston Herald] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got my first--my internship at the Boston Herald the summer of 1976, because I remember it was the bicentennial and I worked in the photo department, and they had--we were taking all these wonderful photographs of tall ships coming into the harbor, and I was the kid who sat in the darkroom and developed the film. And we still used to process actual film. And I was thrown on them because they had no--they had no interest in having the little black girl come on. They knew nothing about me. I was a complete alien experience to them, an educated black woman. And so I learned--knew instinctively that the job was to put them at their ease with me. I was new to them. And so we got along great. We were like a house afire, it was fine, I did whatever they asked. I was a good little copy; you go for this, you go for that. And this was news from where there were no black people. And even when I was hired there eventually, there were one or two of us. And so it was--and it was a throwback in lots of ways. It was the '70s [1970s], but it still felt like the news from the '50s [1950s]. It was Hearst newspaper. Guys were still wearing starched white shirts, smoking cigars and saying, "Honey, get me rewrite." I mean, it was a throwback, which I'm very grateful for now, because I wouldn't have never lived that, because every other newspaper was more modern. But what was also not modern about it was they--I was--the Herald newsroom then and now was right at the border of South Boston [Massachusetts]. We were right at the end of the busing crises and there was so much tension in Boston [Massachusetts] at the time. There were rocks being thrown. If you were a white person in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], somebody might throw rock at you. If you were a black person in South you were likely, they'd have had something else thrown at you. And there were riots every day at the high schools. And I remember walking to class at Simmons [College, Boston, Massachusetts], we walked right past [The] English High School [Boston, Massachusetts], which was right in Boston, Latin high school [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts], which was right on the way to my academic campus, and seeing riot police every day and tear gas. So it was a very tense time. So it's not surprising that it should have leaked into the newsroom as well, because I was, once again, alien. But I was getting along fine, and I came to work one day and there was a little note at my little workspace someone had left me, helpfully, that said, "Nigger go home." And when I saw that note, I remember thinking to myself, okay. Wonder who this is for? Because I'd been raised in a way that nobody would have called me that name, so this couldn't be for me. And it's interesting to me, thinking back on it, that that was my first response, 'cause that told you a lot about who I was; but my second response was, oh, this must be for me. But I'm not going to go on a corner and cry. I'm not going and angrily complain. So I kind of innocently walked to my boss and said, "Look what I found." Now, he was horrified. His boss was horrified. His boss' boss was horrified. And part of the reason they were horrified, I realized instantly, was because they knew who had done it. And that it was an older guy who was retiring, who they didn't want to fire. So rather than getting my, you know, marching on the place and getting upset about it, I just sat there and waited for them to respond. And their response was to over-respond. "We are so sorry this happened. Don't know how it could have happened. If you ever need a job, just come and see us." Now, I was about to graduate from college without a job. But I thought I'll never go work for these racists because I can do better. Well, I couldn't do better. There were nobody hiring--there was nobody hiring journalists out of college that year. So I ended up going back to the Herald and saying, "Did you say you had a job?" And they gave me an entry-level job, which I learned an important lesson, which I tell college students today, which is, doesn't matter how you get in the door, it's what you do once you get in there. 'Cause I could have easily taken that job, walked in, flubbed it, and they would have said, "See. Ya' see. We tried to hire a black girl. Ya' see." Instead, I used it as an opportunity to write, to get--to take the first writing job they offered, which was writing about food, which I knew nothing about but I learned about. I learned how to cook and learned how to do it really well. And I learned how to take what was a negative environment and use it to my advantage to take the next steps I needed to take, which in that case was to get the heck out of Boston. Speaker 1: Now, did the--so you immediately, when you graduate, you have a job? Speaker 2: I do. Story_ID: 228710 Speaker 1: Can you talk about graduation day [from Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Shirley Chisholm was our speaker. Shirley Chisholm was our speaker. I don't know how that happened. I remember my graduation day because I remember my father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] wearing a white leisure suit with a red shirt and a white tie. I remember everyone--my brothers being there, everybody being very proud and that I was especially proud because our commencement speaker was an African American woman. I went back and looked up her speech when I was writing my book, because I thought to myself she must have said something profound. And when I went back and found it, I realized she hadn't actually said anything that profound. In fact, reading it now, it reads like it was a stump speech that she had and she just--with no acknowledgement of the crowd she was speaking to. So it wasn't about what she said. It was the fact of her presence, which I was so blown away by. And it made me--I had an outsized experience of my own graduation because of that. Speaker 1: Well, I mean, she was a big deal then, back then. Speaker 2: She was-- Speaker 1: And it's a woman's-- Speaker 2: --she had just run for president a few years ago. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so this was the big deal. And on a women's college campus? Was a big deal. Story_ID: 228711 Speaker 1: And I want to understand, the Boston Herald [American; Boston Herald] is no small joke either. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But, who is there--are there black reporters there at the time, and who are they, and--? Speaker 2: There were very few black reporters there at the time, but I do remember very keenly there was a guy by the name of Lewis Ogleby [ph.] who worked for the Christian Science Monitor, who saved my job. The first time I got finally off of writing about foods to writing about the schools and covering riots by phone so I didn't have to actually go into the riot zone in South Boston [Massachusetts], I went to cover a school committee meeting, my very first assignment as a serious, straight ahead reporter, and they were speaking in horrible bureaucratese. I remember [Elvira] "Pixie" Palladino and Louise Day Hicks and all of the people from the heydays of the anti-busing movement. And I also remember them doing something, and then everybody getting up and running out of the room. And I had no idea what it was. And Lewis, God bless him, must have seen me sitting there looking completely flummoxed and stopped and said, "They just fired the superintendent. You might want to go file a story." (Laughter) And I looked--was terrified 'cause I completely missed it. I didn't understand the verbiage. And I ran back to the office, wrote a story, and it as page one of the paper the next day. So he saved my career, 'cause, literally, if I had missed that story, I would not have had that job anymore. And over the years, and Lewis just died last year--over the years, I've always credited him in many respects, and I always think about that myself when I see young black reporters in new environments. I think, do they look like they need a hand? Do they look like they need a nudge? Do they look like they need a tip? Because I remembered myself being that kid who just didn't know what was going on around me or didn't appreciate it. Story_ID: 228712 Speaker 1: And you know, Boston [Massachusetts] was, it was a tough place. I was very involved in my church. It was St. Paul AME Church in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. And we were a rocking, rocking congregation, and it was a lot of young people who were black students who were at college campuses scattered around the country--the city, and part of the reason why we bonded there was because it was the place we could go where they could see us, and where the old, older black folk of the church would take us home for rice and gravy or would, you know, we recognized the rhythms of the church and of the music and of the worship. And that gave us a place to be home once a week and then send us back out into the kind of craziness of the world. It gave us a--causes to be behind. I remember [Bishop] John [Richard] Bryant, who was the pastor then, is now an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] bishop in Chicago [Illinois]. He was--he started a fundraiser for the Sahel. It was the first time that we started talking about drought in Ethiopia, and he had this 24-hour fast where we would raise money for this cause. And so we were taught to be about something beyond ourselves. And it gave us and it took us beyond our weird, little academic, often Ivy League bubbles. And as a result, once again, I made lifetime friends there. Story_ID: 228713 Speaker 1: --Where are you living though in Boston [Massachusetts]? I mean, when you're working at the-- Speaker 2: I lived a couple of different places the way all ex-students do. I lived in a group apartment when I first got out of college [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] with three other women, and then I moved into another roommate situation, and then I moved into an apartment by myself, and then I moved in--you know, we just moved all over. Speaker 1: Okay. So you--you said--so when you did that article that appeared on page one [of the Boston Herald American; Boston Herald], are you--how long had you been at the paper at this point? Speaker 2: A year. Speaker 1: A year? And so tell me what happens after that? Speaker 2: I was only there three years all together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Even though--well, there were three seminal years, you know, and I learned how to be a newspaper reporter. I learned-- Speaker 1: What does that mean? Speaker 2: That means that I learned how to tell the facts in a succinct and smart way and to do it on deadline. I learned how to understand when politics is everything. I didn't cover politics per se the way we think of politics, which is running out and covering a campaign. I covered the politics of whether children get educated or not. And I remember doing a series in which I compared a fifth-grade classroom in the suburbs to a fifth-grade classroom in the inner city, and the kinds of resources the really rich white kids have gotten, the kind of resources that little black didn't, and the difference in the academic achievement. And I got to tell stories that way which were important. So by the time I left Boston and moved to Baltimore [Maryland] for a job that was more strictly politics covering, city hall and covering Maryland politics, I understood the underpinnings of so many of these arguments, and to this day to me that tells me a lot, which is every decision that gets made that affects your life, every one that doesn't, at its root it's driven by politics. Whether you like it or not, that--the trading, the reasonable, the trade-offs--all of that affects whether people get to school or not. It affects whether people get to live in homes or not. It affects whether people get up in the morning and they--something's wrong and they get treatment or not. Life and death. And it's all affected by little "p" politics. So I really got into covering politics in the conventional sense, but also what drives my coverage to this day is this idea that politics drives everything we do and what kind of people we are. And that's where I learned that. Speaker 1: But when your story ends up on page one, that is a big deal for someone who's a puppy reporter, no? Speaker 2: Only because--in that case, it was a story that drove it, not the reporter. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: The superintendent got fired, and I was the reporter covering it-- Story_ID: 228714 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you're learning at the [Boston] Herald [American; Boston Herald]? You know, Boston Herald that would sort of--you know, where less-- Speaker 2: That's pretty much it (laughter). Speaker 1: No. That's it. Okay. Okay. So how do you get--how do you end up leaving Boston [Massachusetts] and going to-- Speaker 2: I, like many people who grew up in Boston as a student and then an adult, wanted--just wanted to move on. I just was ready to do something else. And the way that newspaper business worked was you took--if I could--television is the same way. You just move from bigger market to bigger market and try to get a better job. So when I got a chance to come to Baltimore [Maryland], I took it. I didn't know a soul in Baltimore. I knew nothing about Baltimore. I just knew that the paper had decent reputation. I ended up working for the Baltimore Evening Sun [The Evening Sun; Baltimore Sun], which no longer exists, but the beauty of working for an afternoon paper is that you learned how to write fast, because our deadlines were ten in the morning instead of nine at night. And so we would get up early, we would write the stories as fast as possible or stay up late to write the story for the next afternoon's paper, and hope that you weren't duplicating what had been in the morning paper. It was a strange setup at the Baltimore Evening and Morning Sun [The Sun; Baltimore Sun], 'cause we shared a newsroom, but your competitors were literally across the room from you. So if they got and ran from the room, you would get nervous. What story do they have? I mean, you competed in that way. But we were also kind of an afternoon paper, so we were feistier, and we thought of ourselves as being kind of a little looser and they were stiff and snooty over in Morning Sun. So we had a lot of fun. We were all in our, you know, late-twenties, and just happy to work around the clock. And since I was in the city, I didn't know anybody. That was fine, too. So I worked there for three years, and that's where I covered--I learned how to cover city hall, I learned how to cover the state house, and learned, kind of, how to work the room and get--and tell the story in a different way. Speaker 1: But that's what I want to know. What does that mean, learning how, because at this point, you--reporters who cover politics, a lot of times there's a certain location that you're there, you know, there's a certain time, you know, to be there--the press conferences is to be covered. Speaker 2: Yeah. But that's just--that's just doing a job. The part that's --that you have to learn--I mean, if all you have to do is show up at a press conference, that's not hard. The part is knowing how to talk to people and how to get people to tell you things, and how to go behind what it is that people want to tell you. At a press conference, they're telling you what they want to tell you. It's nice and very prestigious to sit in the front row at a presidential press conference. But frankly, that's not where you're getting your most insightful stories. You're getting your insightful stories from what you find out before and after that press conference. And in order to do that, you have to know how to ask a question, and you know how--know how to listen for the answer. You have to know how to be trustworthy enough that people will tell you things, and will tell you things sometimes in ways that you can't use them right then, but it can inform you later. Learning how to do that from covering school committees, covering, you know, dog catchers' races, covering mayors' races, covering congressional testimony; all of that is what I think informed me by the time I got around to covering the White House [Washington, D.C.]; the beats, they're considered to be prestige beats, because you still need the basics. And the basics are not about what the schedule is. The basics are about how do you know instinctively that this is a story? How do you know to listen for it? And the only way you'll know that is the experience of having done it. The experience of having talked to the mother a little boy who was killed on the street in Boston, tells me how to listen to someone who's grieving twenty years later, who's lost someone in Afghanistan. You'll have a different way, and each of those things, which don't seem like a big deal at the time, train you for the stories later on. Story_ID: 228715 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about the Baltimore [Maryland] and what you're learning about the city, and what the city was at that time, because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Which is always-- Speaker 1: --the mayor is, the mayor was-- Speaker 2: White. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The mayor was William Donald Schaefer. He just died last year. He was larger than life. He had--he's the one who created the Harborplace [Baltimore, Maryland], this downtown development that completely revitalized the city. But while the city for tourists was still this sparkling destination, not very far away from it, there were still schools that were struggling, there was still crime-ridden neighborhoods. And that's something he was never able to tackle in years as mayor. And as a result, he felt put off when he was asked about things that were not the great successes. He loved to take the credit for the great successes and get dressed up in costumes. He was quite a character and kind of essential to learning how to cover characters later. You know, people way--later say to me, "How do you cover so-and-so?" And I say, "Oh, you never covered Don Schaefer. He was the--." You know, this is guy even crazy. You should said covered him, because you under--'cause he was not only kind of wacky, but he also got stuff done. And so you had to learn the balance of that. I learned probably from covering people like that, how to now make assumptions about the people I cover. When I covered my first presidential campaign--I'm leaping ahead, I know--but someone said to me, "Oh, what's it like to go cover those [Marion Gordon] "Pat" Robertson people?" or like they say now today, "Rick Santorum people." Well, I find the people at the rallies are all really interesting people who have lives that they want someone to speak to. And after a while, you have to go into every conversation with them not saying, "Isn't it true that...." But saying, "Tell me what is moving you?" "Tell me what about this speaks to you?" And you learn that from covering lots of different kinds of people. If I was only able to walk into a room where black people are and talk to black people and have them trust me and talk back to me, I'd be a failure. Same thing if I could only walk into a room of people who are not like me and talk to them, I've got to somehow be the kind of reporter and listener who can get anyone to take me seriously and listen. And that's something which is a continuing experience, which comes from all of your accumulated opportunities. Speaker 1: The Baltimore that you're in there, who is active in the community? So you're covering city hall. Is [HistoryMakers] Kurt Schmoke at that place? Speaker 2: He was not mayor until after I left. Speaker 1: No. But he--wasn't he (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: He was attorney--he was a district attorney. I didn't cover--I didn't state's attorneys. Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't do that. Okay. Okay. And the Murphys and the (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The Murphys ran for pres-[William H.] Billy Murphy, Jr. ran for mayor when I was covering city hall. And he challenged Don Schaefer. And Don Schaefer was--and the way we set it up was that I was somehow, I don't remember why I did this, but I covered both campaigns. And so the mayor, who was very put off by the idea that a black reporter was covering this black candidate, was convinced that I was biased in favor of the black candidate; whereas, the black candidate knew I covered the mayor and wondered if I wasn't selling out on behalf of the white candidates. So I walked a pretty thin and shaky line trying to be fair to both sides or at least be perceived as fair. I thought I was doing a pretty decent job. Schaefer was never in any danger by the Murphy threat because Billy Murphy was a pretty bad candidate, was never going to get elected city-wide. He was kind of ahead of his time--but--when it came to a black person being the first mayor. But Don Schaefer was so put off by this, I remember him yelling at me the day after the elections saying, "You know, you always talk to me like a school teacher," which I think he thought was a bad thing, which I didn't necessarily think was a bad, but I know what he was saying, is that he was--he found me--he was put off by me. He was scared by me. He found that I--he thought I was judging him and he hated that. And, you know, whatever. I just--I was--I remember that day I was suffering from lack of sleep, and I was very wounded by this. By the next day, I woke up, I was like, oh, okay, whatever, because I was just trying to do the job, and to do the job meant listening to all kinds of different people. In retrospect, I'm glad I got to cover both campaigns, since I did get to hear a lot from different parts of the community, which otherwise you don't get the opportunity to talk to. Story_ID: 228716 Speaker 1: After leaving the Baltimore Evening Sun [The Evening Sun; Baltimore Sun], that's when--how does the next opportunity come? Maybe that's what I should (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The next opportunity came, I was covering the Maryland State House [Annapolis, Maryland] by then and covering the governor. And I had--I don't remember how I heard about it--the opportunity to go interview for a job at The Washington Post. And the first time I interviewed for the job at The Washington Post I did not get it. I don't remember why, but I didn't. I remember going down there talking to people, and Alice Bonner, who at the time was a senior editor at The Post and was a black woman, she--I remember her taking me to lunch and saying, "The fact that I'm taking you to lunch means that they're not interested in hiring you, so we should just have a nice lunch here." And I thought, "Okay. I'll go back to my nice little job in Baltimore [Maryland]." But then the second time I came down, they had a clear job in mind for me which is going to cover Prince George's County [Maryland], which is was this suburban county outside of Washington [D.C.], which was just the--it was the place where all the great reporters at The Post came out of. Everybody had worked in P.G. County at some point. And it was full of roads and interesting people. And the county was in the throes of change, and I just loved working out there. I loved the people I talked to, people I got to know. It was, then and now, a hugely fast-growing community of middle-class blacks; something I hadn't covered before. And--but also it was a tipping point county. It was still 50-50 white, black, and there were still tobacco fields in the southern part of the county, and zoning issues were more important than abortion struggles. I mean, that's where the growth of county was where all the drama lay. And so I got to do that and still--and then go back and forth and cover the state legislature [General Assembly of Maryland] as well when I worked at The Post. I worked in Prince George's County for a couple of years. I probably covered every--except Virginia--I covered every suburban district. I covered Montgomery County [Maryland] and Prince George's County and the [Washington] D.C. government. I covered [HistoryMaker] Marion Berry when he was mayor, which was a whole 'nother layer of understanding. And he--it was before he had his great downfall, but after his glory days when he first came to power. And because I was covering a majority black city council and mayor, that was a completely new experience, and it was also this city hall of the city of the paper I was working for. Story_ID: 228717 Speaker 1: And I just want to get some sense of the time, [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], because this is, first of all, when you joined The Washington Post, it's 1984, you know. Now The Post is a very--you know it's a very good paper nationally. And so I'm wondering, I want to get--but also [Washington] D.C. is--you know, it's Chocolate City-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there's a lot happening; [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan's in office-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --right. So I just wanted to get your sense of-- Speaker 2: Well, I always wanted to move to Washington [D.C.]. I loved the idea of living in Washington. I didn't know anybody here either any more than I knew anybody in Boston [Massachusetts]--in Baltimore [Maryland]. But I thought, you know, I could really figure this place out. But for the first couple of years, working out in Prince George's County [Maryland], I didn't get the flavor of the city or of Chocolate City, or any of that. What I did get internally was, I arrived at The Post shortly after Janet Cooke had to give back her Pulitzer Prize. Janet Cooke was the black woman who was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for writing a series about a young crack addict, it's an eight-year-old crack addict that it turned out she invented. She had to give the prize back. It was a huge embarrassment, humiliation for The Washington Post, which is still sailing on its reputation as the newspaper that broke Watergate [Scandal] or brought down [President Richard Milhous] Nixon. So, I come in at a time when everybody is still in trauma because of this. And I don't think this has anything to do with me, right? Well, of course, it does. Because in the eyes of some people, I was the next black woman they had hired, and they wanted to know really was I what I thought I was. I remember going to an ethics meeting shortly after arriving, which they instituted for everyone on staff to tell them what kind of--and I had the sense the entire time the two senior editors were glaring at me now. In retrospect, who knows that they were, but I was incredibly intimidated by this idea that they kept saying, "And don't you do it to us too, young lady." And every African American woman, and especially, I know who worked at The Post felt that same pressure. We compared notes about it. We all felt like someone was looking at us much more closely because of the sense that we'd follow after Janet Cooke, even though Janet Cooke's lies and her fabrications, nothing to do with her race or her gender. But people will always not--to wannna not--want to relive the last fight. So that just meant we had to do what we were used to, was figuring out how to prove people wrong about their assumptions about us. And we set out to do that. I was fortunate when I go to The Washington Post that there was a good robust crew of people who quickly watched out for each other. Michel Martin, who's now at NPR at 'Tell Me More,' was--I'd come to know her when we were both covering Annapolis [Maryland]. She for The Post, I for the Time--for the Washing-[The] Evening Sun [Baltimore Sun], and people would confuse us even though we look nothing alike. She's about three shades lighter than me, she wore a short afro, I had hair to my shoulder; and people still called me by her name. Okay. Fine. So, but we learned to laugh at it, and we learned how to use it to our advantage and make them uncomfortable, or we would ask--if someone asked who my name--we got name tags. Hers said, "My name is not Gwen Ifill." And mine said, "My name is not Michel McQueen," was her name at the time. And people would start to call us by the other's name, pull up short and not know what to do. It was kind of a passive-aggressive way of reminding people of their assumptions about who we were. And it put it on them, not on us. We were just saying, Think about it before you speak. So she was there when I arrived, and she was a great--she was a great, like, board to walk over into this new world. And one of my dear friends Sandee [Sandra] Gregg has since passed away, she was also a reporter who was working there at the time. Marcia [Slacum] Greene. There were a group of us who just basically kept an eye out for each other. We would socialize together, we would bond with black reporters and black journalists at other newspapers, as we were members of the Washington Association of Black Journalists [WABJ]. I had long been a member of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ]. We had so much in common, and we could watch out for each other so that when some things would happen--like we had some interns come in once who were from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and we were big sisters to them. We were watching out for them, and we heard--actually, I heard it from a friendly white colleague who said, "You know, the managing editor had breakfast this morning with all the interns and the black ones didn't show up. Do you know what happened?" And I said, "No. Where were they?" And I found out when I called that they had decided to boycott it because they didn't like their assignments. And we took them in the ladies' room and jacked them up against the wall and said, "No, no, no. If you don't like your assignments, you come to us. That's what we're here for. But all they thought when you didn't show up at that meeting is that you were trifling, that you had overslept. They didn't think you value this." None of them got hired. And we were adamant that our role was to help them not make those mistakes. And I still feel that way. If I see a young person who is just not being serious or focused, got to--if they're worth it. I'm not going to go out on a limb for everybody, but I got to pull you back on the straight and narrow so you at least know what's expected, you know? Story_ID: 228718 Speaker 1: Even after what happened with her, I mean, Janet Cooke, you point to an environment that's very collegial in some respects among (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Among the black folk. And it was collegial, you know, not universally, but it was mostly collegial with white folk too, but they were dealing with a lot of trauma. And we had to collectively prove ourselves still--I mean, what else is new? This is true in life that we're worth being there. That we have a seat at the table. Some years after I was at The [Washington] Post, I remember having a conversation with the person who was in charge of newsroom recruitment, who, when I asked him why it was we didn't have enough African Americans in the newsroom, his answer to me with a straight face was that, some many had left and it turned out that none of them were qualified. And when I said, "What are you talking about," he reached in his desk, and he pulled out a yellow legal pad with a list of names on it, and began to tick off to me what was wrong with each of these people who had left the paper. I was horrified. He was creating a paper trail to prove why diversity was a bad idea and thought it was a good enough idea to show this to me. I still am horrified years later thinking about it. But what it did was told me what the mindset was and what we had to overcome in order to get past that mindset. Speaker 1: Now, at that time that he did that, were you just at The Post at that point or you been there? Because you came (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. I had been at The Post for a while. I wouldn't have had that conversation just fresh through the door. Speaker 1: Right. Right. Okay. Speaker 2: I may have even been--I may have even been on national staff by then. I don't remember when it happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the other question I have is, who are you looking up to at this point? Who is black that is big, you know, that you want to sort of emulate or that you and your group are looking and saying (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's not just black. I mean-- Speaker 1: (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --I wanted to be Mary McGrory, you know. This was a woman who in her seventies and eighties was still going up to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] and making people answer her questions. I wanted to be [HistoryMaker] Dorothy [B.] Gilliam, who's writing a column every single week for The Washington Post, and was really just breaking through. I mean, I wanted to be--I wanted to be most of all me. I really thought that I was bringing something that was unique and different, and there weren't, sadly, then or now a whole lot of role models for what I wanted to be. I am stunned and still surprised that there was so few of me doing what I do and that--but I'm at the same time pleased that there're enough of us doing what we do differently, that at least there are more faces out there, and it's more important than ever that those faces are in front of the camera, so. Story_ID: 228719 Speaker 1: What are you learning about national politics at this point? And are you covering national or are you covering, in 19-- Speaker 2: In 1987, I covered--I was recruited to the national staff [at The Washington Post] by a woman by the name of Ann Devroy who was a political editor, who took a look at her staff of reporters and said, "I've got nothing by middle-aged white guys." And she consciously said, "This is a bad idea." So she looks--started looking around the metro staff. Who do we have? Who else has covered politics? And she--my interview for the job, but she hired me in part because she thought I would bring up a new--a fresh eye, new blood to these guys who'd been covering things the same since the '70s [1970s]. And one of the people who I have to say embraced me and completely was happy to see me and guided me along the way was David Broder, who had been doing this forever, but saw in me the possibility to learn something he didn't know. I find at different points throughout my career, there were always the people who were most helpful to me and nurturing were often people who thought that there was something I could tell them. Tim Russert was the same way. "What is it that you know that I don't know? Tell me, and then I can tell you what you don't know. We can help each other." And so, as a result, I learned from David Broder how to listen and talk to voters and to value what individuals say as much, if not more, than what official statements say, and to listen more closely. And there was so--there was such a rich--there was such a rich group of folks to learn from if you wanted to, if you wanted to be open to it, and if you didn't pretend like you knew it all, and I didn't know anything. I knew nothing about covering national politics. I was at the bottom of the totem pole, so I was sent out to cover all the candidates who were never going to be president. I had--if they were--looked like they were the most improbable, I was there to cover Pat Buchanan; I was there to cover [Marion Gordon] "Pat" Robertson, and I was there to cover every person left standing; 1988 was my first campaign, national campaign, and 'til the last person standing, who was not the nominee, was [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson. And so on Jesse Jackson's campaign, he had an entire press corps that was black folk, because in 1984 and 1988, once again, all the people at the bottom of the totem pole on all these different newsroom organizations often were people like me; folk who are covering their first campaign, black people; Marilyn Milloy and--who was working for Newsday at the time, and [HistoryMaker] Joe Davidson, who was working for--who was Joe working for? [The] Wall Street Journal, I guess? Maybe I'm missing another newspaper. But there were, like, a bunch of us who were all-[HistoryMaker] Sylvester Monroe was working for Time. We were all working for different newspapers, and we--Phyllis Crock [ph.] was working for NPR, and we all found ourselves out with Reverend Jackson. This was in some ways a weird ghetto-ish thing. And in other ways, it was very useful, because we did kind of get the rhythm of the Jackson campaign. We were attuned to talking to different kinds of people and hearing what they were saying and what was really driving it. We were better versed in trying to get beneath the candidate to find out what was really going on in the campaign, and Reverend Jackson was very cagey character, you know. He knew how to make black reporters feel guilty because he'd say, "You're working for the man, you know, so you're probably selling me out." And he knew how to make white reporters feel guilty by saying, "You know, that's kind of a racist question you're asking." He wouldn't have to say it, but he would imply it so that you were always a little bit off guard. It was also the most disorganized campaign in the history of the world, because he would take off and not know where he was going to land, and he would just--but still wherever he landed there would be four thousand people waiting for him, because he was the phenomenon. He won thirteen states. I mean, we're covering a campaign this year with--there are some people who are not going to win one state, and we're giving them all this all this time. This guy went around and he just--he really earned himself a role at the [Democratic] National Convention in the way that he had in 1984, that made it an exhilarating experience, an exhausting experience to cover, and taught me a whole lot about black politics in a way that served me later when I wrote my book ['The Breakthrough: Politics and Race in the Age of Obama,' Gwen Ifill]. I mean, I understood kind of the rhythm of black politics and met a lot of the people who were leading the charge in a way that I wouldn't have covering, or never did, covering white politicians because it wasn't as important to them to speak to those communities. Story_ID: 228720 Speaker 1: Now, the 1988 [presidential] campaign, though, was--it really set the tone for the election of the first black president (unclear), in--because a lot of--now, who are the people--now, were you interacting also from a press standpoint with Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] much or not? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ron Walters and Ron Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ron Brown was [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson's big advisor in 1988, and I saw photographs of the two of them hanging out together and us hanging out together, because he was--and he was considered to be the mainstream black guy, so it was really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You mean Ron Brown? Speaker 2: Ron Brown and Harold [M.] Ickes, who went--they went on to work for [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton. He worked for Jesse Jackson. I mean, there were--he just cut a big swathe, Jesse Jackson did, because he was speaking to, not just the black folk, but there's this Rainbow Coalition. And that's what set the groundwork for what [HistoryMaker President] Barack Obama was able to achieve, because in order to get elected in this country in a mainstream job, you have to appeal to everybody. You have to tell people, "I hear what you're saying. Whether I'm black or white is part of it, but not all of it." And that's what Barack Obama then did twenty years later. He was able to create a rainbow without saying it explicitly, by saying, "You can trust me because I'm listening to you. I'm more like you than different from you." And that's why Jesse Jackson was able to win that many states. He--you don't do that well in that many states unless somehow you've broken out of a racial box. And that's what he did, even though he doesn't get the same kind of credit. And it's certainly what Barack Obama then built on. There existed out there a base of people who were willing to vote without regard for color, and the question was how did you go on that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you--but this was also a good time for black--you guys who run the press corps-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --because it's giving--it elevates you-- Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: --that there's--and that happens a lot. Speaker 2: It did. It should be said, however, that whenever Jesse Jackson gave them a really good story, that the white reporters would come in and often write it (laughter), because we were the low people on the totem pole. You didn't just covering--that's still true. You don't just keep covering it because you were there. The big stories still goes to the big reporter, so. The goal was to become a big reporter. Story_ID: 228721 Speaker 1: Was there anything else during that period of time at The Washington Post, 'cause you then go to [The] New York Times, and I'm just wondering, you know, what is the-- Speaker 2: I left '88 [1988]--I covered '88 [1988], then I went and covered the housing department [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)] after the '88 [1988] campaign (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) HUD, right? Speaker 2: --and there was a big scandal at HUD by the time I was covering it. It was while-- Speaker 1: Can you talk about that scandal? Speaker 2: Well, the scandal was--it was actually a kind of leftover scandal from the days of Samuel [R.] Pierce [Jr.] when he was secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and the misuse of lots of money and lots of funds for public housing. And what we did was, it was a paper-driven scandal, which is you jump back through all of the reports, the inspector general's reporters, which documented all of these things, ways the money had been misspent, and you wrote stories. And then there were hearings and--long story short, I was covering this story for The Post and The New York Times started paying attention to me, because they thought, "Wait a second," The New York [Times], you know, "She's kicking our butts every day. Who is this person?" And as a result, they offered me a job. They offered me a job because they wanted to get rid of their main competition on this story. And I didn't take it the first time, because I didn't think they had a clear idea of what they wanted to do with me, and I wasn't interested in leaving The Post. They were kind of like, "Come and be our general reporter." And I said, no. I knew enough about the business by then to know that you don't go just to go. And I wasn't in love with the idea of working for The New York Times. But when they came back to me the next year, it was to offer me a job as a congressional correspondent. And I'd never covered [U.S.] Congress and I wanted to do that, and doing that for The New York Times would be a good, great way to get in. Story_ID: 228722 Speaker 1: Okay, so we're just gonna slate the interview, just your name and today's date? Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, and today is March 22, 2014. Speaker 1: Okay, and I'm the interviewer, Julieanna Richardson, and Scott Stearns is the videographer-- Story_ID: 228723 Speaker 1: You know, can you take us back to that time, you know, when you were at The Washington Post because you leave--well, just take us back to that time because you're meeting, up until this point, what are you--when do you meet Michel [Martin] and San--(unclear), when do you meet them. Speaker 2: I, I actually knew Michel Martin before I started at The Washington Post. I was working in Baltimore [Maryland], at the Baltimore Evening Sun [The Evening Sun; Baltimore Sun], and I was covering the [Maryland] State House [Annapolis, Maryland]. And Michel was covering the State House for The Washington Post. So we became friends working as competitors in Annapolis [Maryland]. In fact, even though we were, we looked nothing alike, people who we covered constantly confused us for one another to the point that we had name tags made up. Hers said, "My name is not Gwen Ifill," and mine said, "My name is not Michel Martin," and we spent decades of our career with people confusing us, just because we were black. So we just got used to it. We got a sense of humor about it, but when I started that, that--when I was interviewed to come to work at The Washington Post, I remember at the time, Ben Bradlee, who was meeting me for the first time, walked up to Michel in the newsroom and said, "So, who's better at this, you or her?" And she, he--she just looked at him and smiled and said, "Well, of course, she is, Ben." And that was his--her way of saying, just hire her because all of a sudden there was this comparison between the what, the only two black reporters? It didn't make any sense. But we also knew that we had to bring each other in. We had to pull each other into these environments, and make sure that we go the opportunities we needed. I did that later with other people who came behind me, who I made sure got a leg up or a leg into these big news organizations where otherwise, we were absent. So once I got there, it was like stepping into warm water. There were a lot of other African American editors and photographers and copy editors and reporters, and we all gravitated to one another and, and socialized together and watched out for each other. And all these years later, still know that we went through a special time together 'cause it was post-Watergate [Scandal], when The Washington Post was riding very high. And there were a few of us, but not a lot of us. And we had each other's backs. Speaker 1: So can you tell--who was the most senior African American at that time? Speaker 2: I think it was [HistoryMaker] Dorothy [B.] Gilliam. Dorothy Gilliam was a columnist for The Post at the time. And there were probably more senior people who had worked there longer. [HistoryMaker] Milton Coleman was a senior editor. But Dorothy was the one with the high profile. She went on to become president of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ], and she wrote a column--she and Courtland Milloy--still writes a column, wrote a column every week. So they had very high profiles. Story_ID: 228724 Speaker 1: And what were you finding about The [Washington] Post? What--did The Post have a way--a Post way of doing things? You would later go on to The New York Times, but I'm wondering if there was--I know that you just spoke of there being some introduction session, you know, and maybe they were even affects. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but did they-- Speaker 2: Well, part of what happened, when I arrived at The Post was right after the Janet Cooke incident in which she had invented this entire story about a, a boy who, who was raised by a mother on crack. And it turns out, the boy didn't exist, the story didn't exist. She won a Pulitzer Prize for it and had to give it back. It was one of the most humiliating episodes in the history of The Washington Post, and it was an African American woman who had done it, Janet Cooke. And so as it--there was a period there where a lot of us felt like we were under special scrutiny because of that and because anything we did, people said--not, they didn't say it out loud, but there was some suggestion that we were making it up. It wasn't unique just to the black reporters. Everybody had to go through this ethics training as a result of what happened with Janet Cooke. But it was, it was impossible not to feel a little bit like people were giving you the, the snake eye, just in case because you were African American. You had to get past that and discover just doing the work would always vindicate you. Speaker 1: So, you know, I know that I thought--I was a young lawyer, and I felt people were looking at me in a different way. So I'm not even in the newsroom. I mean it, it had repercussions all across the country in all kinds of different disciplines-- Story_ID: 228725 Speaker 1: In the newsroom, so what are your assignments? Who do you--what work are you doing at the beginning? Speaker 2: I was hired at The [Washington] Post to cover Prince George's County [Maryland], suburban Maryland politics. And it was a interesting time. It actually, in later years led me to, informed my writing for my book ['The Breakthrough: Race and Politics in the Age of Obama,' Gwen Ifill] because I was introduced to a jurisdiction which was tipping point. It was 50 percent black-white. The, the power had--was shifting hands. I had just moved from Baltimore [Maryland] where they had elected their first black mayor. I moved to [Washington] D.C. where [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was the mayor. All of a sudden it's, it was, you know, black power, with a little "b" and a little "p." The actual manifestation of what Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] talked about, I suppose. And so, it was very interesting. There was a lot of zone--you discovered something as boring as a zoning hearing was actually the story of the week because how money changed hands, how land changed hands, who had what power. All of that turned out to be very informative. There's probably nothing more granular and important that I've covered over the years, and school committee meetings and zoning board meeting 'cause it actually affected people's lives, where they lived, where their kids went to school, whether their kids went to school, and, and the way--and to the degree that we have resegregated as a society, had a lot to do with who decided who lived where, and who got to go to which school. And there was still a bussing struggle going on in Prince George's County. It was a rich, tableau of politics and policy and human stories that made it a great thing to lay a groundwork for everything else I was to cover. Speaker 1: And there--at that point in time, as you said, Prince George's County is going through, it's--you know, 'cause it's becoming more black at that point,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --is that true? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very much becoming--it was becoming the destination for a lot of affluent black folk who were moving out of the District [Washington, D.C.] and moving into places where they could have some land, more affordability. And a lot--and white flight was preceding it. So if black folk moved to the outer ring of the District of Columbia, white people moved to Prince George's County and suburban Maryland and suburban Virginia. And then as black folk moved there, they moved further south and further east and further west. And so it's prob--it's a little, it's a way of looking at the way the country changed in lots of urban areas and the way that we moved, kind of away from each other, and as a result, I think, began to understand each other less as time went on. We were--our kids weren't going to school together as much. We were not socializing together. We were moving into our own circles. At the same time, however, African Americans were getting more power and taking more control in the jurisdictions where they were left. And so, it wasn't--the resegregation wasn't necessarily a bad thing, but it was not the ideal that we had talked about in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: You know, that is such a fascinating statement and observation-- Speaker 2: It really is. Speaker 1: --because that, I mean it's absolutely true. But look at the short period of time as if it never really quite happened? Speaker 2: It's, it's interesting, but then, but then it comes full circle again where we have a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] who had to be elected by both blacks and whites. It wasn't strictly a resegregated society. It was a mixture of these things. And it was, and it wasn't enforced by law. The difference between--I moved, I bought a house once in a neighborhood where if you looked at the original deed, you could see there used to be a covenant that wouldn't let people like me buy there or Jews either. But that had to be--that wasn't enforced by law, that kind of segregation, as opposed to voluntary resegregation, which it's hard to enforce and hard, hard to force, one way or the other. But it's what people chose to do. The secret was not to stop people by law from being able to do things. Speaker 1: So, in that, what else is significant about your experience in, in Prince George's County? Is it-- Speaker 2: No, it was a stepping stone. I mean Prince George's County then and now is a stepping stone for young, eager reporters. There's always a story. There are always lots of people and characters to cover, and for me, I had covered the [Maryland] State House [Annapolis, Maryland] when I worked in Baltimore [Maryland]. And I returned to covering the State House after being in Prince George's County. And I, I loved covering state politics. It felt like I was closer to the story than even in covering national politics. And I was only in Prince George's County for a couple of years before I went back to the State House. And I covered the D.C. and Marion Barry and that was a whole urban politics, in a city where there wasn't a lot of power 'cause it was such a low ceiling for ambition in the District of Columbia. And as a result, you got a different kind of--you got different people pursuing those jobs. If you could arise to be--if you could aspire to be a senator or the president or the governor, you would more likely do that--you could do that in Maryland or Virginia or any other state of the Union. In the District, the best you can do is be a mayor where [U.S.] Congress gets to tell you how to spend your money. So if you have intense ambition, there's a pretty low ceiling here for that. And as a result, it attracts a different quality, I think, often of leader. And that's, so that was a whole different way of covering leadership-- Story_ID: 228726 Speaker 1: --Now, at The Washington Post, who becomes your mentor? Speaker 2: I don't know that--one, I had a mentor at The Washington Post. I, when I was in the--not, certainly not on the metro staff. When I--I was at The Post altogether about seven years, and, and I moved to the national staff after about four years, I guess. And I went to cover my first presidential campaign in 1988. And I got that job, in part, because the woman who at the time was a political editor--her name was Ann Devroy. She's since passed away. She looked around at her staff, and realized she had a staff full of middle-aged white men covering national politics. And because she was a woman, and because she, herself, was a reporter who covered politics, she knew that we needed, we needed different voices. And she was tough nut. She wasn't someone who was just gonna pick the first person down the street. But they came to know me because of my work covering Maryland politics, and she and Dan Vault [ph.] who at the time was the national editor, and who probably is the closest to--then and now, to a mentor, I had, saw me and said, she could do this. And they brought me in to cover national politics with the understanding that I would have a fresh eye, that I would bring something different, that I would see things differently, not the same way everybody who'd covered multiple elections had. So I came in at the bottom of the totem pole in 1987. I covered all the candidates who were certain to lose. I reached the point where if I showed up at an election event, the candidate saw me, he'd go, "Oh, no, it's [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill]. It must--I must be--The Post must have counted me out." And it was true. I covered, you know, Paul Simon and Dick Gephardt and [Marion Gordon] "Pat" Robertson and Bob Dole and people who were trying--who thought they were gonna be president till they saw me walk in the room (laughter), and then they realized a decision had been made. On the other hand, I also got to cover the last candidate standing, other than the nominee. Michael Dukakis was the nominee that year. He was running against the incumbent, [President] George [Herbert Walker] Bush, and--H.W. Bush. And we were covering the last--I was left to cover the last Democrat, leading up to the Democratic National Convention, who turned out to be [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson. Jesse, Rev. Jackson, of course, had run in 1984. And he was running again in 1988, and people took him a little less seriously in 1988 because he wasn't as much as a shock to the system as he was in 1984. But then he won Michigan, and then he came close to winning in Wisconsin. Then he began to actually--he won thirteen primaries, and as a result had to be taken seriously. And it was interesting because so many of the reporters covering Reverend Jackson were African Americans because we all were at the bottom of the totem pole at different news organizations. But as he began to be more and more of a serious candidate, all the more senior reporters started to come in to see what was going on. He, to this day, I think takes credit for a lot of careers of young, black reporters who were sent to cover him because it was assumed that he wasn't gonna be much of a story. And he was a terrific story. He was, as then and now, incredibly exhausting to cover, very focused about what he wanted to do, and spoke to audiences you never, ever saw on the campaign trail. People would come out to see him in Palm Beach, California--Palm Springs, California at 4:00 in the morning. So it wasn't just black kids at high school saying, "I am somebody." It was an incredible--when he said, Rainbow, he meant it. He got, in '88 [1988] especially, an incredibly broad range of interests and people who felt no one else was speaking to their concerns. I, that was the campaign where I discovered that by covering Reverend Robertson and covering Reverend Jackson that they, their audiences were more alike than different. Even though Pat Robertson was known as being Moral Majority--actually, that was Jerry Falwell. Pat Robertson was known as being conservative, religious and, you know, hurricanes were caused as wrath of God and all these things. And Jesse Jackson was known as being liberal and obviously, very African American-centric, and, in fact, when I went to their audiences and talked to the people who came to see them at rallies, these people were more alike than different. They were white and they were black, but they were very curious that no one was speaking to them and their concerns. And they were worried about their kids and they were worried about the future of the nation and the direction of the country. And I realized if you put them in a room without the candidates, they would have a lot in common even though they weren't of the same race. So that taught me how to listen for commonality in our national discourse instead of putting everybody into boxes. So covering the low person on the totem pole ended up to be, endlessly illuminating for me and for the reporters who were out there because it told you that, the kinds of things we talk about in our real discourse, and the things that move people--talking to voters is always more interesting than talking to candidates. And this provided a way to talk to voters, and that's what I still like to do now best. Story_ID: 228727 Speaker 1: --I think you also said there was someone who taught you how to listen to voters too? Speaker 2: David Broder. Speaker 1: David Broder, that's right. Speaker 2: David Broder used to like to go door-to-door, every campaign and just knock on people's doors and say, "Hello, I'm David Broder. Can I come in?" which we always thought was shocking because then and now, people would let--not now. He's passed away, but people would let him in. And he would just sit in their living room and let, and ask them about politics. Now, the danger in this is most people don't follow politics, but they do have concerns. And he would find a way to get to voters--now, maybe today, you--people would not open their door or maybe today there would be a technological way of getting to these same voters, but the best way David knew was shoe leather. And he would take me along. And you would get--you'd think to yourself, why are they letting us in here? What is this? So David liked to talk to people who were closer to reality. He liked to talk to voters. He liked to talk to governors. He liked to talk to mayors. He was fine with political candidates on the national stage. But he really wanted to get to the vital concerns of voters, what was driving voters, not just what was driving the politics. Politics now is very granular, and there's lot of, you know, positioning and messaging and the politics of politics. He wanted to talk about the politics of people, and he taught me to do that too. Story_ID: 228728 Speaker 1: When you are covering [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson, this--I think about this, even in terms of, you know, Pat Buchannan and [Marion Gordon "Pat"] Robertson, that they were, oh, I don't want to say the precursors to the Tea Party, but the Tea Party-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: --has come out of that. So you're saying you were on the fringes, but you're actually with people who, you know, are in the news for a variety of things and have now, have offshoots. But I want to ask this. So what are you learning on that campaign trail about even what is happening in American society? Do you see any sort of differences, you know, even between the 1984, when you weren't covering and the 1988, you know, campaign there. I mean, you, you--anyway. Speaker 2: Well, I--I don't know. I mean I, I think that I discovered that--I think I discovered that we had more in common than different. I think one of the interesting things about Reverend Jackson is who he spoke to and how people reacted to him. There were people who were built, who had built in, kind of a knee-jerk, negative response to him. And he was convinced he could persuade you. And so he was always interesting to watch, and he was always interesting to see how even if people were intimidated by him, he would use that as, as a skill. I saw that in [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton too. They were both, they were both skilled politicians and knew how to speak to people and get past their original instincts about them and just by, by pressing, pressing. Now, Bill Clinton, people--has a reputation for listening and being so empathic. Bill Clinton spent most of his time talking, and so did Reverend Jackson. But, somehow, the concentrated energy that they would direct to the people they were speaking to was what many people wanted to hear. And it was very, it was very persuasive close up. Story_ID: 228729 Speaker 1: Are you happy at this point in time with your assignment and what you're learning at The [Washington] Post? Speaker 2: It's my very first presidential campaign. I had a ball. I got to go to--I think I landed--I think I did forty-five states in a year. I--some days you would do five or seven states in a day. When you're--what? How old was I? I was, you know, thirty-five? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was--that was fun (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, you were thirty-five, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, you just get to, you just get to see the country. You get to see--someone gave me a piece of wonderful advice when I started. They said, you're gonna get to see the country on Katharine Graham's dime. You ought to just make sure you see it. Don't spend all your time with your head down. Look up, and look around. See what you're seeing. It was a great crash course in America. And it's something that very few jobs allow you, even if you only spent an hour on the ground in some places, you got to see it. You got--I got--there are states I'll never get back to. There are places I'll never see again, but I saw it that year, and I saw it in subsequent presidential campaigns. Plus, you see people who are taking time out of their lives to actually be part of the political process. This is a unique, cohort of Americans. These are not people who are thinking, I just gotta go to the laundry and go home. These were people who were saying, "I wanna be engaged and involved, and I wanna know more about who leads me." And so there are very special group of people who you get to meet, just regular folk. And that to me, informs every single thing else I do. So it was a great, great campaign and a great year. Speaker 1: So how does that work though? So how are--you know, you said you do five--what did you say you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You're on a campaign plane. So you're on a campaign plane, and the candidate's sitting up in the front. The reporter's sitting in the back. And a--we would, we would do a fly around. I think the day that we did five or seven states at a time, may have been [Marion Gordon] "Pat" Robertson. And I may have done it also with [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton, later on where they would just land, do an airport rally, say hello--you may not see anything more than the airport, and then take off. And then you go to another state, and you try to hit as many places and as many media markets as possible. So you got a lot of coverage. Or with the Clinton campaign in '92 [1992], he--after the Democratic [National] Convention when he and Al Gore got the nomination, we got on a bus, and we went on a bus trip from Atlanta all the way up to, I guess Illinois. We just went through the middle of the country and stopped and had rallies along the way. And you got to see the country, you got to see the people. I, I feel bad now for reporters these days who spend all their time with their heads in theirs laptops because they have to file blogs, and they have to update, and they have to Tweet everything they see, whereas we could actually write one story a day and see the world and spend some time thinking about it. Speaker 1: I see. So how were those assignments made? How are they made on the, the, the trail like that, and your, your comfort--I'm just interested in the relationships that you have with the candidates and with each other. Speaker 2: Well, it's very different now than it was then. In 1988, 1992, even 1996, the first several campaigns I covered, you were assigned to a candidate. When I started at The New York Times, for instance, my can--my bureau chief said, who would you like to cover? And I said, I don't know, either--first, at this point, this is early in--late 1991 and the only candidate of the people who were running I'd ever met was Bill Clinton. So I said, well, he seems interesting, the governor of Arkansas. And he said, really, 'cause at the time, the hot candidate was [Joseph Robert] Bob Kerrey . So I wanted to cover Clinton because he seemed--I learned from covering [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson that it helps to spend time with someone you can stand to spend a lot of time with because you spend a lot of time with the candidate. You hear the same speech over and over again. You have to find a different way to tell the same story a lot. So I--at least I wanted to be able to cover somebody who's compelling enough to spend that much time studying. As a beat reporter--it's not the same way now, but as a beat reporter, you spend a lot of your time trying to get inside the head of the candidate, just eyeballing them, watching the way they interact with people. The way it's done now, you're less likely to spend face-to-face time with a candidate. They're in the front of the plane. You're in the back. You're lucky if you get to see them. In the early years when we didn't, technology didn't get in the way, you could actually spend some time getting to know them a little bit, to the extent that you can. And that, to me, was the value of being the beat reporter on the plane and you spent all of your time on the plane. You never came home for weeks at a time. But there were also--we call 'em the "big feed," the reporters who stayed mostly in Washington [D.C.], who would travel in, fly in whenever they felt like it, fly out whenever they feel like it, who would write the big think, long stories. This is what this all means. Your job was to write the, "This is what happened today" story, as the beat reporter. And you created a narrative about whatever had been said. Sometimes that was difficult. When I worked for The New York Times, there were investigative reporters writing about Whitewater and investigating Governor Clinton. On the campaign trail, we were, my job was just to write about what Governor Clinton said to defend himself against this, from my own newspaper. So one day there would be a page-one story, saying "Ah-hah, this is what the Clintons did in Arkansas." And the next day, my job was to say, "The Clintons say this isn't true," until my editor would come to me and say, why do you keep knocking down our stories. I said, my job is just to tell the story of what the Clintons are saying. So it became--it would always be an interesting--sometimes you didn't know what they were writing. In fact, a lot of the time, you didn't know what they were writing back at the main paper. You'd see it in the newspaper the next day. You'd see it--because they didn't want it getting back to the campaign, investigative pieces especially. But the big think pieces were a little bit different. The, you know, who is driving Jesse, who is he really? The long interviews. And there's always--it was just office politics. There was always a little back and forth about who got to do what. But especially with the advantage of distance and age, I look at it now as just a great ride. Story_ID: 228730 Speaker 1: Well, I mean I don't think people really understand that about journalism and how that's done and the--because it's a close relationship, what you're, you know, pinpointing. At that point in time, it's a close relationship in that you're seeing the candidate, you're hearing them, but then also, if something is controversial, you know--was there any, there was no black lash ever against-- Speaker 2: Of course, there was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that's okay (laughter). I mean their job was their job. Their job is to tell the story the way they want it told. The people around him, their job was to try to spin you. I remember when I was, in covering [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton, that George Stephanopoulos who, at the time was working for him, would spend all of his time trying to study me, trying to figure out what I was, how I was reacting to speech, position himself to watch me, watching the candidate so that he could try to discern what The New York Times might write the next day. That's his job. My job was just to write it. I remember when [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson made the--no, it wasn't Jesse Jackson. It was Bill Clinton's Sister Souljah comment when he came out, and he basically did that slap to Sister Souljah that angered so many black folk. I remember sitting in the room, not being that offended by it. And then finally--then all hell broke loose and I had to change my, my thought of what the story was. I learned a couple times that what I thought didn't matter. It was what, how it fell into this world. When Hillary [Rodham] Clinton gave that famous comment where she said, "I could have stayed home and baked cookies and had teas, but I decided to pursue my goals in life," I thought that made perfect sense, but it turned out, it struck a really bad chord with a lot of women. And it blew up into a big story. So I learned from being too-that you can be too close, that you need to step back and, and look a these things through the view of how it's being seen outside of your bubble. If there's one big problem with covering candidates too closely is that you get caught in the bubble, and you lose track of how it's, how it is being perceived outside of that. And so there is a good thing about being close to a candidate, and there's a lot bad because you can get too close. Story_ID: 228731 Speaker 1: So what was the difference in culture between The Washington Post and The New York Times because, 'cause The New York Times came after you, right? Speaker 2: Right, right. The New York Times offered me a job twice. The first time, I turned it down because it was kind of a, open-ended, you can be a general assignment reporter job, and I knew enough by then to know that that was a dangerous path because you needed to have a specific beat that you were responsible for, and that other people couldn't poach on. And so--and I wasn't unhappy at The Post. I was covering, I think I was covering the [U.S.] Department of Housing and Urban Development then, just when a scandal broke out. And that was when The Times saw my work and started to come after me. They figured, rather than try to beat me, they'd just hire me. But I didn't, I didn't trust the offer from Times. They, they said, we'll make you a star, and something about that just struck me wrong. It didn't sound right. I didn't wanna be a star. I wanted to be a good, working reporter. So I stayed put, and when The Times came back the second time to offer me a job, this time, it was a very specific job. They wanted me to cover [U.S.] Congress. They wanted me--they gave me a beat, a title, and I knew that that was, first of all the Times doesn't knock every day. Second of all, they actually gave me the certainty I wanted, and it was also (laughter), for me, 'cause it was moving from The Washington Post to the Washington [D.C.] bureau of The New York Times, the change was literally--I got off at the same Metro stop and walked in a different direction. It wasn't a big difference from what I was doing. But The Post at the time had reached the point where I, I felt like they weren't--they kept telling me reasons why I wasn't ready to take the next step. I wanted to cover Congress, and they said, I don't think you're ready for that. Well, The New York Times thought I was ready. So it wasn't that I had bad feeling. I just thought, here the ceiling was a little higher for me, maybe because I seemed like a "get" by then for The Times, and The Post had started to take me for granted. Over the years, editors who said these things to me have since been quoted saying, "Oh, we loved [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], and we don't know what she means by that." But I remember very clearly what it was, and, you know, once again, age and distance makes me realize that everything happens exactly the way it's supposed to. And whether I would--I don't even recall whether I was particularly that upset about it or not. I just knew it was the next logical move to make. So I had been at The Times, at The Post by then for seven years. And going to The Times just gave me new opportunities. It gave me a chance to cover a presidential campaigns in a more senior roll and covering [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton took me into the White House [Washington, D.C.] beat. I covered him throughout the entire year, and who knew what a incredible story that was gonna be at the time. And The Times had provided me--The Post had provided me with the groundwork in order to cover this kind of campaign, either first by covering a presidential campaign, by covering the [Maryland] State House [Annapolis, Maryland], by covering local politics in the same way I had in Baltimore [Maryland]. So every step was a stair step to the next thing. Looking back on it now, I see it, even though at the time, you don't always notice it. So when I got to The Times, I was thrown into the deep end. I was covering Congress and then covering a campaign, and then covering the White House. And I was only there three years. And so in a period of three years, I got all of these great opportunities, and that's when I started doing television on the side. Story_ID: 228732 Speaker 1: I think when you grow up in a household where you speak very specifically and very--you're expected to account for yourself, and you sit every Sunday and watch someone deliver essentially a lecture and a speech, you inherit some of that. And so some of it is from being on television. Some of it--a lot, but a lot of it is from--if you talk to my brothers and sisters, they all speak the same way. And it's, part of it is expectation, how we're expected to present ourselves, and it's part of--and a lot of it is example, what we were--what we witnessed and how we saw and how we were taught to reason and how we were expected to account for ourselves. So I think it has a lot more to do with that, and that lends itself to being able to get these opportunities to do jobs where people--you had to explain yourself. You had to present yourself. Speaker 2: So your first, your first experience on, you said, was it 'Meet'--no, was it 'Washington' (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: My first time on television ever was actually on a show called 'Maryland News Rap,' [ph.] which was like a reporters' roundtable like 'Washington Week [in Review]' ['Washington Week with Gwen Ifill'] when I worked in the Baltimore [Maryland] paper. And I got, you know, I look back on it now, and I'd be horrified. But at the time, it was a chance--the best part about those shows is, they let you talk about something you knew already. So you weren't trying to present something brand new. You weren't trying to present and opinion which I still don't do. You just learned how to explain something you already knew. And so that was very helpful. And by the time ''Meet the Press'' knocked on the door, I already knew how to do that. And I knew--so it was just a matter of transferring it to a bigger stage. And so Tim [Russert] and I became friends after that. Speaker 2: 'Cause 'Meet the Press' was, I mean 'Meet the Press' was the thing because there were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It was the thing. Speaker 2: It was the thing. I mean you would tune in at-- Speaker 1: It was the perfect job because I got to do--I loved, I had The New York Times after my name. And I got to cover big stories. And then television at the time, at--for print, people were still considered to be low class. But I discovered that television served a couple of purposes. One, is that it got your phone calls returned. People invested in you more if they knew who you were and what you looked like. And also, it just gave you broader audience to get your point across. And that was very helpful. When I worked in print, I used to have the luxury of showing up to interview people, and they didn't know I was black. And there'd always been that moment of surprise. And the good thing is, I had the upper hand when I had the moment of surprise. Once I went to television, I lost that, unfortunately. They kind of knew what they were getting when I walked in the room. But it's okay. It was a good trade off. Story_ID: 228733 Speaker 1: So you're at The New York Times, you said three years, so this-- Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: Three years. So this would have been 19-- Speaker 2: Three consequential years, 1991 to 1994. Speaker 1: Nineteen--okay. Now, in that time--okay, and [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton is elected in ninety (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two [1992]. Speaker 1: --two [1992], okay, that's right. So what is the culture at The Times? Speaker 2: Very different. Much more corporate than at The [Washington] Post. It was, it was populated by people who spent their entire careers trying to get The New York Times. The New York Times was the ne plus ultra of, of newspapers. And I was not one of those people who wanted to spend my entire career getting there. I was happy to be there. It was a fabulous platform. All these years later, people still say, "I remember you from The New York Times." But that wasn't my goal in life. It was a way of getting to do the job. Every job, I've had, including the one I have now, is good because it allowed me to do what I wanted to do. And when that became--whenever it reached the point where I was no longer allowed to do what I wanted to do, that was when the time to move on always, always arrived. And that--so when I got to The Times, it was just--the resources were there. The, the impact was there. People read The New York Times and, and reacted a certain way. I was able--I didn't realize it fully until I started covering [U.S.] Congress, and I realized the way other reporters on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] responded if I asked a question or if I wrote a story because their bosses were reading The New York Times and saying, why don't you have this story? So I had to--I realized I was accountable in lots and lots of ways because it was such a widely-read, respected news outlet. And you--the trick is not to let that part go to your head, but to use it to do the job better. Story_ID: 228734 Speaker 1: What didn't you like about it? Okay, I mean you've said that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't-- Speaker 1: --and how did you feel limited, I guess is what I'm saying because the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton campaign was a marvelous campaign-- Speaker 2: It was, it was. And the Clinton White House [Washington, D.C.] was, in that it was just slippery and crazy and gave you new experiences. My--the limitation for me--I, you know, I wasn't--the reason I left The [New York] Times was more personal, the reason I left other places. I was at a point in my career and in my life--my mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] passed in 1994, and I was taking care of her. And I was feeling very burdened, obviously. And I didn't feel, at the time, that The Times was backing me up. I think they thought my work had fallen off. I thought that it was obvious why. My--and it's, I really try not to go back and relive old grievances-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --but I would have stayed at The Times. I would have found some other way to make it work. There are lots of places to go and lots of things to do at The New York Times, if I had not been approached by, first, NBC, then CBS, then ABC, then CNN, all trying to hire me. Now, when that happens, you have to think to yourself, God is speaking to you and that it would--and that there is an opportunity that's being presented. Now, this came as a result of having been on television because not only was I doing 'Meet the Press,' I was on 'Face the Nation.' I was doing the Sunday shows. Speaker 1: You were doing the premier Sunday shows. Speaker 2: Right, and 'Washington Week [in Review],' ['Washington Week with Gwen Ifill'] and my profile was going up. And, and I was covering the big story and doing this these shows. So I got their attention. I got Tim's [Tim Russert] attention first, and Tim made me the offer I couldn't refuse and basically, dared me, you know, what are you? A coward? Why don't you come work for me? And at the time, I thought, I don't wanna work in television full time. I never got into this business to work in television full time. I like to write. And he made the offer I couldn't refuse. He says, I'll make you chief political correspondent, I'll make you chief congressional correspondent. You'll still cover politics. You'll be doing it for us. You'll have a regular role on 'Meet the Press.' And then when the other networks got wind that Tim was making this run at me, then they said, "Oh, we can do this too." CBS flew me to New York [New York], ABC flew me. Everybody was suddenly competing, not so much for me, but against each other for the next hot thing. And at that point, I--God and I had a little talk (laughter), and it became clear, it wasn't really about The New York Times or about whether I was doing what I wanted there or whether I felt they had supported me or not. It had to do with the next opportunity which was being presented to me, that I didn't go looking for. And when you're presented those kinds of opportunities, who are you not to take it? So I, in the end chose to go to NBC because of my relationship with Tim, who I trusted to--I knew enough people who had made the shift from print to television who had failed. They had not learned--television's very different. They had, did not take the time. There was not an investment made in them to help them succeed. And several of them, including Tim's wife, Maureen Orth, came to me and said, "Here's what you need to do to succeed in television. I went into television, and it didn't work for me. You make sure Tim gives you a good producer to teach you television." And so I went to Tim and said, this is what your wife said. And he was right--and she was right. And Tim kept every promise he made to me. He got me a producer who was great, patient. We traveled the world together, and who was--taught me how to do television in a way, write for it, present for it, appear on it and--which was completely different from anything else I'd ever done. I learned brand new skills. And I worked with great, smart, behind-the-camera people who just--the audio guy, the editor who took care of me, who said, this doesn't look right. Your necklace is not, is funny. Your hair is funny, and would make sure that I always looked good. And after you learned--I learned how to appreciate them as well as appreciate the people in front of the camera. And I learned at the highest level possible how to do television. So yet, today, when young people ask me how do I get into television, I, I'm at a disadvantage because I don't know. I didn't, I didn't work in local news. I didn't have to work my way up from affiliate to affiliate. I got to start at the top of the game, didn't even realize at the time how fortunate I was, that I got to start at the network level and start by covering national politics. So I was at NBC for five years. Story_ID: 228735 Speaker 1: No, I mean it's huge. That whole paradigm shift because it just doesn't happen. And there haven't been that many, I mean when you look at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There haven't. Speaker 1: I mean you think Carole--I mean, you know, there was [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson that people looked at-- Speaker 2: But I'll tell you, a key, a key difference for me and that made it work is that there were three of us at the time who had the same background, who were also going to television. [HistoryMaker] Michele Norris worked at The [Washington] Post with me. Michel Martin worked at The Post with me. Michel Martin left The Post, went to work for The Wall Street Journal, and then went from The Wall Street Journal to ABC. Michel Martin went straight from The Post to ABC, and I went from The Post to The [New York] Time[s], to NBC. And we stayed friends throughout that time, and we could compare notes and say, am I crazy? Was this a crazy TV day that I'm having here? And we would basically have each other's back 'cause it was hard. But we were such friends and three black women going into television at the same time with a background in print, that hasn't happened before or since. So we really supported each other. It got--it reached the point where Michel Martin--Michele Norris and I once were on a campaign covering [Marion Gordon] "Pat" Robertson, somebody. She was working for ABC. I was working for NBC. And we ended in the middle of a hotel and panicking in the middle of the night. There weren't enough rooms. Everybody was crazy and unhappy. And we just looked at each other and said, "We're sharing a room." And we did because people said, but aren't you competing? Isn't she ABC and you're NBC? We're like, we need some sleep, and we are gonna go, we're gonna--and we were friends above it all, and still are. So that, I think, made a key difference in my being able to adjust from print to television, having other people around me who are close to me, who are doing the same thing. Story_ID: 228736 Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit just to the--so, you're saying at the time that your mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] is ill, you're her caretaker. Speaker 2: (No audible response - nodding head). Speaker 1: Now, are there--who else is around 'cause there's a lot of family here. I, you know, I--your brothers, Roberto [Ifill]-- Speaker 2: Now, but not then. Speaker 1: They weren't there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --so you became sort of the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the, the--'cause that happened in my family, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --everybody, so I was wondering about that. Speaker 2: No, my brother, my brother at the time was living, I think he was in Connecticut. He was at Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut]. He spent a great deal of time--he was great, coming to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where she lived for, for a while. And my dad [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] died in '91 [1991] and she continued to live in Philadelphia. And he would spend a lot of time going back and forth and helping take care of her on the year when I was on the road in '92 [1992], when I was traveling all the time. And so he was good, he was a good brother. And my sister [Maria Ifill Philip] was in the [U.S.] Foreign Service, and she was abroad-- Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: --so we were--and my other brother lived in California at the time. So we were all scattered. And, but after I came back in ninety--after the '92 [1992] campaign, moved her here [Washington, D.C.] from Philadelphia, I was the main person around. Speaker 1: But that's two major deaths in a short period of time. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 228737 Speaker 1: You're saying that, you know, just because, you know, there wasn't a lot of support. Who's at The [New York] Times at the Washington [D.C.] bureau too, at the--black, I'm talking about? Speaker 2: At the Washington Bureau at The Times, at the time was Steve Holmes-- Speaker 1: I was gonna wonder if Steve Holmes was there. Speaker 2: Steve Holmes and, oh, well, Gerald [M.] Boyd was the deputy for a while. I'm trying to think who else I'm missing. I feel like I'm missing somebody else who was there at the same time, but not that many. Speaker 1: Gerald Boyd, he's, he then went back to New York, right? Speaker 2: He did. He became (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then there was a controversy-- Speaker 2: Right. He became the managing editor of The Times, he and Howell Raines. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he and Howell left after the Jayson Blair-- Speaker 1: Right, and Jayson Blair was somewhat like, I mean sort of like Janet Cooke. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, I mean when you think about it 'cause, tell the Jayson--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I don't wanna tell that story. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (laughter), I'm sorry. Speaker 2: It's not my story. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (laughter), okay (laughter). Speaker 2: It didn't even happen while I was there, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, no, I know. It happened later. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, so you, so this--when you talk about, you know, [HistoryMaker] Michele [Norris] and-- Speaker 2: Michel [Martin]. Speaker 1: Michele, sorry, I keep--Michele-- Speaker 2: And Michel. Speaker 1: And Michel, when you talk about both of 'em which is crazy, you know, that, that is a unique type of thing. Now, what--is there, was this a trend at that time that people are transitioning, you know, are trying to transition (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, there weren't that many beside--beyond us, there were not that many examples. I think Tamala Edwards who was at Time or Newsweek at the time. And she went to ABC. She's now anchor at a ABC affiliate in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. I'm trying to think of anybody else who also made that transition. There's a woman now who I, I don't know very well who's made the transition. But generally--her name is Susan Solovy [ph.] at ABC. She was at The New York Times. She just got to ABC. But there are not that many examples of print to television transitions, in general, but then that many fewer of African Americans. Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pierre Thomas, I take it back. Pierre Thomas was at The Washington Post, and now he's the justice correspondent at ABC. Story_ID: 228738 Speaker 1: What do you find different about TV? I know you have a good producer, but, you know, there is a difference in even how you, you know, maybe a difference in the day, a difference in how, you know, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Well, it depends on what you're doing. When I was covering [U.S.] Congress and President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton was being impeached, that was a daily slog. Every single day, you did a story, and over time, it became clear it was a story that wasn't really--nobody was fond of. It was a Washington [D.C.] story. It was a story where, at some point, it became clear what the end was gonna be, which is that he would chastised but not kicked out of office. It was a distasteful story, kind of a creepy story. But in the end, that was a different kind of pace than covering--then right after that was over, when nobody was interested in stories from Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], and you had to spend a lot of time trying to get on the air and not being able to. Working for commercial television was very different from working what I do now, non-commercial, in part because of the time limitations. When I worked for The New York Times or The Washington Post, I could write these long stories or I could write these thought pieces, and the writing was different than for television. You needed to actually have pictures in television. And that was different. When I--but that was--then I went to the network where our idea of an in-depth story lasted for two and a half minutes. But more, more stories were a minute, fifty, probably less than that now. And when I went to public broadcasting, a short story is five minutes long. So it's just a matter of the luxury of time to tell the story that makes the big difference. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is the time--the time you're talking about--I think it's just before we have the pundits come into-right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. There were always pundits, but it, cable television gave them a lot of room to rant, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 228739 Speaker 1: Why do you end up leaving then? Speaker 2: NBC? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I had another offer I couldn't refuse. I was working for NBC, happily, and under contract--and this is one of the reasons when I say Tim Russert kept his promises to me, PBS came to me and asked me if I wanted to take over 'Washington Week [in Review]' ['Washington Week with Gwen Ifill'] when the previous guy, Ken Bode, left. And because of the circumstances under which he left, I felt uncomfortable about that. And I said I didn't think I wanted to do that. Why would I leave my full-time network job to do a one week--one day a week show, especially under the circumstances? And somehow, they got wind of this at the 'PBS NewsHour' and the executive producer of the 'PBS NewsHour,' Les Crystal, came up with this idea that he would say, well, why don't you work part time for the 'NewsHour' and part time for 'Washington Week.' That sounded good because I got to do the work. I got to work in a noncommercial environment and very well respected broadcast and I could also have my little, my--what I call my sandbox, 'Washington Week' on Fridays where I just had grown to love. And I was still under--one problem is I was still under contract at NBC. So Tim, when I told him about this, said, oh, this is a great opportunity. You've gotta take this job. This is great. You're gonna get to have your own show. And he was, he-- may have known things I didn't know about my future at NBC being, you know, with--I don't think I was ever gonna have my own show at NBC. But he took it upon himself to go to New York and tell them, listen, this is a great opportunity for her. You've gotta let her out of her contract. And he did, got me out of my contract. A lot--and so I always tell people, Tim brought me to NBC, and he allowed me to leave NBC. And so when I want--and I think they didn't feel as competitive about it because it was public broadcasting. And I wasn't going to work for a direct competitor. So they were happy to let me go, and I got to do this, once again, a brand new, brand new adventure. Speaker 1: So what was the adventure that they talked, you know, they said--first of all, what are the circumstances around Ken Bode's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, Ken Bode had been there for five years. And Ken was--you know, it's, some of, some of this is hearsay, so I don't feel comfortable repeating it. But things weren't working out, I think we can say. And, and when Ken left, there was, there was drama. There's always drama in these things. But they didn't have a plan for what to do next. And I was right in front of them. I was a regular on the show. They knew me. They were familiar with me. And for a while there, until they figured out what to do next, Paul Duke came back to the program. He had retired. He'd been the long-time moderator. He came back, and he filled in until they could figure out what they were gonna do next. Story_ID: 228740 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], I also wanna know what--did you feel limited by commercial TV at all and the decisions and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. I think everybody I know in commercial television feels limited in different ways. You just decide whether it allows you to do what you wanna do or not. And I was willing to, quite happily, work within those limits for the five years that I was in, NBC. You just figured a way to adjust to that. And when I started at NB--just while I was at NBC is when they started MSNBC. CNN, up until then, was only--the only cable network. And MSNBC's been through lots of changes over the years. But at that time, they were trying to be CNN. And they--on the other hand, they were also bringing in people--I believe Laura Ingraham had a show ['Watch It!']. I think they brought in people with lots of attitude to have different programs. It put a lot of the straight ahead reporters between a rock and a hard place 'cause we were dealing with opinionated people. And it's, it's still a, a line that you try to walk, but it was a brand new enterprise. And everybody was trying to figure it out. Now, I think they've figured out that there is a, there is a lot--it gives networks a lot more room to run when there's breaking news to have a cable outlet. And that's why CNN and NBC have a, around-the-clock advantage over ABC and CBS because they don't have cable outlets. So, but everybody's got web outlets now. So even that's taken up some of the gap. So, you know, it's different, but it's all a question, whatever allows you to do what you wanna do. Speaker 1: Okay, but how did you feel limited. That's what I wanna understand--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At-- Speaker 1: At NBC. What were the things that you found-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --a little--was it because, was it that you really wanted to be, you were trained to be a serious journalist and sometimes (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, no, it's just a for--the format. I mean if you have twenty-two minutes a night, and you have ten reporters trying to get on the air, you're not gonna get on the air that much. If you have a chance for a minute and a half on 'The Today Show,' ['Today'] you're not gonna get on the air that much. And that's not, you know, that doesn't allow you to do the work. And if what you're interested in is, you know, how the housing bill passed the [U.S.] Senate, and no broadcaster cares about how the housing bill passed the Senate, you're not gonna get--so they're the limitations of the forum, not of anything that happened to me personally. Story_ID: 228741 Speaker 1: When you start then--let's see, what do I want to say? Nineteen ninety-five [1995], is this move in 1995 or is it later? Speaker 2: I moved to PBS? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999]. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999], okay, okay, and that's even the time--that's past the time that even [HistoryMaker General] Colin [L.] Powell, you know, he was being thought of a candidate for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at NB--I was at NBC then. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Okay. Speaker 2: I was on vacation in Paris [France], and Tim Russert called me and said, "Go to London [England], find Colin Powell and find out what he's gonna do (laughter)." This is the kind of thing we used to do routinely back then. Speaker 1: Well, you know, but they had such budgets,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I know. You could do that. Speaker 1: --you know, so you could all those things. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, it's down to one cameraman or the cameraman doing everything. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: Okay, so you become, when this happens in 1999, you become the first African American woman in history to host a prominent political talk show, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Is that--okay. And the thing I wanna ask you, [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], because you're a journ--you know, a print journalist. Then you become a TV--you, first, you're, you're a commentator, and then you're, you're actually moderating. And what do you learn, because you've often said that you're not, you know, you're sort of--I don't wanna, this is not the way you said it. It's sort of a vessel. You facilitate. How do you, at that point, what are you deciding or do you have the ability to decide what the program is going to be, you know, under your leadership? Are you stepping into shoes and trying to keep the same structure and the same approach to the show--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. At 'Washington Week [in Review]', ['Washington Week with Gwen Ifill'] for the first time, I am actually in charge. I actually get to decide what is important and my--it takes, takes a while to get used to that. It takes a while to be a leader and to be in charge of a staff and to shape the vision. For 'Washington Week,' which had, has now been around for forty-seven years, for many of those years, it was basically five white guys sitting around a table saying, you know, kind of huffing and puffing. And then it, over time, evolved into having slightly younger people, more women. And I, and--so now, I have the opportunity to bring it into the next generation, and not only by deciding who would be around the table. One of the things I wanted to make sure is that we moved away from punditry and more towards reporters who were covering the stories. So a lot of the regular report--of the regular panelist had kind of aged out of reporting, had become columnist and pundits, and as a result, the program was beginning to look more like everything else. What we needed to be was unique. And what was now, by then, unique, was an actual table full of reporters talking about what they knew, emptying their notebooks. What had become common was, you know, groups, people with opinions yelling at each other around the table. Speaker 1: 'Crossfire.' Speaker 2: 'McLaughlin Group.' That was fine for entertainment, but it wasn't what I thought 'Washington Week's' mission was. So we were able to reorient it by recruiting another group of smart, beat reporters who could tell you, I was in Ukraine, and this is what happened or I was in the elevator with the Senator and this is what he told me, not, "I imagine this is what the Senator is thinking." I thought there was more value to be brought and also kind of a unique space that we could hold, when we were talking about facts, rather than opinion. And so I really wanted to shape it that way. I wanted it to look more up-to-date. I wanted to insert--it's just my nature, humor into our analysis because so much of it is not as deadly serious as we, we take it to be. And I wanted ultimately, for anyone watching to feel like they were eavesdropping on a really smart dinner conversation. And I knew that if I see people around a table I don't wanna spend time with, I'm gonna turn the channel. I wanted the people around the table to be people who at home went, "Oh, look, there's Gloria. I wonder what she thinks?" and would invest in us. And that--I don't think I was very consciously doing it. I don't think I sat down with a map and said, this is what I want it to be. But that's what it evolved into. And that's what it continues to evolve. It's--taking over the '[PBS] NewsHour,' we have the same challenges in lots of ways. Story_ID: 228742 Speaker 1: How long does it take you to get to that point though, and can you talk about, you know, when you're first--first of all, you're going back and forth, right? You got released from your contract? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But there was a period of time where you were doing it one day-- Speaker 2: No, I, I didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, I see, okay-- Speaker 2: No, we--the contract said I was gonna continue to appear on 'Meet the Press', and I did still continue to appear on 'Meet the Press' as much as I would have anyway. But it mostly allowed NBC to say that I hadn't left, but I had. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But how long--so what does, what is the PBS family 'cause it's not like you were part of that family beforehand? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And they are, they operate--sometimes people are saying they're still trying to sort of figure it out. Speaker 2: Well, people don't understand that PBS, there's no such thing as PBS. It's not a network. It's a trade association of 300-some, 375 local stations. All of them have their own governments, their own managements and share a lot of programming and pay dues in order to get a certain amount of money in order to get access to this programming. And only a--a lot what you see in your local PBS station comes from that, that common pool of programming, and a lot of it doesn't. It's completely up to local programmers, local stations. But 'Washington Week [in Review]' ['Washington Week with Gwen Ifill'] is one of the common carriage shows, as is the '[PBS] NewsHour', as is shows like 'Nova.' All the things that you look at that you think of iconically as PBS, they're produced by independent production companies that are then marketed by PBS to the stations. So the 'NewsHour,' it was a different production company than 'Washington Week.' So I had two sets of masters as it were, trying to--I was the bridge between the two programs, now, reaching a point where they're, where they're all gonna be under the local Washington [D.C.] station. But that--most people would assume that had already happened, and it had not. So, it's been, you know, you--in order to fully understand public broadcasting, you have to understand at about eight different levels, funding levels and the governance levels and, and if you're lucky, it get--comes out and doesn't look like it's that fractured. 'Downton Abbey' is PBS, but it's not produced by PBS. All of these things are very--can be very complicated. Speaker 1: But you--does it take you time to sort of get your, your--you know, do you feel you sort of jumped in or does it take you a year or two years, I mean 'cause, you're starting in 1999. When do you sort of get your, your-- Speaker 2: I'm still figuring it out. I'm still figuring it out. I don't, I don't think I ever woke up one day and said, "Ah, now, this is the way this ought to work." I think it's been a constant evolution, separately, 'NewsHour,' separately from the, from 'Washington Week.' 'Washington Week,' I felt like I had a lot of control--small staff, a weekly program--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: How small a staff? Three people? Speaker 2: Three, four full-time people. And then I'm like a part-timer. I'm over there a couple times a week. And, and they are the ones who are driving the program. I'm driving it on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday by email and in person, but they're the ones keeping it going and keeping our website up-to-date and all these other things. But all, but that had to keep growing over time. And we had to keep an eye on the audience. The 'PBS NewsHour' was evolving in a different way in that it had first been--it was called 'The Robert MacNeil Report' then 'The MacNeil/Lehrer Report,' then the 'NewsHour with Jim Lehrer,' and then Jim Lehrer retired slowly, gradually over time, and while he was deciding what his next step would be, stepping away from the program, he was elevating the rest of us into, to take over, but in a group way. So for a couple of years, there were like five of us taking turns anchoring. That didn't work. People didn't know who's, who's in the chair, what's going on. So finally, last year, they said, okay, it'll be Judy [Woodruff] and [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill] as co-anchors. And that is a process which we're still working out, but which, at least it's more coherent for the audience. They know who they're gonna see every night, but it also has given Judy and me incredible say in what we want the program to be, which is fortunate that we get along because we agree on 95 percent of everything. But it still means you gotta push forward, and it's a different challenge than it was when I first got there, when I just showed up, got--took my assignment, did my story and went home. Now, I have to think about it pretty much 24/7. Story_ID: 228743 Speaker 1: So you're still, you're basically in charge of two programs now, is what you're saying (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: You know, really--I mean the truth be told. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so how do the--describe your differentiation with those programs, you know, between the two programs and, okay. Speaker 2: 'Washington Week [with Gwen Ifill]' ['Washington Week in Review'] is a comfortable place for me now. I figured out that what kind--what it's supposed to be, what its mission is, what it should be, the kind of conversation we have, I, I know what that is now. I figured it out. The '[PBS] NewsHour' is, is a--because it's a news gathering program with a much bigger staff and a lot, different ways of telling--it, in some ways, it fills the same role that I was describing about the 'Washington Week,' which I thought 'Washington Week' operates in the space that nobody else operates in. It's in--it's serious reporters having a serious conversation about what they know, not what they think. 'NewsHour' also operates now in a special place and because of the timing and because it has an hour every night, but it also has a responsibility to tell stories better and to tell them more deeply, and to tell them well. And so we have to find a million different ways to do that, and a lot of that is driven by resources, a lot of that is driven by, do we--can we afford to go cover this story. And if we can't afford to go cover this story, which we think is really important, what do--how do we tell the story otherwise or Margaret Warner, who is our foreign affairs correspondent, will raise the money herself to allow her to take trips to the Ukraine or to Mexico or to South Korea, and to tell the story or to, you know, Egypt, to tell the stories that are out there. So it's a, it's kind of heavy lifting in some respects because you're part fundraiser, you're part editorial guide, and you're part leader of, of the crew and inspirer of the mission. And so it's a lot of--a lot more balls in the air for the 'PBS NewsHour' in, in that respect. Speaker 1: So really, [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], you become, you became your own franchise, I mean as-- Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think, I think when you've become your own franchise, everything devolves to you. And I still feel like I'm pretty much the head of a collective effort. Plus, when you're your own franchise, don't you own it? Story_ID: 228744 Speaker 1: Let's go to 2004. I mean, I had been covering, this would, by now, I had been covering campaigns '88 [1988], '92 [1992], and '96 [1996], 2000. And so in 2004, I was working for Jim Lehrer, who had done several of these debates, and they came and they asked me--he was gonna do another--or maybe that was the year he did all the debates. I don't remember, but his--they came and they asked me to do a vice presidential debate, which was [Senator] Joe Biden and--no, no, no. Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: Thousand and four [2004], they came and asked me to do a presidential debate with [Vice President] Dick Cheney and [Senator] John Edwards. I joke now that if I had to do it again, I would ask them both much different questions. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But in 2000--but in 2004, Dick Cheney had, you know, basically chewed up [Senator] Joe Liebermann and spit him out in the 2000 debates because people looked at Dick Cheney and said, ah, he's such a mean guy. Well, he showed up, and he sat down at the table. He seemed very chummy and it was, and Liebermann fell for it, and end up looking weak. And this time, John Edwards clearly came prepared to, to push back. Unfortunately, his pushing back often looked disingenuous, especially in retrospect. For instance, he brought up out of nowhere the pres--the sexual orientation of one of the vice president's daughters, which allowed the vice president to get angry and defend his family. But also, I--the thing that sticks in my mind most about that first debate is that I was very conscious of the fact, both with this and the second one that there's only one vice presidential debate, a cycle. And you can't, you have to talk about foreign policy and domestic policy, everything in that same time period. You have to keep track of the time. You have to listen to answers. You had to make sure that they are equally (unclear) proportion. It's very, it's--there's a lot that goes on, and it's very stressful and very hard. It's as hard as anything I've ever done. But I also remember thinking, I've gotta come up with a question that only I would ask, that none of these other moderators would think of, that will force these guys off their message and force them to actually think and answer a question. So the question I came up with that year was a question about a story I had read about the rise of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] among African American women and I wanted to hear what--how they prioritized this as an issue. So I read the statistics to them and asked them to respond. And the response was interesting. Dick Cheney's response was basically, "Really, I didn't know that." That was it. John Edwards' response--and I had prefaced my question by saying, we're not gonna talk about AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in Africa. We're gonna talk about right here in this country. And his first response was, "Oh, well, you know, in Africa, my plan is this." And he looked at me, and he caught my eye like he realized he had just broken the rule of the question. But he didn't have an answer to my question. And now, I had a couple--I found out later from people who were involved in his debate prep that he had been told that I might ask a question about AIDS in Africa, so he was prepared for that and didn't hear how I had phrased it. But the, the truth about John Edwards and Dick Cheney and that question is I realized I had a couple of options when I knew that neither of them had an answer. I could pound on the table and say "How could you not know this?" which I didn't think was my role or I could trust the audience to understand, this is not a priority for these. If this is something you care about, this is not their priority. And I moved on, and I chose to move on. And I was vindicated because so many people, up until now, walk up to me and say, I remember that question you asked and what it told me about those guys. And that was exactly what I was going for. I wasn't going for a definitive answer one way or not. I was going to see how thoughtful they were, whether this had been something they'd ever given a passing thought to. And it became clear they had not. So my job there was done. I didn't have to do that. That came in handy in the 2012 debate when I interviewed [Governor] Sarah Palin, and she prefaced the question by saying, I don't have to answer the moderator's questions. I found out later that was part of her debate prep. She had been told to basically--if I asked anything she didn't wanna answer to just say what she came to say. My option was to say, "What? What do you mean? Isn't that what you're here for?" But I knew that if I did that, they would--the headline would be "cat fight," two women fighting. So I decided to step back, once again, and trust the audience to understand that she basically decided not to play by the rules of the game. And they did. They got it. I put my faith in the audience to be smart enough, except for the partisans, who were gonna yell at you no matter what, to be smart enough to see what was happening. And that's what those debates for. It's for you to see the candidates on a stage and watch the way they interact with the, with one another, and how they think on their feet. It's not about the moderator trying to get her back up about something, and it's not about even getting them to fight about something. It's about watching them, it's about eyeballing them. For most Americans, it's the only chance they'll ever get. So that was my responsibility in both of those debates. Story_ID: 228745 Speaker 1: I want to take you back to the first debate, because I was thinking that if you had done [Governor Sarah] Palin, if that had been your first debate, then it's woman, you know, it's a woman being with a, you know, when there's a woman, a female candidate. But here and--well, I won't talk about her as a candidate. But the thing is that you were interviewing two white men, and, and so that's a different level of, of, you know, sort of expectation. And it raises your, your visibility and your gravitas, I would say. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So my question is first, what is the preparation? I mean from the time that you're told--first of all, how much notice does someone give you? Speaker 2: Not that much. We find out in August. The debate was in October. And I took my cue from Jim Lehrer, who was very conscious of the fact--and he's correct, that every candidate, their job is to figure out what you're gonna ask him. Their staff is figuring out what you're gonna ask. It's, if they're gonna prep their guy, they've gotta prep him with the questions they imagine you would ask. So they check you out. They check out your prev--any previous debates you may have had. They, they, they make a gauge about whether you're fair or not, and they have a veto power to not agree to certain moderators with the commission. So by the time you've been selected, they've agreed you're okay. But then the next step--or fair anyway. At least, that's what you're hoping for. But then the next step is for you to figure it out, and in my case--everybody does it differently. In my case, I kept it all to myself. I did all my own research. I, I turned my dining room table into a kind of debate central. I'm, it's--looking back on it now, I'm terrified because I discovered that people who do this, who come from networks, have entire teams of people who are working with them. But Jim was very conscious of the fact, of keeping everything close to the vest. And so I followed his, his goal, his lead and kept it very close to the vest. Maybe, by the time we did the first debate, two other people knew what the questions were. And by the time I did the second debate, three people. I mean in both cases, it was very, very tightly held because I didn't want what I might ask to pollute--to get out, to get to them and pollute the pool. And in, especially in the second debate with [Senator Joe] Biden and, and Palin, there was so much attention being paid to it that I really had to protect myself. Speaker 1: Did you have to--so do you do, were you doing practice sessions with the two people? Is that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did that time, at the very end, I did practice sessions. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And did you follow what--so was Jim, was he mentor to you in many ways or not 'cause-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --he has a totally, I mean he has a different style. So that's the other thing with women, females and their style, and not to say that you were moderating every week with-- Speaker 2: Jim and I are not alike in that respect at all, no. So he--I wouldn't--he did not provide that kind of mentorship, no, not, not for debates. Speaker 1: So what else, so you--so there's, there--it raises your visibility. You're there. You have your questions. There's a lot of anticipation about what the questions will be, and people are--they're really looking at the candidates because you're really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --the guide for people to, to, you know, see the candidates. Sometimes people, you--you found that in the second debate what you--the question--there was a lot of, thing about the book, you know, and what questions, were you gonna be fair, blah, blah--no, no, that's the debate, sorry. Speaker 2: That's the second debate. Speaker 1: That's the second debate. So what, how did you feel, if you could take yourself back to that? Are you really afraid? Are you scared? Are you-- Speaker 2: Which debate? Speaker 1: The first debate. Speaker 2: I wasn't--the first debate, I, I wasn't smart enough to be scared. I should have been more scared than I was. I was, it was a brand new experience. I was, I had done debates before, just not national debates before. And I--in both cases, the same thing happened, which is just before I go on the stage, the enormity of it would hit me. And I'd get sweaty palms and shaky and shallow breathing for about five minutes. That would pass, and I would--it was almost like flicking a switch and I would go on stage, and once I was on stage, and there to do my job, I just did the job until it was done. That was the only way I could focus. I couldn't focus on fear or on the audience or who was watching or what people were thinking. Once I got on that stage--and I'm, everybody's different. For some people, when they're about to do something big, they get, they get the fits, they go crazy. They get nervous. For me, I get calmer and calmer and I kind of get to a pin prick, and so I'm just focused on that goal at hand. When it's over, I can fall apart, but at that moment, that was all I was there to do. And as a result, that's the way I get through big stuff, no matter what big stuff it is. Story_ID: 228746 Speaker 1: --Your ear had been trained to listen also, but right? Speaker 2: That's the hardest part. The hardest part of any interview and debates--only because more people are listening--is to listen to the answer as well as ask the question because your mind is naturally going ahead to what's the next thing or he's only got thirty second left or, you know, you're wanting somehow, engage them. I always tell people that, especially after the second debate, things happened on that stage I never saw. When she walked out and said, "Can I call you [Senator] Joe [Biden]?" The worst seat in the room was to be on that stage. I didn't hear it, it didn't come through my microphone in my ear. I didn't, I didn't notice it because--partly 'cause I was so completely focused on directly what I had to do. And so things happened all the time that you didn't see. Speaker 1: So wait a minute. Are you saying you weren't in eyesight to see or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I-- Speaker 1: --because you were, you were in a (unclear)-- Speaker 2: She said it was captured on the television mics, but it wasn't captured on the mic I was hearing. But also, I just didn't, I was just in this place, and so things--like people said she winked at the camera. I watched that. I saw that on 'Saturday Night Live.' That was news to me 'cause she was playing to the camera, not to me. So all the things that people--that became iconic about those debates, I was in the last posi--I was in the worst position to notice. Speaker 1: But after the first debate, you also have Queen Latifah playing you on, on 'Saturday Night Live.' Speaker 2: Which was great fun. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: That was great fun. My fear was that they were gonna--I knew they were gonna do a debate thing because they always did these debate skits, but my fear was that they were gonna get Kenan Thompson in drag and that he was gonna end up playing me, and I thought, now, I'll never live that down. So when I discovered she happened to be the guest host the week, the week of the debate thing, I thought, thank, thank you, Jesus. A woman is gonna play me. I met her years later, and thanked her for playing me. This is between the two debates, and I, and I said to her, you know, if you ever wanna do it, you can play me any time. And she said, well, just get me some material, and I'll do it. And then they picked Sarah Palin, and that was the material and they brought her back. She wasn't guest hosting. They brought her back just to play me that week, and it was fun. Story_ID: 228747 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the [Governor] Sarah Palin because this is a whole, you know, different time period. So just the context of the campaign that was happening, I mean at the place that we are in the cam--you know, at the campaign. And then you broke your-- Speaker 2: Ankle, yeah. Speaker 1: Which, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, a lot happened. Sarah Palin, separately, was quite a story. She was out of blue, she was--got people's attention, much conversation about her. And her supporters decided that anybody who was not a supporter or rabid Palinesta was against them. If you're not with us, you're against us. So I became a, a target. In part, I was writing a book, the title of which was 'The Breakthrough: Politics of Race in the Age of Obama' [Gwen Ifill]. Because of the president's name in the title, the--a lot of assumptions were made that I was there for writing a bias book about [HistoryMaker President Barack] Obama, which I wasn't. And the book wasn't written yet. The chapter about President Obama had not been written 'cause I didn't know how things were gonna turn out. None of those little details mattered. They just needed something--this was about gaming the ref [referee]. The--see, and it happened in subsequent debates with other moderators. The key is to discredit the moderator, and they had this title, this book title. It didn't matter that I had already--I had written a piece in Time magazine about what the book was. It was hiding in plain sight. It became a, "Aha, she is secretly writing a book about the president" which wasn't true. But I wasn't in a position leading up to the debate to defend myself because I was focused on the debate, and I didn't wanna focus on a distraction. The distraction was whether I was biased or not. And I figured the truth would tell itself out. People, like Wil [sic. Wolf] Blitzer went on the air and said, I know [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill. She's not biased. I know, my--people who knew me would defend me, and I left it to them. I--in part, because two days before the debate, I was at home. I'd finished all my, all my preparation. My office is on the top floor of the house. I came downstairs, tripped, fell, broke my ankle. This is the night before I was supposed to be on a plane to St. Louis [Missouri]. So I hobbled around and hobbled around, and thought, hum, this is swelling up. I guess I'd better go to the hospital, caught a ride to the hospital. I had broken it really badly. So they, so they--the doctor looks at me the next day and, and puts my--it's Rosh Hashanah. So it's hard to find a doctor it turns out. I find this doctor. He puts my ankle in a big splint and says, I think there's some place you have to be. I said, and I said, "Yes." And he says, okay, well, we'll operate when you get back. So I went to St. Louis in a wheelchair on crutches I didn't know how to walk on. My assistant wheeled me everywhere. It--well, they built an elevator to get me to the stage, and then they recruited these two football players from Washington University [in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] to help me get out on stage on crutches 'cause I didn't know how to walk on them yet. And to that--to this day, that was my favorite part of the whole episode because there were these two bruising young men, named Buck [ph.] and Tim [ph.], and I was happy that Buck and Tim were there for me (laughter). And they seated me. They built a little ledge underneath the desk that could keep my foot elevated. Most people never saw it. The only--the time anyone noticed is I didn't stand up at the end to shake the candidates' hands. I just sat, and they came to me because I couldn't stand up. And the other thing I did, because I was very conscious about all the criticism, is I knew I couldn't be on pain medication during the debate 'cause it would cloud my thinking, and I didn't want to--I didn't wanna raise any questions about that. So I just took a couple of Advil, and went out there and did the whole thing. Adrenalin is a great antidote to pain. So the excitement and the focus that I needed allowed me not to think about the ankle. And then the next day, I flew back to Washington [D.C.] and had surgery. But I--it also allowed me to be kind of cut off from all the drama about, is Gwen biased, and, because I didn't have any extra bandwidth to worry about the ankle, to worry about preparing for the debate and to worry about some, you know, phony nonsense involving me. And I was persuaded that if I just did the job, that I would be vindicated in the end, and that's exactly what happened. Speaker 1: Yeah, because it all, it was almost a three-ring circus, if you think about it-- Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: --because, and I would like to talk--you to talk about this. So there you are, there's the book, you know. So you become, I--you know, you become your own--well, you're, you're in the three-ring circus. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So there's this whole thing, you know, we have a black candidate. It's the first black person running, you know, we have--people are looking and, you know, journalism has changed so you become, you know, she's biased. She's writing this book. And then we've got Palin who has come out of nowhere, you know, and it's [Senator John] McCain's choice. And it was a (unclear)--it really caught everybody by surprise-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that that was his candidate. And then you have [Senator Joe] Biden and frankly, she does 'cause I--you know, I was there like everybody else watching the debate. She has, she's very much at ease. She's, you know, from that wink on, you know, she-- Speaker 2: She did a good job that night. Speaker 1: She did a good-- Speaker 2: She did what she needed to do. But, you know, she wrote about it later in her book. And I read, especially the part, with special interests, the part about the debate because she said in the book, "I thought I was treated fairly." And when she said that, I thought, okay, argument's over. In fact, after it was over, her father [Charles Heath] came up to me and said, "I heard you have a bum hoof." And I said, "Why, yes, I do." And he said, "Well, you know, I hope you're--I hope you get better." And I thought, wow, he is from Alaska, isn't he (laughter) because he was, they were very sweet and very kind and very solicitous of my injury, and everybody felt I was fair. So all the other three-ring circus stuff didn't matter to me as long as I came off as being fair. Story_ID: 228748 Speaker 1: I do want go back to something. You asked a while ago about what happened in the, that period of time, that first few years. Speaker 2: From 1990 to 19-- Speaker 1: There's something that I skipped over, the [Don] Imus episode. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I was working for PBS by then, and I'm trying to remember what year it was. And I went to, and Don Imus had--the, the--let's go back. The Rutgers [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] women's, girls' football--basketball team, the Rutgers women's basketball team had just had an amazing season, and they'd had this great run up to the [NCAA] championship and lost by just a bit. And it was a narrow loss. But they were amazing. Well, everybody heard at the same time that Don Imus and his jokesters on his radio show had come on the air and it was being simulcast on MSNBC at the time, had said, had called the girls this, by this terrible slur. They had--and I don't really wanna repeat it, but they had called them--I guess for the purposes of this, I should repeat it. Speaker 2: Yeah, you should. Speaker 1: He had called them "Nappy-headed hoes." Now, he himself hadn't it, but one of his sidekicks had done it, and they had all laughed. And there was something incredibly offensive about the idea of three or four white guys sitting around laughing at these girls who had accomplished so much. And I thought--I heard about it, and I thought it was pretty awful. Then I thought about it some more. And I was sitting at home one night, and I realized an important thing came to me. It was one of these moments where you realize, you're the only one who can speak. When I worked at MSNBC, Don Imus had insulted me. And I had let it slide off my back because I didn't really care. But he had asked me to be on his show several times, and I kept saying, why do I wanna do that? This is when I was at The New York Times. I wasn't interested in, in being on his program. And he, and he said to someone--it was quoted in the newspaper at the time, and I never knew what he said, "Why, why does the White House [Washington, D.C.] let the maid,"--no, "why does The New York Times let the maid cover the White House?" And I remember at the time, I didn't know what he had said. I just know people kept walking up to me and saying, what did you do to Don Imus? And I kept saying, what are you talking about? And they'd go, oh, nothing. So it took years before I actually heard what he said. Nobody had the nerve to tell me. And when I heard--by the time I heard what he had actually said, I was by then working for NBC. He was then working for MSNBC 'cause his show is cancelled. And as part of my job at MSNBC, they would--I would apparently, I would occasionally do his program. And he, and then--and I looked--when I found out what he said, I called Tim [Russert] and said, "Now, I know this is a friend of yours, but I don't have to do his show anymore 'cause I've just discovered what he said." It was written about in a column in the New York Daily News. And he said, okay (laughter). He wasn't gonna argue with me on that. So I just felt off the hook, never made a big deal of it, never talked about it again. But when this happened, I thought to myself, I'm in a unique position. I work, I worked at NBC. He insulted me in the way he insulted these girls. I'm a black woman with an access to a platform, and the platform was the editorial page of The New York Times 'cause I had worked at The New York Times and knew the editorial page editor. So without talking to anybody, I just sat down in my home and, and wrote--this may have been '95 [1995] [sic. 2007], and wrote this op-ed column in which I basically said, pick on someone your own size. You can insult me 'cause I'm a grown person. I don't care. I let it off my shoulder, but these girls had just had the most amazing moment of their life. They had just come out, and they had been smart and interesting and athletic and accomplished. And how often do we get to see this? And this was the reward these black girls were gonna get? I was outraged. And so I got to write this, and I got the platform to write it, and I realized not another person exists in the world who can say it just this way. Story_ID: 228749 Speaker 1: After it [op-ed] appeared in The [New York] Times, it got a lot of response. And then I started getting phone calls from [Don] Imus saying he wanted to talk to me about it. And I said, you want to apologize for something that happened, how many years ago now? I'm not particularly interested in that. Meanwhile, Tim [Russert] called and said, you know, do you wanna come on 'Meet the Press' and talk about this? Actually, his producer called, and I told her, you know what? I don't think Tim wants me to come on because Tim is friends with Imus. He's been defending him, and I don't think he wants me to come on his show and, and, and in his house, basically, to insult him. And then Tim called back and said, "No, no, no, no, no. That's exactly what I want. I think, you know, you should come on and you should say what you believe. I think you have a role in this debate." And I said, okay. If you don't mind 'cause--so we were, so I showed up on 'Meet the Press' that Sunday. And when Tim asked me what I thought about it, I said, I have a goddaughter who wants to play basketball. And she'd been out shop--we had been out shopping for basketball shoes for her to wear. And I didn't like the idea that the--my goddaughter, who, at the time, was twelve or thirteen, was ever gonna have this said about her, and that in order for that not to happen, someone had to speak up. And someone had to tell people what was not acceptable. And, you know, that went off like a nuclear bomb. And the response almost universally was, "Whoa, [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill] really told Tim off," when, in fact, what I always tell people is, I don't know anybody would have allowed me to do that. I think most people who run their own program and get to be in charge of their own image, would have never allowed me to come into his house and insult him in that way. And he didn't mind. He wanted that. He knew that was an important part of the conversation, even though he felt the need to be loyal to his friend. So it was a, it made Tim and I tighter instead of, you know, we weren't fighting. We disagreed, but we were greatly respectful of our--each other's point of view. And it also gave me a chance to speak for these girls. I subsequently went and gave a commencement address at Rutgers [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and accepted an honorary degree which I was very grateful for because Rutgers and those girls needed someone to speak for them, and ultimately, they got it. Story_ID: 228750 Speaker 1: You know, like the president's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you know, when he made that speech on race, that, you know, sometimes, you know, it--'cause a lot of times, maybe the right person is not there to be able to give that vantage point. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And there may a lot of chatter on the side, but it never gets out-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --into the public that way. So that, you know, 'cause that created, I mean 'cause black women--see, that's the thing. Those were two very insulting comments that are commonly-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --it actually is--the only thing that was missing was Aunt Jemima. Speaker 2: It just, it was completely, it was dehumanizing, and the, and it would have been insulting no matter who it came from, but something about middle-aged white guys chuckling among themselves about it, was so dismissive, and especially when you know what women have to overcome and black women have to overcome and black teenagers have to overcome, to have anyone knock down their achievement that way, just seemed breathtaking. And they apologized for it, but, you know, it was a moment. It was a moment that you seized to say something. Speaker 1: Right, and then, you know, [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], you, you had spoken also in other interviews about the work that you and [HistoryMaker] Michele [Norris] and Michel [Martin] and, you know, others, have done in terms of even mentoring others coming along. And you were talking about that one instance where these, you know, the girls didn't, you know, they didn't go to a luncheon. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, you know, I don't remember telling that story, yeah. Speaker 1: So, can you talk--because I think what you're, you know, you're pointing that, you know, there're, there're these different roles that you--when you get to this level, you have to really play or hopefully, you play. Speaker 2: Well, hopefully, you play all of these roles at every level. You don't, I mean I don't spend a lot of time thinking, well, I'm at this level, so I should, therefore, I should speak for this. I think we should all be speaking all the time on behalf of people who don't have voices for themselves or who don't know. In the case you're talking about, I was working at The Washington Post, and they were bringing in interns as they still do, every year. And there're always a few interns. In this case, they would recruit a few black interns from Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And we would have a special interest in making sure they succeeded because what's the point in doing this if there's nobody behind you to do it next. And one of them, a couple of them decided one day they were going to boycott a breakfast with the managing editor 'cause, to prove that they thought they weren't being treated fairly. We found out, we hit the roof because we thought, no, no, no. That's what we're here for. If you don't think you're being treated fairly, take advantage of the people who are here, who will speak on your behalf or who will help you over the shoals. And they didn't. And they were young, and they needed to be schooled and we schooled them on, this is not the way you handle adversity in the workplace. And that's what we're there for. We were there, not to yell at them or make them feel bad. We were here to say this, not--if what happened to you is unfair, this is how you handle it. And I--it's the kind of thing I wish I had. I mean we all wish we had people who would pull our slips and say, that's not the way you do this. Let me speak for you or find a different way to speak. And you don't know until you've been through it for a while, kind of how to be effective in your objection. And that's what we were there to help them with. And that happens probably, you know, on a, on a daily basis. I mean I've worked in newsrooms where I see the one black kid wearing earphones in the newsroom, and I'm thinking, you know, you're--all you're doing is telling someone you're not listening. Pay attention to everything around you. Be aware, trust me. The kids who are getting hired, they're out there. They're in the faces of the bosses. They're making it clear that they're there to do whatever is necessary. I saw a movies years ago, which I thought was very funny in which one of the recurring black characters would say that, "Whatever happened to him that was negative in life was 'cause he was black." (Unclear) He decided that--he was no count, but he decided that was always the reason. And that's not--and maybe it is, maybe it isn't. But you can't assume it's always the reason. You have to find a way through and around that. Story_ID: 228751 Speaker 1: Can we talk about the book ['The Breakthrough: Politics and Race in the Age of Obama,' Gwen Ifill], and how the idea of a book, you know--how did it generate and was--okay, sorry. Speaker 2: The book was a kind of a accumulation of experience. I had always had in the back of my head, unbeknownst to me, been accumulating stories of leaders who had broken through in spite of things. I didn't fully realize it, so I started thinking about the book. I had encountered the first black mayor [HistoryMaker Kurt Schmoke] of Baltimore [Maryland]. I had encountered the first, you know, black county executive [HistoryMaker Wayne Curry] in Prince George's County [Maryland]. I had covered the busing drama in Boston [Massachusetts]. I realized, as I started to accum--to add up all the experiences I had, that I had been exposed to a really interesting group of people. And so I fall to an instinct that if I talk to enough of them and enough other people like them, that I would come up with common themes of their stories in life. And indeed, I did. I started the--I think the publisher got interested in the book 'cause they knew [HistoryMaker President Barack] Obama would be part of it. But I didn't, at the time I started it, have any confidence he was gonna be president. I just thought he'd be the interesting story as senator. So I started--Doubleday [Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group] agreed to do the book, but they wanted to publish it on Inauguration Day. One way or the other. They wanted it out in early January, 2009, which if I look back on it now, I would know that was crazy 'cause it was a horrible turnaround. And it was in a year in which I was covering an election, and I was constant--but that was interesting. I always tell people if you wanna write a book, make sure it's something you don't mind sleeping with and dreaming about all the time because it was--never left my brain. Everyone I talked to, everyone I interviewed, I'd say, do you know someone else? And they'd say, well, do you know the mayor of Buffalo [New York] or do you know this woman who's running for mayor in Atlanta [Georgia] or do you know this person who is, who--there are three generations of them who have been, held big positions in Columbus, Ohio. So I kept meeting people who had done--I start think--just kept thinking there are generations of black politicians now, the Jacksons, and, which, you know, that's turned out in a complicated way. But the--all, and so there were, there were the gener--there were the generational ones. There were the ones who had come from something else. And they all said the same thing to me. They said, people told them it wasn't time, that they weren't ready, including other black politicians, black civil rights leaders who weren't ready to hand over the torch. People told them they weren't black enough, that they were--they didn't fit some sort of notion of what blackness ought a be. Everybody said that. [HistoryMaker] Deval [L.] Patrick said, Barack Obama said it, everybody said. And I began-Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] said it. And the more I started putting together this story, I realized it was an amazing similarity of what it took to be audacious enough to think that you could be mayor, be county executive, be whatever, in spite of. And I just thought that was a very fas--it was a fascinating story. And so the more I kept reporting, the more I kept coming with the ideas, like where are women fit in this. I reeducated myself on the history of the Civil Rights Movement and where we were and where we were not. And it was--and I would write at night, and I would write in the morning, and I would write whenever I had an hour on a plane, and I never had a moment--I began to parcel out my day in two-hour chunks. And if I said, "Ooh, I have two hours here, I'll write." I never had a time where I felt like I could just go to the movie because I felt I should be writing. And that's the only way it got done. And, and I wrote it, I wrote each of the chapters, kind of out of order, and then as I said before, didn't write the Obama chapter at all 'cause I didn't know how to organize it if I didn't what was gonna happen. So I didn't even--I had assembled all the information but didn't write the Obama chapter till after Nov--that November, 2008 because it began differently once he had been elected. And so that, I now discover was one of the craziest crashes of all time. But it landed at just that interesting moment. And if people picked it up because they thought it was about Obama, they picked it up and discovered it was about a lot more. And by the time it was time for the paperback a year later, so many other things have happened. I had to update everything. Speaker 1: Well, that's what was really amazing, you know, 'cause I was rereading the postscript, postscript, right. And so much had changed in that time period,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Just in that short period of time. Speaker 1: --it was very, it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And it's changed again. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and I, I--people lost elections, people won elections, people aspired to things they didn't get. It was, it was fascinating and I still--every now and then--I had a researcher and an assistant who worked with me on it, and whenever we see another story, we'll just send each other emails, 'Breakthrough' or we see another example of something that fits our theme. And I--it was a deeply satisfying experience. And among other things, I learned that I could do it. Story_ID: 228752 Speaker 1: The nice thing also is that you put yourself in it ['The Breakthrough: Race and Politics in the Age of Obama,' Gwen Ifill] too, you know, 'cause there were inner--they're reflections about you at different points in your life, and I thought that that was good because, you know, I--well, let me ask this, let me ask this. Do you believe that there is a new kind of black politician? I mean part of it was looking at different patterns, but do you--what did you--do you really believe that, and what did you learn, as someone who had covered the political landscape (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if there's a new kind of black politician. I think there're, I think politicians evolve, of all races, to fit wherever the situation is. For instance, there was--the [HistoryMaker] President [Barack Obama] did a little jokey interview with a guy from 'Funny or Die', Zach Galifianakis, the actor in which part of--one of the joke questions was, "How does it feel to be the last black president?" And the president's response was, "How does it feel to be interviewing your last president?" Right, funny. But the question was interesting to me because, in fact, it'll be a long time probably before we see another black president, partly because Americans are very proud of themselves for having done it, partly because at this period in time, people look at Barack Obama, and they'll--he's less popular than he was. People are over the idea of a first, and so maybe it'll be a while. It's always a while after the first breakthrough. But it's a interesting idea about how we think about these kinds of breakthroughs as a country. And I do think that that changes who the politicians are and how they--one of the best examples in the book is Artur Davis who, at that time that I interviewed him, was running for governor of Alabama, which seemed incredibly audacious, right? It turned out it was. He thought he had figured it out. He, in his mind, was another Barack Obama who was gonna take on the entrenched leaders of the party and he was gonna surprise everybody. And he was gonna be the moderate, middle-of-the-road black politician who was able to win in the South. Well, he wasn't. He lost. He lost really badly, and he took it badly ultimately and switched parties and spoke at the Republican [National] Convention four years later. I mean it was the most remarkable change. He's not typical, but he is an example of someone who tried to change the times, and the times weren't ready for him yet, or he wasn't ready for it. So it's not that black politicians are changing. I think it's just that politics changes all the time and it's organically changing. And smart politicians figure how to change with it, no matter what their race is. Speaker 1: Which black politician are you--since we're on politicians and black politicians, what black politician are you most impressed with now, that's on the landscape? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I, I'm still keeping an eye on Kamala Harris in California. I think she is very savvy, very smart and has ambitions. And it will be--and if there's ever gonna be a black California governor again, I think she's likely to be that. Again, ever, (laughter) forget Bill Bradley [ph.]--I mean Tom Bradley did not win. He ran for governor and did not win. So there's that. She is interesting. She's fascinating to me. She's figured out how to cross lots of different lines, and that's worth tracking. I think it's worth watching Republicans like Tim Scott. I think that he has figured out--if you listen to him instead of just buy into what you think he is, he's a very interesting guy who's figured out how to be who he is and, and believe what he believes without being controlled by--I don't think, by parties. But I don't know him that well, just worth watching. Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Deval [L.] Patrick? Speaker 2: He's worth watching too. He's a perfect example of someone who probably would have run for president, but I can't--I don't know that we're gonna have--be ready for it yet. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Of course, I didn't think we were ready for Barack Obama, so. Speaker 1: Do you know--'cause there was an article in the paper the other day. This is getting--that he was looking, and I was thinking, it's too close. You know, it's too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't think he's--I'm not sure that's what he wants to do. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: I'm not sure it's what he wants to do. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I think it's something you think about because you should, but-- Story_ID: 228753 Speaker 1: So let me ask you where you are right now in your life? Can I ask that question? Speaker 2: Just like that? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Just like that. You know, because you--yeah, where are you in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, tell me what you mean by that? Speaker 1: Okay, well, I--well, you know, before I get to that, you actually, when Tim [Russert], your friend and maybe mentor. I don't know if I could--but, you know, your friend and colleague-- Speaker 2: He was my mentor in television. Speaker 1: And mentor, okay. Tim passed, you know, he dies suddenly, and that's in 2009, I-- Speaker 2: Two thousand eight [2008]-- Speaker 1: --or eight [2008], okay, which was--no one expected-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and he was, you know, really at the top of his game, and had--and so he passes away. And I remember, I heard that you were, you know, they were-- Speaker 2: In line for 'Meet the Press.' Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was written. That's what they said in the paper (laughter). No, I talked to NBC about it, and, and there was serious conversations. But I didn't get it, and I really do believe things happen for a reason. And I have since come to believe that was a really fortunate thing. You know, you never know what's gonna happen or how things are gonna work out. But I do believe that when things do go a certain way that you--there's a reason for it. And so I'm really grateful to be doing what I'm doing now, and I think if I had gone to 'Meet the Press,' I don't know what would have happened. Maybe I would have been a sterling success, but it sure would have been hard. And if they were not ready, which I believe, come to believe that NBC was not ready for me or someone like me to be in that chair, I would have been miserable. Speaker 1: Now, what--oh, you mean it would have been hard coming after him as they want--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: It would have been hard on many levels. It would have been hard because the big--the great advantage I had in going to 'Washington Week [in Review]' ['Washington Week with Gwen Ifill'] was that I didn't follow the icon directly. It was Paul Duke. Then there was someone in between. Then it was me. So people had a little time to get used to, just the notion of change, a little on the physical embodiment of it. To follow--anybody who followed Tim was gonna have a hard time partly because of the tragic circumstances in which he went away, partly because it was just--you cannot underestimate the amount of emotion that was within the network at the time about the loss of Tim. And it would have been really hard. Now, and there were other people who wanted the job who would have, you know, that would have been competitive about--the success would have been hard. It would have been very hard. And not to say it wouldn't have been--worked or that it wouldn't have been the right thing. I just think that things work out the way they're supposed to. Story_ID: 228754 Speaker 1: So where are you now? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. I'm where I think I need to be. I--every day I get a challenge. Every day I feel like there's something that I, uniquely, can bring to the job that I do. I'm never bored. I'm always learning something new, brand new, every day, which I don't think most people can say, who--to mental fabrication, you know. I am very grateful for that and because of that, and because I have a really deep abiding faith in God and his plan for me, I have long since stopped second guessing what I'm supposed to be doing and where I'm supposed to be. I am persuaded that I am where I'm supposed be and that I have to only not squander it and to always be aware of the gifts that I've been given and the platform that I've been given and not to, not to, not to, to (unclear) bad by my family, you know. You want to always do things that, that you will always feel proud of. You will always want to speak in a way, as my mother [Eleanor Husbands Ifill] used to say, "If you weren't there, your name weren't called." You wanna be always in the right place at the right time and speaking in a way--and to understand that you're speaking for other people, and that whenever I get tired of doing this or I say--I have a friend, the Sunday shows will call and say, will you come and-- and I say I don't feel like giving up my Sunday to be on TV. And someone will say to me, a friend'll say to me, you realize you need to be there because they need to hear your voice, in the same way that Tim [Russert] said that to me about [Don] Imus. And so I try to always be conscious of that responsibility as well. But that said, I have a lot of fun. I do. I think my life is not--if you had asked me when I was twenty-five whether this would be it, this is not the picture I would have drawn, but I am so grateful to have it. Story_ID: 228755 Speaker 1: Well, one of the things, you talk about being where you need to be. One of the places that you've been is with The HistoryMakers which, I mean, I have to talk about this part because you've had such a, you know, a profound impact on our organization. And, and the thing is that, you know, it started in 2005, and you, you know, you were requested, and, and at that point, we were having one celebrity interview the other, and that had gotten a little (unclear) (laughter), I was like, okay, things, you know. And you came on, and the thing that--you know, I'm not sure, you know, in this interview. I think you know how you're viewed. But, excuse me, I'm getting teary eyed. I think you know how you're viewed, but there were, between, you know, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll and, and up even to, you know, [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E. Jordan, Jr.] who's gonna happen in a few weeks, I mean with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt, I, like I was not gonna get her unless I had [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill]. And I was like, I don't think Gwen's coming to Chicago [Illinois]. I don't know. I can get her in [Washington] D.C., but I--and they were like, we went through like, I don't know, candidate after candidate-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and they were like, and I finally said, okay, I'll ask her, but I don't think so. So what you did for us--and I just, and I wanna say this because, you know, you have interviewed for us, you know, iconic character--people in the African American community who had been watching you and knew that you were--I am so teary eyed. Speaker 2: I know. You are gonna make me cry in a minute. Stop it, stop it. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But they were, they were iconic people in the African American community who saw you, you know, I mean they could have chosen anyone, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Here's the thing, here's the thing you don't understand. I mean I'm grateful that I am viewed this way. But it is such a gift to be part of the--okay, you're gonna get me started. Speaker 1: Sorry. Speaker 2: Let me start. HistoryMakers, when you first approached me about HistoryMakers, I thought, what a great idea. I didn't this was true. One of the things we do not do as a people is keep our stories or tell our stories. And I feel huge guilt about not having told my parents' [Eleanor Husbands Ifill and O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] stories. We all know the stories we've just let go by the wayside. And so when people like you and people like [HistoryMaker Henry Louis] "Skip" Gates say, I wanna dig deep and tell our stories 'cause they're important too. How could I not be part of that? Not only that, but I get to interview, if what I do is interview. That's what I do. So I don't have to come up with new skills to interview the iconic people of our time who it turns out have stories to tell. I didn't see it coming. I didn't see Diahann Carroll. I had this idea of who Diahann--we all had this idea of who Diahann Carroll was, and she turned out to be this incredible race woman. And the best part about it is doing it in front of audiences and watching the audiences suddenly discover things. When Eartha Kitt walked out on that stage and kicked her leg up in the air at eighty-plus years old, with her knee to her nose, and whole audience went crazy, not knowing that she knew she was not gonna live but a few more months. It was an amazing night. And for me, it has allowed me to expand my skills because normally, I'm doing very, you know, dry interviews with generals and scientists and experts, but I get to actually like dance with [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson. Come on. There's nothing wrong with this. Not only that, but it's--I get to do it because it's fun, but it's also a cause that I really believe in. The idea that HistoryMakers preserves our stories which are so important and that the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] will preserve HistoryMakers, Julieanna [Richardson], it's--you could die happy. I mean to have contributed to something like that, which is about more than you and goes beyond where we will be off this mortal coil, and this will still exist? There aren't that many opportunities to do that. You make it possible for me to do that. So, for me, I don't feel like I do enough for HistoryMakers-- Story_ID: 228756 Speaker 1: I'm saying that, look at how people were looking, in our community, this is what I'm trying to say. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, our community was: raise up the child, find the child, raise the child up. And they were looking at you and you were making them proud. They saw someone just like you had wanted to be, you know, fair minded. They saw you professional, fair minded, someone that they looked up to, you know, that was a beacon. There haven't been that many examples. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And so, and even the two examples you give who are friends, they are not seeing them in the same light. Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's what, that--it became a perfect sort of marriage in that way. And, I mean last year with [HistoryMaker] Ursula Burns, you know, all I heard afterwards was--and I'm talking, sorry, okay. All I heard afterwards was, "[HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], it was Gwen Ifill too," you know, (laughter), Gwen Ifill, in New York [New York] with the cynics in New York, and, you know. And so I just, so I wanna thank--I don't even know what I was asking, but I wanna thank you. I do believe that, you know, PBS has often said that they saw it--you know, this was a new side of Gwen, you know, they saw a lighter side. Speaker 2: It gives, it gives me an opportunity to be who I am, not just to be what people see me talking on the news. And that's part of who I am too. It's an important part of who I am. I am always conscious of the fact that I don't do anything that would shame my family, and, in fact, would make them proud, whether they are present or not. And these are the curiosities, these are the--this is the kind of thing that was brought into our home, whether it was music or whether it was culture or whether it was accomplished black people. When Ursula Burns--when I interviewed Ursula Burns, I didn't know she had Panamanian heritage. Well, so do I. My cousin, who was born in Panama there, the two of them knew people in common. I mean we have so much more in common. We have so much more connection than we ever give ourselves credit for, and what people like in watching those programs is discovering that. Speaker 1: And Ursula Burns, let me--that's the other thing that PBS was--we don't know her. It doesn't sound interesting. And that program has been very popular. People heard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness-- Speaker 1: --her story. Speaker 2: Once again, the point--well, we'll talk about this off camera-- Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) okay. They heard her story, and they were like, I mean they--we've been selling out DVDs because there're--I think it was just, you know, her rise. And, and you know, her rise is amazing, but the Panamanian connection. Gwen, you're born, I think you're born in the same month. You--that was what was. You guys are born-- Speaker 2: And we didn't know this. Speaker 1: --two, like two years apart. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's like crazy. Story_ID: 228757 Speaker 1: I want to move to asking some philosophical questions, and I want to go back to family too. So, where--you have spoken a lot recently about your views of race, and race in a positive connotation. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this is not a view that we hear very often. I've heard different versions of it, but it hasn't been quite your view. You know, I hear the post-racial, you know, you know, we interview people who don't wanna be called African American, you know, I mean we got all that going on. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I want you to talk about that and how you--but how you came to that. Okay. So first, say what you believe, but tell me how you came to that? Speaker 2: Well, it's tied to the family question. I'm trying to think. Recently, there was a--oh, I know. Recently, the morning after the Oscars [The Academy Awards] when Steve McQueen won it for 'Twelve Years a Slave,' there was a commentary on one of the show that called him the first African American director ever to win, except he's not African American. He's British. I said, I tweeted that day just, you know, by the way, he's not African American. He's British. You can--it's okay to call him black. Well, you would of, I got--it got retweeted 1,700 times. I mean people are--or last I checked, reacted to that. And I thought, okay, why? And so I went back and looked at the people who reacted to it, black people, Africans, who are not African American, are tired--have gotten tired of being, had that phrase put on them. White people are nervous because they're thinking, is it okay to call him black? I thought we weren't supposed to call 'em black anymore. What are the rules? So there's been this big discussion about labeling which I just say be accurate. That's all. But the reason why it became such a big deal is because we're all so paranoid about talking about race. So the paranoia, to me, is what we need to get to the heart of. I was raised, you know, a household. My father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] was very race conscious and very proud of it and taught us to be proud of it and told us if someone--at the time when we were growing up, Negroes was the acceptable term. We had just moved from colored. Black was still considered a pejorative. And so if someone called you a black so and so, that was supposed to be a slur at the time, 1960s. My father informed us our response should always be, thank you. And people would always stop. They'd go, what does she mean by that? And I learned over the years that that, whenever someone intends an insult and you don't react to it, that's the best way to react to it, 'cause they're saying it to get you to respond. But in this case, I--this was before black is beautiful. I realized black was beautiful which turned out to be an important little detail for a dark-skinned black girl in this country because even when we began to embrace people of color, we often did embrace people who looked like me. And I don't spend a lot of time thinking about it, but I have enough people who approach me, especially after I started doing television and saying, it's good to see you on television. And I realize they were black people, and they weren't necessarily just saying, good to see a black person. They were saying, good to see a African-featured black person, good to see a person of a certain color. They, there were, there were layers of trauma that we have covered, that we have carried with us about race, especially in this country. But the one thing we haven't--in all of this, we've focused on the trauma and not on the positive. I grew up--everybody, black person I grew up, knew, grew up in homes where we laughed a lot, where we played cards, where we danced, where we did a lot of things which were not about the burden of being black. It was about the joy of being black, and so my attitude was always, ah, if you only knew how much fun it is to be black, you'd wanna be black too. Now, everybody doesn't buy that because there are burdens. We understand that, but it doesn't consume your entire identity of who you are and neither should you. So I found when I was toying with the book that the thing that caught audiences--now, understand, my audiences were often very mixed. There were black folks who read books who were happy to see me writing a book. There were white folks who read books. There were PBS viewers. There were--it was a mixture of people who usually were never in the same room together, often on college campuses, young people. So whenever, I--the one thing, I could always stop the audiences by saying, you know, I don't wake up in the morning and say, "Darn, I'm black again." I kinda like being black, and it would bring them to silence because either you had--there was, there's a self-hating cohort who thought, oh, what a drama to be black every day, what a burden. Then there're white people who assume--who think they're thinking well of you, who are saying, "What a shame for you to go through so much?" I'm like, there's no shame in this. I love what I am. I love what God made me. Why can't I embrace that, and why can't you embrace it too? That, to me, is the positivity of being black, which I think a lot of black folk know and have been keeping to ourselves all these years (laughter). Story_ID: 228758 Speaker 1: I mean you're right about people do enjoy the fact they just don't, you know. It's the restrictions that have, you know, that have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And that doesn't make them any less real. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: It just means that we are not one dimension. We're this full--we're the fullness of time. Why can't we embrace it all? Speaker 1: So what hopes and concerns do you have for the black community? Speaker 2: I think, in general, I would like for us to embrace everything that we are. Yes, I worry about young black men and the disadvantages they face and the cons--I, I worry about the way that young black women see themselves. I worry about the way some of our parent and some of us don't. But, in general, I think what we have to embrace is all of our differences. We are not one thing. We are not conservatives. We are not liberals--all of us, we are all parents. We're not all straight. We are not all gay. We're not, we, like any community, are all of these things. And to the degree that we can embrace it all and not reject any section of it, is, is forward moving. So, for instance, if we are--everybody, black person I know is not a Christian, but most are, and most are practicing. But that doesn't mean I reject people who are different, who believe differently than I am. I don't reject people who live differently than I am. I don't, I may not have a lot in common with a girl I see on a street corner with a baby who she had at the age of fourteen and who's just trying to get through day, to day, to day. We may not have lives that overlap at all, but as far as I'm concerned, she's still my sister, and we have to figure, to find that little space, that little place where we can be. But we just--we've reached the point where we're not just one thing as a community. And once we accept that, don't leave each other behind or don't judge each other for what we are or what we're not or what opportunities we've had or what we don't. Then we begin to make progress. Story_ID: 228759 Speaker 1: --So I'm saying, I don't see--you know, I understand your response was--and I, you know, I see the world somewhat as half positive or I wouldn't be doing--but I sometimes, I see us losing. So my question is legacy--let me start with this. What is, what is your generation's legacy, our generation's legacy as black? What do you think at the end of the day? Speaker 2: I think at the end of the day, our generation has managed to, because of [The] HistoryMakers and because of the world we're in and because of the positions we're allowed to hold now, I think we have somehow managed to create a new platform to build on. I think the expectations are higher because the achievements have been higher. But I, I don't assume that I know everything out there. Whenever I meet someone new who I didn't know about, who I've just met, who's just done an amazing thing in an amazing place, I always think, oh, there's hope. Or even if I go to a college campus, and I meet a young, smart ambitious, great writer who doesn't necessarily wanna be a journalist, I think, okay, the kids are fine. I don't expect everybody to do what I'm doing 'cause I don't think what I'm doing is gonna exist in another ten years. I don't necess--no, I think technologies is gonna change what I am doing. But I do want someone to have that position, that power, that ability to influence thought. The most important and powerful places right now for us to be, are places that-boardrooms, are newsrooms where decision making about which stories will and will not be told. Being in front of the camera is hopeful. It's a bonus we needed. Our kids need to see that. But I really think it's almost more important that we have decision makers who are behind the scenes. And that's why, you know, I went to The BET Honors this year [2012], and I was happy to see them honor [Kenneth] Ken Chenault and Ice Cube, you know, or Ice-T--which one was it? Ice Cube (laughter). But we had to enter--we have to honor our performers as well as our achievers in different realms, and that, to me, allows us--that builds a platform for our future, not just someone who's gonna do what we did. We have a habit of valuing people who only do what we do. And that's fine, but I think there's much more. We're gonna talk to [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.]. He's a perfect example of someone who has been helpful to me, even though I'm not a lawyer. I didn't, didn't follow in his career, but they've found a way to spread it as much as possible and tell the story as much as possible. That's kind of what our generation has done. We've provided an in for telling those stories better, and therefore, the next generation will look and say, oh, well, that's, that's possible. That's not even a big deal. I'm gonna do this thing. I hope. I mean that's what I'm, that's what I'm working so hard for. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about our community that's suffering, [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill]? What about that part? Speaker 2: I was very, I was very heartened by this, My Brother's Keeper initiative at the White House [Washington, D.C.], and, and I was heartened that I was in a position to tell a story about in a way that was real and wasn't just about, the [HistoryMaker] President [Barack Obama] announced this today. That's because I'm a chair in a room where I make decisions because the numbers are disheartening, and there's no question that we need help and that the interesting thing to me about the My Brother's Keeper initiative, is not the initiative itself, but the fact that it's thrown a spotlight on a lot of work that was already going on. A lot of the foundations in that room who were underwriting this were already doing this. A lot of these community organizations were already doing this. What they now have is an umbrella so we can see everybody who's doing this. We didn't just wake up as a people and decide black folk need help. We've been doing something about it. But now, there's a way to channel the money, the resources and the attention so it gets broader attention. And it's something we wouldn't have, may ever had a chance of doing without a black president because it was his priority. So I, I, yeah, there are lots of things we could focus on that could be better. It is clear. When you look at unemployment rates, when you look at rates of achievement and college attainment and college graduation rates, it is clear that we fall short in so many ways. But it is also clear that it's better than it was, and that what we--one of the things we have to do is to harness our energies in a different way. That's what things like My Brother's Keeper, I think, do. Story_ID: 228760 Speaker 1: When you look at where you came from, because your parents [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr. and Eleanor Husbands Ifill] did, they did see your success. They didn't see you, you know, with the, you know, being the moderate--that would have been, oh my God. Could that, could you imagine that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think they saw it. Speaker 1: I know. I mean think about that, 'cause-- Speaker 2: And I did. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: And I did think about that. Speaker 1: Um-hum, because there, there's [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill] right there. You know, you--you know when you were talking about your family history, right, I was looking back over the interview which I thought there were a lot of rich parts in that interview because you grew up in a very structured-- Speaker 2: Very. Speaker 1: --you know, household. And, you know, you said even at one time, you know you wanted to be a librarian, but it was all very, it was almost--I don't wanna say like a monastery (laughter). I mean real strict--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We were strict, we were strict West Indians-- Speaker 1: It was strict, strict-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --West Indian household, but very much based on faith and responsibility and really the things in many ways that is, not only the immigrant story, but the American story--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --you know, of responsibility and all of that. And I wanted you to talk about that in terms of, 'cause you're--you still are very active A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal church]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I want you to sort of talk about your journey in a reflective, you know, in a reflective way because you were saying you could not have imagined, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, where you are, but-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I didn't intend to be famous in any way. Being a librarian will tell you what I intended. I even, when I got into journalism, intended to be a reporter with a byline. I didn't intend to be anything more than that, which is not to say that when the opportunities presented themselves, I wasn't--I hadn't been raised in a way that allowed me to take advantage of them. My parents made a choice to come to this country. I think all immigrants make this kind of choice, which when you think back on it, it's quite daring. I'm going to uproot myself. I'm gonna move away from everything I know. I'm going to settle roots in a new place, perhaps do something completely differently than what I was trained to do, and I'm gonna have children and bring them up to have a better life. People who were born in this country often take a lot of that for granted, but people who have chosen to be Americans, have already taken the big leap. So if you've been paying attention as their child, you realize what--any leap you take is not gonna be as big as the one they took for you. So that means that you have to face down the opportunities. You have to--it's, I tell young people all the time who are scared to make a change, it's not worth doing if you're not a little scared. And so you get a little scared, and then you say, oh, look, I'm on this branch, and it hasn't given away yet. And then leap to the next branch. Oh, it turns out this can hold my weight as well. And there are setbacks, and you, you use the setbacks as information for the next step. To me, that is what all of our kids need to take in more. We need to take in the fact that these are opportunities, and that they're scary, and that they're worth doing, and that it's not--and that your skin color is not the only thing that can hold you back. It may be one of the things, but that doesn't mean you can't overcome it. You're in a much better position now to overcome it than [HistoryMaker] John Lewis who had a rock thrown at his head. We hadn't had to take any of the risks that people just a generation ago took on our behalf. So why not try it. Why not give it the next step? Why not push the rock up the hill one more time because--and do it not just for you, but for everybody else and because of--for the example that you set by doing it for everybody else. I surround myself with a cohort of friends and family who believe like that. We believe in that kind of opportunity, and we believe that we make our own opportunity. We're not sitting with our arms folded waiting for things to happen because it wouldn't happen. And because of that I'm optimistic about the ability for other people to do that. But I do think it's rooted in how, what you are--what you are raised to believe you are capable of. Story_ID: 228761 Speaker 1: That ties into the whole issue of identity, and your sister [Maria Ifill Philip] always saw herself as a Caribbean American. Speaker 2: Still does. Speaker 1: And you (laughter). Speaker 2: Still does. Well, she was born in Barbados. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I was born here, and that's part of it, but it's part of the discussion we were having before about, about, you know, whether someone British automatically gets slapped as an African American. But she thinks even more broadly than that. She just doesn't like the labeling, and I get that. I completely get that. I don't have a problem with it. I can understand why some people would. I just think you have to decide what you want to be labeled. You don't wanna be limited. I don't think the label in this particular case, limits me. I think it's fairly obvious that I'm black. I think for you to pretend that I'm not, to say you're color blind--that's the thing that cracks me up because if you don't see my race, then you must be blind. Stephen Colbert tells a funny joke all the time on his show where he says, "Well, of course, I don't see color, so they tell me you're black." And at least--the thing I like about that joke is he is aware that it's a joke. And that's the same thing I feel sometimes about people who pretend not to see color. It's like why? The only reason you pretend not to see color is if you think it's a negative. I think it's a positive. There's nothing wrong it. And that is the other thing that causes people pause. They go, okay, well, I hadn't, I thought--well, they don't have an answer for why they think color blindness is a good thing. So thinking about it at all. It's not--it's, it's condescending actually. "Oh, well, I, I like you in spite of the fact that you're black." Really? It's okay to like me because I'm black (laughter), you know. It's just--I just have never bought into the notion there's anything wrong with it. In fact, I've brought into the notion there's lots of good with it, and that all these things tie together for me. Speaker 1: So you believe in the diversity experience 'cause right now, there's a move on college campuses, you know, where they, you know, kids are saying, well, they're only bringing in non-slave, slavery background--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)--whatever-- Speaker 1: You've heard this? Speaker 2: Yeah. I've never bought into that. They bought into this with the Obama debate too, where--in which they said that [HistoryMaker President] Barack Obama is not really an African American because his family wasn't raised by slaves. Why are we dividing ourselves that way? Why, why are we caught up, caught up in this notion. Yes, we know slavery left a special legacy. But, you know, to the extent that children who were raised--I mean the difference is my slave--the slaves I descended from were on cotton--I mean were on sugar plantations. So it's the same idea. But dealing with the here and now? Let's see if we can't get past that and understand that we have far more in common than we have that's different. Story_ID: 228762 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That I interviewed [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt once (laughter). I, you know, I don't think much about legacy 'cause I guess I'm not, I'm not there yet. I mean I would like, I would like for another generation of young black women to look at me and say, oh, I can do that. I would like for young black men to look at me and say, oh, I can do that. I would like for young white girls to look at me and say, oh, I can do that, not because they're color blind but because color is just part of the thing that informs them about who I am. I want to know that--I wanna create a situation where people--I want people to understand that journalism is not just about being a personality. It's not about opinion. It's about informing in a way that enhances. And so much of what passes for journalism doesn't enhance our experience whereas, if you're asking the right questions and listening for the right answers and maintaining a constant high level of curiosity which always will lead you to the next question, then you can be a really excellent journalist, a chronicler of our times. And because--the thing about journalism is it leaves a record. And the record becomes your legacy. So if I can do that with honor, and I can do that with respect, and I can leave a generation of young people who say, ah, I can do that too, that's a perfectly fine legacy by me. Story_ID: 228763 Speaker 1: And what do you wanna be remembered for? Speaker 2: Just that. Speaker 1: Okay. And one last--is there anything else you want to say? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, I want to say, thank you. I'm sorry I had a breakdown. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But for the record, she has had a profound impact on our organization [The HistoryMakers]. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: And we can't--so thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you. I'm all talked out. Story_ID: 228764 ANNOUNCER: The following program was funded in part by Toyota. Additional funding was provided in part by Comcast NBC Universal, Discover Financial Services. Story_ID: 228765 ANNOUNCER: Born of a close-knit family of Caribbean descent, she dreamt of becoming a journalist. Her career has taken her from print to network television, to PBS, to the moderator of vice presidential debates. When she speaks, others listen. Her name is [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill. The HistoryMakers, the nation's largest African American video oral history archive is proud to present 'An Evening with Gwen Ifill.' And now to our host, [HistoryMaker] Michele Norris. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: Hello everyone. We are in for a special evening tonight. When she speaks, people lean in to listen. She has politics in her blood, and she's a consummate journalist, fair, balanced, my dear friend, Gwen Ifill. Speaker 2: (Music clip). (Applause). Speaker 1: Hello. Speaker 2: This is weird. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: You know, we talk on the phone how many times a day? Speaker 1: A few. Speaker 2: A few times a day. And so you get to sort of eavesdrop, I guess, on the conversations that we have. But this is gonna be the more personal because we're gonna explore what makes Gwen Ifill so special. For many years, you have been in this chair, but tonight, we're turning the tables. I get to interview you. Speaker 1: That can't be good. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: But before we get started, there's someone who has a special message for you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Can we take a listen before we get started? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, let's listen. Speaker 1: (Film Clip). Speaker 2: VERNON JORDAN: What I like about this moment is that last time that I did something for HistoryMakers, you were doing the interviewing, and now this time, it's about you. You have had, Gwen, an extraordinary career, and every time I see you described in various publications, you're always described as the best African American, female reporter, newsperson, anchor. I think you're not the best African American reporter. You are just the best. Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.] is here in the audience tonight. Vernon, would you please stand? Speaker 1: (Applause). Story_ID: 228766 Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: --Many people around the globe, with you, feel like they already know you because they listen to you, they watch you, and they already have a sense of who you are and a sense of your storytelling. But tonight, we're gonna do something a little bit different. We're going to learn a little bit more about who you are, and how you do your work. And I wanna ask you just what do you think is the, is the most important ingredient in what you do? Speaker 1: Accessibility. I--you talk about people who think they know you. I once had a former boss walk up to me at a party and say, "The last time I saw you, I was naked." Speaker 2: Okay, well, that's (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: And I responded, "Was I there?" Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What he meant, he had seen me on 'The Today Show' ['Today'] or something. It was early in the morning, and he decided that he felt familiar in a way we never were. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: But it's good, it's good because in order to tell stories, in order to bring people's understanding of our world, and make them listen to you, they have to feel that they trust you. They have to think, you know this--you do it better if you find a way to communicate directly with them. Story_ID: 228767 Speaker 1: People have a sense that they know you, but there's a lot that they don't know about you. Speaker 2: I hope not. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) We're gonna learn a little bit about that tonight (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My family is here. They know things. Speaker 2: They're right here. They're smiling at us in the front row. And we're--we'll have a chance to meet some of them because we want to learn a little bit more about the Ifill family. There were six kids in the family. Let's learn a little bit about where you come from, your backstory. Let's take a look. Speaker 1: (Film clips). ANNOUNCER: [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill] was born in 1955, the same year that Rosa Parks was arrested in Montgomery, Alabama, to an activist, preacher father and a strong-willed mother. Speaker 1: REVEREND JOHN R. BRYANT: Her dad [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] has black consciousness and he fit very prominently in the whole Civil Rights Movement and also sewed that spirit into his children. Speaker 2: ROBERTO IFILL (GWEN IFILL'S BROTHER): My father was what used to be called a Race Man, meaning he was very, very strong in his belief in the dignity of African Americans. We grew up with a strong sense of pride. We called ourselves black before that term became actually popularly known, but also a real, sort of sense of ourselves as, as having an identity beyond just simply kids. Speaker 1: SHERRILYN IFILL (GWEN IFILL's COUSIN): We are the daughters of two pretty amazing brothers who in many ways shaped us. They had a kind of incisive wit. They were incredibly intelligent. They were deeply engaged in the affairs of the day. There were three newspapers in my home every day and probably the same in Gwen's. Speaker 2: ROBERTO IFILL (GWEN IFILL's BROTHER): And believe it or not, I think she always, almost always wanted to be a journalist. She was always curious. She always wanted to get sort of the story, if you will. She was always interested in what people were saying about issues, about each other. She naturally gravitated to journalism and communications, even before we really knew what it was. ANNOUNCER: Ignoring the advice of a bad guidance counselor, Gwen was admitted to Boston's [Boston, Massachusetts] Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] in 1973. At the height of Boston's busing crisis where riots and protests were a frequent occurrence. At Simmons, she would find a mentor in her journalism professor, and an internship at the Boston Herald. Her journalism career was off to a great start. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: I love that picture. Speaker 2: I like all of those. Speaker 1: My brothers on graduation day, holding me up as they always do-- Story_ID: 228768 Speaker 1: I'm really glad you didn't listen to that guidance counselor. Speaker 2: Mr. McDuffey [ph.] wherever you are, you were wrong. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). (Applause). Speaker 2: I hope he is watching. We're gonna hear more about-- we'll hear more about Mr. McDuffey-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in a minute. But I've gotten a chance to know your family very well. They are wicked smart-- Speaker 1: And competitive (laughter). Speaker 2: --and competitive. If you play board games, you better bring your A game and, and hope that you, you know, had a lot of coffee and a good night's sleep. But I never got to meet them when they were young. And I've always wondered what it would be like to be inside the Ifill household. Take me inside that household. What was that like? Speaker 1: Well, it's important--my cousin [Sherrilyn Ifill] mentioned this on the tape there. We were children of immigrants who came here from Panama and Barbados. They chose to be Americans. They-- Speaker 2: They chose to be Americans. Speaker 1: They chose to be Americans. They decided being American was something to strive for. Not only that, but they also, they--you know, my parents [O. Urcille Ifill and Eleanor Husbands Ifill] could sing every patriotic song in the book. And we sang along. But they also exposed us to this sense of what America's flaws were, as well, and how we could overcome them. There was never any question but that we would overcome them. And I remember doing my times tables at the table, and if I failed, this was not a pretty sight. There were tears shed. Speaker 2: So they had high expectations. Speaker 1: They had very high expectations. And, you know what? That was fine. We could all stand to make our children live up to high expectations. All my brothers and sisters turned out to be amazing people. My cousins turned out to be amazing people. We see each other now at family gatherings, and we're a little shocked at it all, that we survived it because we were all poor. We didn't have any kind of middle-class upbringing or opportunities to get a leg up. We started out at ground zero without any thought that we would fail. Speaker 2: But you were rich in important ways. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: That's clear. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: That's clear. Speaker 1: And we grew up in religious household where we really did believe in the end that it didn't end with us. It didn't begin with us; it didn't end with us. Speaker 2: You grew up in a strict household also? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I met your father. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: And so, I'm wondering as journalist, if you learned something important, having to figure out how to question authority without being sent to your room? Speaker 1: Sometimes you have to be sent to your room too (laughter). Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: It's true that--I think we would say my father and mother did not, broke no nonsense. But it's also true that it taught me that sometimes every question needs to be asked. Sometimes, you're not gonna always get an answer as I discovered at vice presidential debates. But it means-- Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: --but it means you have to ask it any way. And I learned to be very conscious of the fact that I'm representing more than myself when I'm in public especially. Speaker 2: We heard in that tape that your father embraced a word that many of his generation had to wrestle with for a while. He decided that he was unapologetically and, and--he was unapologetically black at a time when people of color were sort of marching away from being Negroes and moving towards being colored and weren't quite sure if they were black or African American. He said, I'm black, and-- Speaker 1: And this was way ahead of James Brown, let me just say. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: It's when black was still a slur. We had gone from colored to Negro, and if you were called black, that was a black so-and-so. That was a bad thing. So our father taught us to say, if someone were to call you a black so-and-so, just to say, "Why thank you." Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: It works when you defang a slur because the person hurling it at you doesn't--didn't really mean, all along for you to be happy about it. They wanted you to be upset. They wanted you to--get under your skin. But if you defang it and, in fact, embrace it-- Speaker 2: You neutralize it. Speaker 1: But it neutralizes it. Speaker 2: How did the relationship that you have with your siblings, that sense of family, that cocoon, how did that shape you as a journalist and as the person you've become? Speaker 1: Well, because my father was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister, we moved every couple years. You who are familiar with the A.M.E. itinerancy, we--every couple of years, we'd be transferred. And so in the end, your best friends growing up were your family, were the people you knew all the time. And that was extended, that expanded to our extended family as well. So that made you realize the value of family first and foremost. But it also allowed you to pick very carefully who your friends are and who they're not. So I'm not confused about friendships, but I'm also very conscious about the number of people who are my friends because of my job and those who are my friends no matter what. Speaker 2: I got yah. Speaker 1: And that's, that informs my thinking and informs my morality, and it informs how I gauge--not judge, but gauge the people I cover. Speaker 2: Many of you are very artistic. You paint,-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you sing. Was that a part of your childhood growing up? Speaker 1: It was a part of our childhood, especially the singing. We're a very musical family, and I'm talking about every kind of music. My father would embrace everything from Nat King Cole to the highest hymns of the church. Speaker 2: The first time I met him, he was sitting on your couch, and he was sitting there dancing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Doing a little Calypso. Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: There's a little bit of that going on. Speaker 2: The Mighty Sparrow [Slinger Francisco]? Speaker 1: And a little Might Sparrow (laughter) very good. Speaker 2: I remember. Speaker 1: And as a result, we all became--it just became part of who we were then and now. And we--and most of us still, I mean even the ones who can't particularly carry a tune, still try. And I'm speaking about my brother, [Reverend] Earle [H. Ifill], yes. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: No, I love him. He's wonderful-- Story_ID: 228769 Speaker 1: I want to ask you a little bit more about that guidance counselor, Mr. McDuffey [ph.]. Most of us have a Mr. McDuffey in our life, somewhere, and I hear the audience responding. Um-hm, um-hm. And you have to learn how to push past that, how to let that just roll off your shoulder. And you did at that moment. But was that, was that easy for you to do? Speaker 2: It didn't occur to me that he was right because at home I was getting a different message. And, and that's why, as you well know, your children are--I'm very close with your children. Your daughter's my goddaughter. Your son is basically my godson. He won't allow anything else. I have another godson. I feel it's very important that I am defending them, and that I am showing them away. A few years ago, after the Rutgers' [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] incident, remember, with the basketball players who were called a name by a radio jock [Don Imus]. I went on 'Meet the Press' that Sunday to talk about it because I was angry, and I realized I had a way to speak. I had a platform to speak, and I--and my friend, Tim Russert who was then the moderator of 'Meet the Press' was a friend of this radio jock, and had defended him. And I thought--I said, Tim--he said, "Do you wanna come and talk about it?" I said, "I don't think you want me to." And he said, "No, no, no, I think we need to hear it," which is one of the reasons I loved Tim Russert. He wanted someone to disagree with him in his house. And one of the things I wanted to say that day and did say is, I didn't want anybody to walk up to my goddaughter and use that kind of language about her if she decided she wanted to excel in any sport, which she does. And it is important to speak when you have that platform, when you have that ability to get an op-ed piece printed in The New York Times, where I used to work. I realized if I didn't speak for these young, black girls, nobody else had the platform to do it. And that informs everything I do and say. Speaker 1: You use your voice whenever you can. Speaker 2: Have to use your voice. Story_ID: 228770 Speaker 1: You went to school at Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] where you sort of widened your sphere of influence, but also, more people had a chance to put their hands on your shoulders. And you had one person in particular there who was very influential. And just, even as I describe him, your face brightens up. Tell us about him. Speaker 2: Alden [W.] Poole was a grizzled old newspaper guy who worked--and who taught me Journalism 101 and basically, will tell you to this day that I got a C in Journalism 101. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: Something I had blocked out until he thought to remind me. But he taught me the fun of newspapering. We did grow up in a house with a lot of newspapers. We did like the idea that we could ask questions and force answers and hold people accountable. But he taught me how you could write it too, how you could tell the story. I didn't wanna be on television. Television was too shallow. Who knew? I wanted to be a newspaper reporter. I wanted to be Mary McGrory. I wanted to tell the truth in newsprint. Speaker 1: And did you want you? I mean Bert [Roberto Ifill] suggested that you always wanted to be in newspaper. Speaker 2: I always wanted to write-- Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: --I always wanted to write, and I needed a deadline, so I became a newspaper reporter (laughter), 'cause I couldn't actually get things done otherwise. But I--but that was my goal. My goal was to write. I had a brief goal to be a ballerina and that wasn't really for me (laughter). Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: But you can dance. I've seen you on the dance floor. Speaker 1: No ballet (laughter). Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Just saying. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). (Applause). Speaker 2: So thanks to his influence and your decision to pursue a career in journalism, you got a job early on in Boston [Massachusetts]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --at a newspaper, and you became a food writer. Speaker 1: I did. It was the only way to write. I was, I walked in the door, and, and--actually, even going, how I got that job, I got that job because I was being, I was an intern. And I came to work one day all bright-eyed and bushy tailed and someone had left a note at my workspace that said, charmingly, "Nigger, go home." And I looked at the note and thought, I wonder who this is for? Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). (Applause). Speaker 1: Couldn't be talking about me. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: And then it occurred to me. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: So I went to my boss, who went to his boss, who went to their boss. They were all properly horrified, and in the end, they said, "If you ever need a job,"--they thought I would sue them. That hadn't occurred to me-"If you ever need a job, come back." And I thought I would never go back and work for those racists until I sent out fifty job resumes and got not one nibble. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So all of a sudden, that job looked really appealing. So I went back to the Boston Herald American [Boston Herald], and I was a gofer. You go for this, you go for that. And when the first writing job came open on the staff, it was writing about food. I didn't know how to cook (laughter), and I, I learned an important thing from that, which is, you learn anything you need to know. If I wake up tomorrow, and there is, there is an over--some coup has happened in Moldova, I will not know anything about it in the morning. I will interview Margaret Warner about during the day and know a lot about it by six o'clock [p.m.] (laughter). Story_ID: 228771 Speaker 1: You were in Boston [Massachusetts] at a time of great tumult. Speaker 2: Tumult. It was a terrible time to live in Boston, but a good time for a reporter, which is to say there were riots. There was upheaval, the school busing crisis. I eventually left the food beat, and started covering education. But I would cover school riots by phone because they were not paying me enough to go to the riots. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: You should talk a little bit about that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --because we forget what was going on in Boston. It was actually dangerous to go to-- Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: --the scene of some of what was going on. It was difficult to just travel across town. There were places you could not go. Speaker 1: We saw a photograph of a man in a three-piece suit, black man, being attacked by an American flag. I don't if you remember that from that time. That was Boston at that time, and that photograph was taken by a photographer [Stanley Forman] who won a Pulitzer Prize, who I worked with at the Boston Herald American [Boston Herald], who captured that just before digital cameras, just happened to be at the right place, the right time and knew what to do with it. And that was the kind of tension. And you didn't cross a bridge 'cause you didn't know when you might be assaulted. You found a way however, as a reporter, to maintain a little bit of distance from it, enough to make sure that you could tell the story. Speaker 2: You eventually left Boston. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And then you went to Baltimore [Maryland]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and covered Baltimore during an interesting period also, sort of the rough and tumble of that city. And at that point, is that when you decided this is, this the--I found my home. Journalistically, I found my home (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, everybody-- Speaker 2: --in terms of the beat that you were covering. Speaker 1: Yeah, everybody in their career has a salad days, a period in their careers where it felt like everything clicked. And that was Baltimore for me. Maybe it was leaving Boston, which was so tense, to a place that at the time didn't feel as tense. And maybe it also was covering actual elective politics for the first time, covering mayor's races and covering the [Maryland] State House [Annapolis, Maryland] and just doing the nitty gritty of finding out how politics actually affects people's lives, not just how it affects the politicians. And that has informed everything I've done since. Speaker 2: We have a wonderful clip that will take us inside your life at that time, as you were covering Baltimore during a very acrimonious time. Can we take a look? Speaker 1: Sure. ANNOUNCER: Baltimore, Maryland, in the 1980s was led by Mayor William Donald Schaefer, touted for his revitalization of Baltimore's downtown. Speaker 1: (Film Clip of Mayor William Schaeffer): I've said so many times. I walk the street and ask people, "Why are you for the Ukraine?" ANNOUNCER: Four years later, [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill] would move to the venerable [The] Washington Post where she covered Prince George's County [Maryland]. She would be moved to the national desk in 1988, where [HistoryMaker] Reverend Jesse [L.] Jackson's presidential campaign catapulted the careers of many African American journalists. Speaker 1: (Film Clip of Reverend Jesse Jackson): "I just wanna take common sense to high places." ANNOUNCER: She would eventually leave The Post to join The New York Times where she covered the presidential campaign of President [William Jefferson] "Bill" Clinton. Speaker 1: (Film Clip of President Bill Clinton): "Most people are working harder for less money than they were making ten years ago. It is because we are in the grip of a failed economic theory." Speaker 2: (Film Clip of Shelby Coffey III): So I'm the guy who nearly ruined Gwen's career. When I was editor of the Los Angeles Times, I had followed Gwen's writing career, and I very much wanted to hire her. She was thinking about television and the shift over to television at that point. I said, "Hang on, that can be a very shaky business", which was not untrue. Speaker 1: (Film Clip of Roberto Ifill): She had to think a lot about it, and, in fact, she was pretty much aggressively wooed by all of the networks, and the cable networks when she was contemplating leaving The New York Times. And we had some discussion about, well, what does it mean to go to ABC versus NBC, CBS. They were all after her. And I think she chose NBC, in part, because no one says no to Tim Russert but also because I think she was assured by him that journalistic standards would still be maintained. And she would be able to use that experience that she'd gained as a political reporter in more than just a kind of a sound bite of a minute or so. Speaker 2: (Film clip) Speaker 1: (Male moderator): "One thing you can certainly say, Gwen, about Bill Clinton and that is that he is a survivor. And I think we'll have to say you're a survivor too because you've been The New York Times reporter who has been right at his side, covering his campaign all year. ANNOUNCER: After he wins, Ifill became a White House [Washington, D.C.] correspondent. She then left in 1994 to join NBC as a congressional correspondent for its Washington [D.C.] bureau. Speaker 1: (Film clip of Pete Williams, NBC News): "I was at NBC News in 1994 when Gwen Ifill came here from The New York Times. Gwen, from her very first story made the change almost instantly for two reasons. She knows what she's talking about, and she knows how to tell a story." Speaker 2: (Film Clip of Gwen Ifill): "Now with only a month to go before the Iowa caucuses, these long-suffering voters are being bombarded by presidential candidates who say they can fix Washington. Every four years, they hope again. Gwen Ifill, NBC News, Iowa Falls, Iowa." Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Two things. I always look cold in those stand-ups. And I had a lot more hair. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Story_ID: 228772 Speaker 1: --You've noted that for people who disdain politics or just dismiss it, that one of your roles is to help people understand how politics touches their lives in almost everything they do. Speaker 2: It's true. And sometimes it's a losing battle. I can't always convince people when they can't--when they've just finished turning off their television set from being completely coated in negative television advertising. I once worked for a boss at The Washington Post who believed that reporters shouldn't vote, that it would somehow cloud our thinking. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: I had to say to him that, nobody got hosed for him to have the right to vote. So as far as I was concerned, I saw the connection. I saw how it mattered. To me, if you choose not to participate, that's on you. But for me, I see the through-line to what my life is today and what it would have been if people had not participated on my behalf. Speaker 1: So you mentioned going to work at The Washington Post. You were hired there to work first in--was it the Prince George's County [Maryland] bureau? Speaker 2: It was Prince George's County bureau. Speaker 1: You covered the [Maryland] State House [Annapolis, Maryland]. And you covered the campaign of [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson. Speaker 2: I covered [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry somewhere in there too. I'm telling you. I did it all. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: I cov--I ended up covering Jesse Jackson because it was, I was the low girl on the totem pole in 1987. I was the fresh face on the political staff. And that meant that you got to go and cover all of the candidates who no one thought could win--with all due respect. So I would walk into [Representative] Dick Gephardt's rallies and Pat Robertson's rallies and Paul [Martin] Simon's rallies, and they would look at me, and after a while, go, "Oh, no, she's here." Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: I was like the angel of death. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). (Applause). Speaker 2: But let me tell you. The one person who would not just fade away was Jesse Jackson. He stayed that year--he had run in '84 [1984]. He ran again in '88 [1988]. He stayed all the way through to the conventions, and so he was a--he became a great story 'cause he was the only guy who was not [Governor Michael] Mike Dukakis. And so I spent a lot of-- Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: --which in retrospect, you know, which, so I spent a lot of time on the road. I got, I think I got, made it to forty-eight contiguous states that year, just traveling around and with a lot of reporters who've gone on to great, great careers because we were putting in the miles in 1988. Speaker 1: Reverend Jackson is here this evening. Speaker 2: Ah (jumps). Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). (Applause). Speaker 2: Got yah. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it's a good thing I didn't say what I was gonna say (laughter). We took the early bus, Reverend. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: There were a lot of reporters who were on that bus. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Tell us what that was like at that time. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now he's here. I don't know (laughter). Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: Reverend Jackson would get on a plane and say, "Let's go to Palm Springs [California]. We'll get there at 4:00 [am] in the morning." And we'd think, who's gonna be in Palm Springs for Jesse Jackson? Hundreds of people. You'd walk into a high school gym. There would be thousands of people. "I am somebody." There was something that really sparked an amazing engagement. The other interesting thing I discovered about covering Reverend Jackson is I also--I did really cover Pat Robertson for a while. And when I went to Pat Robertson rallies, I went in thinking, I don't know. Moral majority. What am I gonna find? And I found the same people I found at Jackson rallies. They were white. They weren't black at Jackson rallies, but they were people who felt that their voices weren't being heard. They were looking for someone else. They were drawn to these two men of the cloth because they were speaking to and for them. And so I discovered that it was an interesting thing, that race is not the only determinant of what--how we choose to do what we do. So it was really important for me to make that connection between these two very different individuals, but also to keep in mind that if you were covering Reverend Jackson, you could travel for days and miles and eat nothing but fried chicken. It's true. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Am I right? Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: (Reverend Jackson in audience nods, yes). Speaker 1: And, you know, I didn't eat chicken for two years. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter) Speaker 1: Jackie [Jacqueline Brown Jackson], you know what I mean; you know what I'm saying, okay. Story_ID: 228773 Speaker 1: So you left The Washington Post, and you went to The New York Times where we saw you covering [President William Jefferson] "Bill" Clinton's campaign and you eventually left The New York Times and moved into television. Speaker 2: Can I tell a story before we go leave The Washington Post? When [HistoryMaker] Michele [Norris] came to interview at The Washington Post, she came over to my desk and said, "So, how much money should I ask for?" I said, "Ask for $10,000 more than you think you deserve." Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: And she did, and she got it because it was the kind of thing we needed to share with each other because that's what the boys all did. Speaker 1: Well, that's what you said to me. You said, "Because the white boys would do that." Speaker 2: Okay, the white boys. Let's just say it. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter.) (Applause). Speaker 2: I may have said that. Speaker 1: So you moved from print into television. Oh, but before we go on, we should, we should also note that we both worked for Ben Bradlee. Speaker 2: We did. Ben Bradlee was a curmudgeon. He was an amazing journalist, and we worked--we were just, you know, crumbs in his path. But he created a newsroom that doesn't exist anymore where you knew that someone had your back. I once went to a campaign event where a Secret Service agent roughed me up. And it got back to Ben Bradlee that one of his reporters had been injured. He didn't just call the head of the Secret Service. He called the secretary of the treasury to complain. His idea of backing up his reporters and making sure that if you were right, that he would have you, it stuck with us throughout our entire careers. Speaker 1: And someone who also walked the newsroom. Speaker 2: And he walked the newsroom. Speaker 1: Right over your shoulder while you were writing for the paper. Speaker 2: Yep, great guy. Speaker 1: Great guy. We miss him. When you went to television (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --we heard from Pete Williams that you took to it almost immediately. Speaker 2: That's so not true. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: I was--I love Pete, and it's so sweet that he thought that, but it was really hard making--and you know this, making the transition from print to television. You had to figure out how to write differently, had to figure out how to present differently. And you had to settle on the right shade of lipstick, which was huge. (Audience laughter) It turned out that everybody had something to say about you when you were in front of the television. But the other thing is, you get your phone calls returned. People felt they knew you, that accessibility quotient came to work. And you reached a much broader audience. So when--and I left The Times, I remember going to the then publisher, Arthur [Ochs] Sulzberger [Jr.] at The Times and told him I was thinking of leaving to go work for NBC. And he said, "Why would you go work in television? I don't watch television." Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: Well, that's changed. But the point was, I wanted to make sure another important lesson for the, for the children which is, I didn't burn any bridges. I made sure in case I failed in television, I could go back to print. And, and I didn't fail for the same reasons why you don't fail. You work hard. It's not how you get in the door. It's what you do once you're through the door, and you make sure that you make friends and learn lessons from the people who are willing to help and ignore you, the haters (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, and the one thing that, that I can say, having worked in television also, is that everywhere I would go, I would find camera crews who loved them some [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, that you remembered that it was a team that got you on the air. Speaker 2: Well, I would flirt with the camera crews too, should you say? Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: To this day. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) You covered a lot of conventions. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And you said that, that covering the conventions is actually one of your favorite parts of covering politics. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What do you love so much about conventions? Speaker 1: I'm one of the last hold-outs who think conventions kind of matter. I like the room--a room full of people who are enthusiastic about the process. I like--I think it's important that we hear from the future leaders of a party. I was standing on the podium, the podium--the dais, in 2004 when the keynote speaker finished speaking. And when [HistoryMaker] [President] Barack Obama walked over to me with the, you know, the place was crazy and the, the confetti was flying and balloons. And there was this electricity, you'll remember, that night. And I asked him how he thought he did. And he says, "Ah, I think I did okay." Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: Now, I found out later that Michelle [Obama] had said to him in advance, "Just don't screw up." Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: So, you know what? He didn't. And it was great to be there in that moment, at that time, and to talk to him about it, and to capture that sparkle that came off him as he was bursting onto the scene. And so I, I like that about conventions. It gives you a chance to be there at that moment. I was on the floor the same night [Governor] Sarah Palin first spoke. The room went kabuli [ph.] that night. And she was going to take the party in whole different direction for a while, at least. Speaker 2: Your brother has said that you, as a kid, used to watch conventions. Speaker 1: Yeah, don't believe everything my brother says, but that's right. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: You did, you did. Speaker 2: We watched conventions kind of for, for recreation. I--once again, this was an extension of the fact that my parents [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr. and Eleanor Husbands Ifill] thought that what happened in American politics and government mattered. So--and also keep in mind that when we were growing up and watching conventions, we didn't know how they were gonna end. They were actually kind of dramatic. And imagine watching a convention where Barbara Jordan gets up and speaks, and you're a little black girl at home who sees nothing like this on television. It blows your mind. Where else was I gonna see that voice, hear that voice. And so, as a result, whenever I go through the Austin [Bergstrom International] Airport [Austin, Texas], I stop and pat her a little bit. There's a wonderful bronze sculpture of her in baggage claim at the Austin Airport. And I just greet her every time because she was an amazing--and Shirley Chisholm. I mean there were women, black women who were out there speaking their truth in an environment where it wasn't generally welcome. Speaker 1: As I listen to you talk about this, though, I'm imagining children watching television now and seeing you. Speaker 2: Okay. She's gonna make me a little farklempt here. You know, when I was a little girl, there was a woman named Melba Tolliver, who was on the news. And she had a big afro. And I just was transfixed by this idea, not--it didn't make me wanna be in television as much as it made me want to tell the story. And every now and then I am not particularly interested in--you know, I just get caught up in whatever the day's work is. Invariably, somebody will come up to me and tell me the story of their little girl. And it always stops me in my tracks because as long as I remember that there's someone on the other side of the piece of equipment, the camera, who's watching me with expectation, and it can shape what they do next, I have to take what I do seriously every single day. Story_ID: 228774 Speaker 1: When you left network television, you went to PBS. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And you went to work for 'Washington Week [in Review]' ['Washington Week with Gwen Ifill'] where you sat in the big chair, at the head of the table. And you decided at that moment that you didn't want to follow a path that others had already set forth, that you wanted to do something completely different. Speaker 2: You know, this was the other side of the Tim Russert story. Tim wooed me into television, and then he made it possible for me to leave NBC because when I got the job offer to not only host 'Washington Week,' but also to be a correspondent for the '[PBS] NewsHour,' one of the last serious hours of television in the news business, I just thought, "Well, I don't know. Should I do this? I'm scared. What do you think?" And Tim said, "You gotta do this. Are you kidding me? You're gonna make history. You gotta do this." "But you're under--but I'm still under contract at NBC, Tim." "Oh, I'll take care of that." And he did. And so he got me into NBC; he got me out of NBC for this next phase of my career, which was gonna allow me to host my own program, to do it without shouting, to allow us to have more, more light than heat, which turns out to still be rare, and, and to work for Public Broadcasting where I've now spent the bulk of my career, knowing that every single day, when I get up and go to work, I'm not gonna have to do a story about Chris Brown. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). (Applause). Speaker 2: You know. We're gonna do stories that matter. We're gonna do stories that really affect your lives, and we're gonna start every day thinking--as we do every morning in our meetings at the 'NewsHour,' what is the question we wanna ask, and why does it matter every day. Speaker 1: But you can do a story about [Michael] Mike Brown, and you can say, we're gonna lean in, and we're gonna look at what happened in Ferguson [Missouri] in a particular way-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --because you're also the managing editor. Speaker 2: And PBS is ambitious. And we went to Ferguson, and we did an hour-long special where we brought all these people together in a room for a town hall meeting who've been talking about each other, but not to each other, about what happened in Ferguson. It wasn't my job to tell them what they ought a think. It wasn't my job to make them fight. But it was my job to seat the U.S. senator next to the rapper who said that he would rather go to hell than be arrested by the St. Louis County [Missouri] police, and watch them interact. It was--it did my soul good to be able to be a facilitator for that. And I'm not sure there's any place else I could do it. Story_ID: 228775 Speaker 1: As you talk about this phase of your career in television, let's take a look. Let's-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Film clip). ANNOUNCER: In 1999, [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill] was hired by PBS. Speaker 1: (Film clip, Jim Lehrer and Gwen Ifill): The [U.S.] Supreme Court's new term and to our new senior correspondent, Gwen Ifill. Welcome, Gwen. Speaker 2: (Film clip, Gwen Ifill): Thanks, Jim. For a preview of the Supreme Court's 1999 term- ANNOUNCER: She also served as moderator for 'Washington Week in Review' ['Washington Week with Gwen Ifill']. Speaker 2: (Film clip, 'Washington Week in Review'): Now, here's moderator, Gwen Ifill. Speaker 1: (Film clip, Gwen Ifill): Good evening. A big week in presidential politics involving Democrats, Republicans- Speaker 2: (Film clip, Judy Woodruff, Co-anchor, 'PBS NewsHour'): There are very few people as good as Gwen is at figuring out, you know, who's telling the truth, who's being straight with the facts and holding them to account. Speaker 1: (Film clip of Gwen Ifill interviewing Vice President Dick Cheney): "Was this the fruit of a report that you requested, that you received a week ago, that show there was no connection between Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and Sadam Hussein?" Speaker 2: (Film clip of Gwen Ifill interviewing Afghanistan leader, Hamid Karzai): Speaker 1: GWEN IFILL: "Let's start by talking about security in Afghanistan? How would you assess it now? Speaker 2: HAMID KARZAI: We expect this year because of our elections-- Speaker 1: (Film clip of Gwen Ifill interviewing President Barack Obama): "And one of the things he said is that there might be repercussions if there were a U.S. attack. Do you worry at all that a U.S. attack could backfire?" Speaker 2: (Film clip of Senator Joe Biden being questioned by Gwen Ifill in a debate between the Democratic vice presidential candidate, Joe Biden and the Republican vice presidential candidate, Governor Sarah Palin): "As America watches these things happen on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], Senator Biden, was this the worst of Washington [D.C.] or the best of Washington that we saw play out?" Speaker 1: (Film clip of Martha Raddatz, ABC foreign affairs correspondent): "When I found out I was chosen as a moderator for the vice presidential debate, Gwen Ifill was the first person I called. First of all, I thought she did such a masterful job with that debate--" Speaker 2: (Film clip of male host introducing Gwen Ifill to show): "She is the moderator and managing editor of PBS's 'Washington Week.' Please welcome to the show, Gwen Ifill." ANNOUNCER: Her book ['The Breakthrough: Politics and Race in the Age of Obama,' Gwen Ifill] about [HistoryMaker President Barack] Obama would become a [The] New York Times best-seller. And her audience grew along with her ratings. Speaker 2: (Film clip of Gwen Ifill in audience interview forum): "That's a question about the working class which is not so-- question about the working class--" ANNOUNCER: And she interviewed the most noted-- Speaker 2: (Film clips of Gwen Ifill introducing various HistoryMakers during the live 'An Evening With' events) Speaker 1: GWEN IFILL: "I am so excited and so thrilled to be here tonight. I am especially happy to bring to you the story of an icon, [HistoryMaker] Ms. Ursula Burns." (Applause). Speaker 2: GWEN IFILL: "Please help me welcome to the stage [HistoryMaker] Mr. Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.]." (Applause). Speaker 1: GWEN IFILL: "Without further ado, please welcome [HistoryMaker] Mr. Quincy Jones", "[HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll" (applause), "[HistoryMaker] Mr. Smokey Robinson", "[HistoryMaker] Ms. Valerie Simpson, of the legendary, Ashford & Simpson." "He's the founder of Motown Records, [HistoryMaker] Mr. Berry Gordy, Jr. (Applause). Speaker 2: GWEN IFILL: "Ladies and gentlemen, my honor to present to you, [HistoryMaker] Ms. Eartha Kitt" (Applause). Speaker 1: I have to tell you, when Eartha Kitt walked out on stage that night in Chicago [Illinois] for her [The] HistoryMakers' interview, she did this thing where she kicked her, her leg up in the air and there was growl involved (audience laughter). She was spectacular, and little did we know that night, that would be her last interview. Speaker 2: Yes, and we should say, Eartha Kitt's daughter, Kitt Shapiro, is in the audience. Let's show her some love. Speaker 1: (Applause). Story_ID: 228776 Speaker 1: Often when women take on an anchor role, they work extra hard to project authority. And--you know what I'm talking about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (laughter) That wasn't ever going to happen-- Speaker 1: Well, no, but when you, when we see pictures of you, you're often smiling. You're dealing with the issues of the day, very, very serious issues. But there's something that is open in your approach which is somewhat unusual. That is one of your signatures. Is that something that you did by design or did that just sort of happen, that sort of approach to news with a wide open heart? Speaker 2: Oh, thank you. It wasn't by design. I think I enjoy what I do. And all of it's not so bloody serious. And some--but some of it is, and we take it seriously and treat it that way. But a lot of the time, what you're--once again, you're trying to pull people in. And people talk a lot about my smiling or they see me in person and say, you seem to have a better sense of humor than I thought. And I say, well, it's kind of hard to smile when you're talking about death and destruction. But it is important, however, to want to be listened to and to make people want to stop and pause when they're walking past a TV on their way to dinner and say, what's she saying tonight? Speaker 1: When you work in a position like you have, you're often the first, sometimes the only, often one of a small number. And I know you've talked about feeling like everything you do, you have the opportunity to push that door a little bit wider for someone who comes behind you. Does that feel like a burden or an opportunity? Speaker 2: It is completely an opportunity. This whole idea of not being a role model, (sound) come on. There aren't enough of us out here to afford that. We have to be the role model. We have to show them the way it can be done right, not lazily, and not easily, but necessarily. Speaker 1: What do you think about journalism right now? Speaker 2: I am more optimistic about journalism right now than most of the journalists I know because I think it is evolving into something different. If I wanted to judge it by what it was I got into journalism to do in 1977 (cough)--yes, it's been a minute. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: I would say, no, it's not that anymore. And it will never be that again. We're going to something else. There are multiple platforms. There're are million ways to tell the story, and the story still has to be told by the same sets of rules. We just have to make sure that we're still teaching them. Story_ID: 228777 Speaker 1: You talk about bringing your perspective, your unique perspective to what you do since you've lived in public housing, covering the public housing, covering HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --a little bit differently. That was evident also in how you approached presidential debates, particularly, in the first debate with [Senator] John Edwards and [Vice President] Dick Cheney. There was a question that you asked that was unique probably to you. I'm not sure that someone else sitting in that chair would have asked that question. And that was at a moment when women of color were in the bullseye of the AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] epidemic and you asked the candidates what they thought of that. Speaker 2: I asked them--I remember thinking very carefully about that question and knowing that nobody else would ask that; also being aware that it was a vice presidential debate, so there would only be one. So I framed it by saying, "Please, don't talk about Africa, AIDS in Africa. I want you to talk about AIDS here. And what do you think about these numbers which show this increase in HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] infection among African American women?" Dick Cheney's response was, "Oh, really. I didn't know that." That was it. Dick--and John Edwards' response was, "Well, my AIDS policy in Africa is this." But he didn't answer the question I had, and I discovered--I had a choice. I could say, how could you not know about this? Or I could move on. I moved on because I trusted the audience to say, if this is an issue that matters to you, this is something that doesn't matter to them. And to this day, all these years later, people still come up to me and say, "I remember that question you asked." Now, it should be said that sitting on the stage at a vice presidential debate is the worst place to know what's going on. I didn't hear the "Can I call you Joe?" Didn't hear that at all. I didn't see her wink, didn't see--because he was winking at me. So I didn't see any of that. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: It should be known that that night--and you know this too, that night at that debate, I head out two nights before leaving for St. Louis [Missouri] for the debate, had fallen down the stairs at home and broken my ankle. And as a result, I-- Speaker 1: What did you trip on? Speaker 2: I tripped on copies of the biographies of [Governor] Sarah Palin and [Senator] Joe Biden. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: His was this big, hers was that big. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: And I broke it pretty good, and I, and I had a big split on my leg. And I was in a wheelchair, and I got my, my boo to come with me to St. Louis to keep an eye on me. And she came in on that with me and kept the bad people from my door 'cause it was lots of stuff going on, which isn't worth going into. But in the end-- Speaker 1: We're trying to get a picture of you-- Speaker 2: Can't try and get a picture of me looking evil with my--but here's the thing. In the end, I, I had to do that whole debate without pain medication 'cause I was afraid I'd get loopy, right. And then they would say, [HisotryMaker] Gwen Ifill was on drugs. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: So I had to sit there through the debate. They had my leg propped up underneath the table. I couldn't get up to greet the candidates when they came in, so I looked kinda rude, you know. But in the end, I kind of made it through. I just plowed through on adrenaline, which is an amazing pain relief. Speaker 1: And you had those two gentlemen that carried you into the-- Speaker 2: I couldn't walk on crutches yet, so they gave me two football players to get me on stage. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: What were their names? Speaker 1: Their names were Tim [ph.] and Buck [ph.]. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: She still remembers (laughter). Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: It was a high point of the evening. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: And out of that, that experience, you wound up being portrayed on 'Saturday Night Live' by Queen Latifah. Speaker 2: What can I tell you? Speaker 1: What was it like to watch that, 'cause you--were you at all worried 'cause they can go--on 'Saturday Night Live,' they can go a lot of different directions. Speaker 2: You know, you gotta just take what's coming when you're on 'Saturday Night Live.' I mean, come on. Who's gonna say, no? And it was Queen Latifah. My fear is it would be Keenan Thompson playing me. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: So I was ahead of the game (laughter). Story_ID: 228778 Speaker 1: --But it's quite an honor to be parodied by 'Saturday Night Live' because that means that they're paying attention, that they're--they've taken note of your career and actually, there are a lot of people who have taken note of your career. And we actually have someone with us this evening. We have a very special message for you from the one, the only, the fantastic, [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick is here with us this evening. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: DIONNE WARWICK: I have a very, very special message that came in from someone that you interviewed, [HistoryMaker] Ms. Diahann Carroll. She'd been watching you on TV for some time, and felt you were the only one that could interview her. Now, the shoe is on the other foot. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: DIONNE WARWICK: And you are being interviewed. But she wants you to know, you make us all so very proud. Thank you. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: And, yes, there was a selfie taken backstage (laughter). Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Gwen [Ifill], you do make us proud. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 228779 Speaker 1: And over the course of doing so many interviews for The HistoryMakers, with each one you allow us to see something of someone that we thought we knew so well. You--they come really prepared to unburden themselves, reveal themselves, tell stories, and you understand what you think will happen throughout the evening. But there are moments, magical moments, moments of surprise that sort of happen spontaneously. And I wonder if you could share some of those? Speaker 2: Well, you know, Julieanna Richardson lured me into The HistoryMakers some years ago. And I--it just seemed like a good idea at the time. And then she came back and she came back and she came--and she kept coming back with something more. "Well, you know, [HistoryMaker] Smokey [Robinson] will only talk to you." Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: What are you gonna say to that, really? So it became just, it became something I really looked forward to. I mean, who are they gonna get now? They would bring musical guests. I watched Janelle Monae, you know, slide across the stage for [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy. I got to see a most amazing moment one night with [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson. It was her first public appearance after--some of you will remember this, after Nick Ashford died. And she sat down at the piano. And we'd seen her do it in rehearsal to, you now, it was kind of nice. And she began to sing 'Ain't Nothing Like the Real Thing,' and, you know, the first words, "I see your picture hanging on the wall, but it can't talk--." She began to sing it really slowly, and there wasn't a dry eye in the house, including hers and her children who were in the front row. There are moments like that which you can't plot, you can't plan, you can't scheme. But, in fact, the truth is that I learned so much, and the key is, you know, from interviewing, is listening as well as talking. And if you make, like you're doing for me, the conversation comfortable, you'll learn more. Speaker 1: What was the hardest interview that you did? Speaker 2: At HistoryMakers? None--I've never had a hard interview. I have to say, once I get started, I mean I thought, I met [HistoryMaker] Ursula Burns and thought, "Oh, she's a real businesswoman. She's very serious about this." And the next thing, it turns out she's a Panamanian. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: And next thing, she meets my cousin, Lester [ph.], and they start talking. Speaker 1: And your father [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] was from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my father is from Panama. So the next thing you know, it becomes this bonding thing that you didn't even see coming. So you walk into a room, and you discover how much we actually have in common once we've agreed that we're gonna share. Story_ID: 228780 Speaker 1: You don't like to talk about your legacy. I know you've never felt comfortable about that, but I'm gonna ask anyway because I think it's important to take stock of that, when we're taking stock of your career. When you think about the people that follow behind you--and ask the question this way 'cause you talk about that so often. You're always concerned, who's gonna come behind me? And you look at the press corps and you think, there still aren't enough women there. There still aren't enough people of color. When they, when they come behind me, what, you know, who's shoulders will they stand on, and what do I want them to inherit? As you think about that now, what do you want your legacy to be? What do you want people to think about when they think about your contribution to journalism and to Washington [D.C.] and to life in general? Speaker 2: It's not enough to have walked this path and then to leave it unoccupied when you're done. And so I, I'm particularly drawn to young people who are interested in telling the story however it can be told. And not just telling our stories, but being there to ask the questions which influence everybody. I mean black history isn't just history about black people, right? It's history. And that's why The HistoryMakers to me is so important because we're remembering our past and then building for our future. That is really important in journalism too. I am--I would freely admit that my ideas about what journalism ought to be may seem dated to some people. But I still think the basics are still there. I'm asking for people to be engaged, and however they act on that, you know, I have siblings and cousins who do any wide range of things. But they are all engaged in the world around them, and I hope that too for my godchildren, for your children, for your children. I want us all to be connected in that way. Otherwise, we're doomed to fall back. Story_ID: 228781 Speaker 1: Is there a dream interview you have for [The] HistoryMakers? Speaker 2: I think it's time for the young, former [U.S.] senator from Illinois [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] after he leaves office, to come back to HistoryMakers. Don't you think? And talk about his life and his times. Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: Can we make that happen? Speaker 1: (Applause). Story_ID: 228782 Speaker 1: When they put together the musical entertainment for this evening, and it was fitting because you have such a strong commitment to young people, that we heard from young people also, Mae Ya Carter Ryan. Oh, my goodness. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: Remember this young lady and remember that name because, girl, you're going places. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: And she's gonna take us out in song. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: (Mae Ya Carter Ryan sings). Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: (Applause). Story_ID: 228783 ANNOUNCER: To order our own DVD copy of 'An Evening With Gwen Ifill,' please call 866-914-1900 or by mail, send check or money order for $19.99, plus $5.75 shipping and handling to the address shown [1900 S. Michigan Avenue, Chicago, IL 60616]. Speaker 2: ('Swing Low, Sweet Chariot,' choir performance). ANNOUNCER: The preceding program was funded in part by Toyota. Additional funding was provided, in part by, Comcast NBC Universal, Discover Financial Services...