 Story_ID: 375852 Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted with Dr. Mildred Fay Jefferson [HistoryMaker Dr. Mildred Jefferson] at the headquarters of the Massachusetts Citizens for Life at 259 Main Street [sic. 529 Main Street] in Charlestown, Massachusetts--Charlestown being a neighborhood of Boston [Massachusetts]. The date is April 5th. The year, 2006. The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Madame HistoryMaker, would you state your full name for me and would you spell your full name, including your middle name. Speaker 2: My name is Mildred Fay Jefferson, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, F-A-Y, J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N, Mildred Fay Jefferson. Speaker 1: Thank you. Dr. Jefferson, where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in Pittsburg, Texas. It doesn't have an H on it. They were not wealthy so they couldn't afford the extra letter, and they left it just G, in Camp County, Texas. Story_ID: 375853 Speaker 1: Before we move into the formal part of this interview, we have what we call a few warm up questions. Which will also give the viewers of your interview over time another slant on your personality. They are People magazine type questions. Dr. Jefferson [HistoryMaker Dr. Mildred Jefferson], what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is Washington State red delicious apples. Speaker 1: Good. Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is autumn. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Almost any shade of blue (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Any shade. Okay. What about a vacation destination? Do you have a special place you like escape to for--? Speaker 2: I don't get vacations, but if I ever had one it would be the Monterey Peninsula of California because I believe if the Garden of Eden is in this hemisphere instead of where it is said to have been, that's where it was. Speaker 1: Very good. And, the last warm up question, do you have a favorite phrase or saying, something philosophical that you use from time to time with your friends or colleagues? Speaker 2: "To thine own self be true," ['Hamlet,' William Shakespeare]. Story_ID: 375854 Speaker 1: We're gonna start by talking about your family, your family history so that those people who use and study your interview will have a context in which to view how--your life and your career. But, I'm gonna divert just a little bit from that. Tell me about the derivation of your last name, Jefferson. How did your family come to have that name? 'Cause you told me before. I think it's an interesting story. Speaker 2: Well, my father's family on his father's [Kyle Jefferson] side, was derived from the slave owning family, and they were entitled to use that name after they were emancipated. But, whatever great-grandfather, I've forgotten how many greats go in there, decided he did not want the name Russo [ph.], which was there, would've been their legal name. So, he decided to honor a president and he took the name Jefferson. And, then named, when my father came along as his grandson, my, or great-grandson, I don't remember I've lost count of which greats. But, anyway, my father's father remembering that; named him after two presidents [President Millard Fillmore and President Thomas Jefferson]. So, his name was Millard Fillmore Jefferson. And, I have the name Mildred Fay Jefferson [HistoryMaker Dr. Mildred Jefferson] because when my mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] discovered I was coming along she wanted me to have the same initials as my father. So, she gave me the name Mildred. Although, I don't know whether she looked up that it has meaning in the old Anglo-Saxon, of mild strength. But, in the old, let's see, no, in the old Anglo-Saxon it's voice with a smile. But, in the Old High German it's of mild strength; Mildred. And, she chose Fay because she wanted me to be as light and graceful as a fairy (laughter). So, I ended up Mildred Fay Jefferson derived from Millard Fillmore Jefferson, derived from that long, long ago, Russo changed to Jefferson (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 375855 Speaker 1: Before we move on and continue the family history background. What is your occupation? What--how do you describe your profession? What do you do? Speaker 2: I'm a general surgeon. And a general surgeon is that branch of the surgical specialty that does what everybody else does not want to stay up all night doing. We're trained in every aspect of surgery. But what we actually wind up doing depends on the size of the hospital and it size of the area in which what practice is conducted. So that as you're admitted to staff privileges as a general surgeon now, you have list of operations that you may do and that list varies with the other specialties that are there and the location of the hospital. Speaker 1: Very briefly, you also have been involved as a physician in medical jurisprudence and medical ethics. Would you say just a little bit about your work there? We'll do it in detail later but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, well that started back in medical school because I was so very much impressed with the, those who were pathologists. There was Dr. Sidney Farber, for example, a great pathologist too, happened to give our very first lecturers on medical ethics. But, he also introduced us to some of the great forensic pathologists of that time who came to speak at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts]. And, that just captured my fancy then and remained so that even though I went into general surgery, I still kept an interest in those areas. Story_ID: 375856 Speaker 1: Let's begin your family background by talking about your mother. Would you give me her full name-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, when and where she was born? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Gurthie, G-U-R-T-H-I-E, Lee, L-E-E, Roberts, R-O-B-E-R-T-S [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson]. The first born of George Roberts, who was a Baptist preacher who gave up fishing for men to return to being a fisher of fish. And, her mother, Fannie Deramus Roberts, was a teacher. They had seven children eventually. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. What did your mother tell you about her growing up years? Did she share her childhood with you? Speaker 2: Well, yes. She grew up in the country [in Carthage, Texas]. They farmed. And, although she was sent to school, they also sent her oldest brother, who was one younger than she. But, even though the family had decided to make the sacrifice to send him away to school, he actually ran away from school. And, had people there mail postcards back to the family so they would not know he had gone. He remained mischievous all of the rest of his life. But, mother diligently did what she was supposed to do; became a teacher and became somewhat the anchor of the family. Because in certainly farming neighborhoods in rural Texas had certainly ups and downs in their fortunes. And, if you didn't have drought, you had dust storms and all sorts of things. And, even though the State of Texas was very much advanced in its early agricultural programs, its reforestation programs. At least when I was a child I remember, reading anyway about circumstances where there were droughts and dust storms and other things. But, as they, the State of Texas took a greater effort to teach the farmers about tilling the soil and preventing erosion and all those things. They gradually corrected some of these problems. And, I remember in my childhood that the farms grew quite well. And, my mother's father would always have a truck farm. And, one thing he grew were many varieties of tomatoes. But, I especially liked, they were all kinds of fruit trees and nut trees. And, as a child I developed the habit of eating nuts. So, I've been eating nuts practically every day of my life, as long as I've had teeth (laughter). Story_ID: 375857 Speaker 1: Any other stories that you recall your mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] telling you about her childhood? Speaker 2: Well, mother's childhood was somewhat difficult in the sense that she was the oldest of seven children. And, at that time the children had very strict responsibilities. They had to work in the houses. They had to work in the farms. They had to do everything that was to be done. But, mother had a special sense of obligation because her mother [Fannie Deramus Roberts] had what was known as a rheumatic heart. When I got to medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], I understood that she had rheumatic heart disease. And, she did died of that rheumatic heart disease when I was about six or seven years old. So much of what I learned later about cardiac disease, I had already observed and was able to tie it together at that later date. But, mother was always a very industrious person. But, she had a very, very marked sense of responsibilities toward her siblings. Especially her brothers because they had to take care of families. So, that I remember many times that I felt that she was putting more focus on making sure that her brothers could provide for their families (laughter). However, she did not neglect me in anyway. But, I just didn't think she should've put all that time in. But, that's the selfishness of childhood. Story_ID: 375858 Speaker 1: My father [Millard Fillmore Jefferson] as a Methodist [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal (C.M.E.)] minister, was usually traveling somewhere else. But, mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] did not want my education to be interrupted by all of the moves. So, that actually, she and I came to live in her family seat. Which is a small, was a village, wasn't a village at that time, it was just a stop in the road outside a small town which has now become a very well-known small city. And, in fact, one of the publications, I think the first edition of a hundred best small cities to live in, that particular city, Carthage [Texas], was listed in that one hundred. But, they've always been in many ways a little bit more advanced in the way they approached things. I lived in Texas. That gave me a different experience from many people who were living in the same area, at the same time. The life they knew and described, I had no idea of. Because, we lived in what was quite a different setting. In the little community that I grew up in, everybody was interested in the children. If they had the ability to learn in school, that was encouraged. For those who didn't were not, academically oriented they were taught a trade or someway to take care of themselves and their families. No one expected to grow up doing just nothing. Everybody expected to achieve the most that their abilities would allow. And, everybody seemed to encourage that. Speaker 2: What region of Texas are we talking about now (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're talking about East Texas. Speaker 2: East Texas. Speaker 1: This is Panola County [Texas]. There're no major cities. The commercial center is Shreveport, Louisiana. However, the little city of Carthage now has practically any and everything that someone might want to find-- Story_ID: 375859 Speaker 1: When I was back (laughter) one day, I'm included in the North Texas Rural Heritage Museum [Northeast Texas Rural Heritage Center and Museum, Pittsburg, Texas] because I am the first person from my part of Texas to go to Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts]. And, I found out at the time that they dedicated that museum. And, I did not have chance to go visit it at that time; but, did go later. That someone, the editor of the newspaper [The Pittsburg Gazette] in Pittsburg [Texas], the little city in which I was born, on the fifth anniversary of my graduation from medical school noted it in the paper (laughter). But, at the time that I finally got back to visit the museum, they held quite a celebration. The mayor gave a proclamation and declared it (laughter) Dr. Mildred Fay Jefferson Day. I was taken to the church [St. Beulah C.M.E. Church, Pittsburg, Texas] where my father [Millard Fillmore Jefferson] had pastored. The parsonage in which I was born had been torn down. But, at least the church was there. And, the local television station sent out a reporter to interview me on the steps of the church. The high school [Carthage Colored High School, Carthage, Texas] had special assembly, and I was invited to speak to the students. And, then that evening, there was a general meeting called so that all of the towns people and people from far and near, and I was surprised to find that some of my old college classmates [from Texas College, Tyler, Texas] drove from as far away as (laughter) 250 miles to come and say hello. That was-- Speaker 2: Do you re- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They said you can't go home again. But, Thomas Wolfe was wrong (laughter). Speaker 2: Do you recall your message to the students that evening? Do you remember what you said to them? Speaker 1: Oh, generally, when I speak to students, I always speak to them about, usually some of the themes that go by Emerson [Ralph Waldo Emerson], hitch your wagon to a star, even though you land in the treetops. But, I also work in something that was later said by Oliver Wendell Holmes, no man has earned the right to intellectual ambition until he has learned to lay his course by a star he has never seen. To dig by the divining rod for springs he may never reach. I always like to leave some sense to the students that they can accomplish whatever they can conceive. But, they have to focus. They have to prepare. And, they must do all within their power to bring it about. Then, see what happens in the rest of the world. Doesn't mean it going to be easy. There always people who are going to turn up who try to block your way for no other reason than they can. But, that's no reason to let them. Story_ID: 375860 Speaker 1: Staying with you mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] for just a few more minutes. She was a teacher-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her path to -- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --being a teacher, and where did she teach? And-- Speaker 2: In that era, the people who occupied the most influential places and communities were usually preachers and teachers. So, that since her mother [Fannie Deramus Roberts] was a teacher and her father [George Roberts] was a preacher, it was perhaps unspoken that this would be her course. But, in many ways she was very much ahead of her time. She was a very bright woman. She had a high IQ, and she read widely. And, I remember the first magazine I ever saw. I saw a cartoon that had a soup bowl full of text, and that impressed me greatly. And, the name of that magazine was Literary Digest [The Literary Digest], and there was always reading material. And, in the little country area, the only one who got the newspaper daily was a great uncle. And, my mother and I would walk ten miles, twice a week to go over and read his newspapers (laughter). He wouldn't give them to us (laughter). He always kept them, but we at least knew what was going on. And, was always the matter that feeding your mind was important and sometimes more important than feeding your body (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me a little bit about the school that she taught in and the children. Speaker 2: Well, mother started as a lower school teacher. Although by the time she retired, she was a high school history teacher. But, the first school [Roberts School (ph.)] I ever attended was on, was on ground given by her family, and named after her family. So, that, that's one thing I thought was characteristic of the area. They didn't wait for someone else to do things for them. They did it with what they had. It wasn't a magnificent institution, like Eton [Eton College, Windsor, England] for example, or maybe some of the fashionable prep schools. But, it certainly was there, and the Baptist church that is there, Walnut Grove Baptist Church [Carthage, Texas] is on land that was donated by her family. And, in fact, all of the land around belong to my mother's family and her family. And, their relatives so that the time spent was essentially and a family compound with the few cousins who owned land on the edges. But, even during my childhood there was the beginning erosion of people selling off their lands to people who weren't in the family. So, now in that community there are many people living there now who are not related to mother's family. Story_ID: 375861 Speaker 1: One last question regarding your mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson]. How do you remember her as a person? What was her personality like? Speaker 2: She was a person who never received in life the credit that she deserved for the things that she accomplished. And, I could not have done as I have been able to do without a mother like her. Because even when she did not understand what I wanted to do or why I was doing it, she did not try to hold me back in any way. She would've been happier, of course, had I chosen to be a teacher as she was and stayed within the realm that she could comprehend. But, she supported that whatever--I remember sometimes hearing other people talking about me to her. And, they would say, "Where does that little girl get all those ideas?" Mother wouldn't--said, "I just don't know. I guess from God." But, one day I heard her say, or describing me, describe me as a jewel too costly for its setting. I remembered that. But, I didn't ever let her know that I heard her say it (laughter). Story_ID: 375862 Speaker 1: Give me your father's name and, when and where he was born. Speaker 2: My father's name was Millard Fillmore Jefferson. M-I-L-L-A-R-D, F-I-L-L-M-O-R-E, Jefferson, J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N. Named after two U.S. presidents [President Millard Fillmore and President Thomas Jefferson] (laughter). He was born in Louisiana. I think Mansfield [Louisiana]. But, I've also heard the names Bossier City [Louisiana]. So, I don't know exactly. But, I do know, his family originated in Louisiana. That's not surprising with the name Russo [ph.]. Speaker 1: What did he share with you about his childh- his growing up years? Speaker 2: Not a great deal. Because his mother [Lydia Jefferson] died when he was five. He had a younger sister. They had to live with relatives while their father [Kyle Jefferson] worked. We've never known exactly what he did. It was always said, he was with the railroad. But, since about the only thing I can think of that he could've done with the railroad, if he were not working on the tracks, would be to, to have been a Pullman porter. But, he was a man who was so immaculate in his dress. And, so very careful about the way his children looked that one time when he had come home unexpectedly and the children were the way children sometimes looked when they're running around playing, but he was so dismayed. He immediately removed them from the custody of the relatives that had been taking care of them and moved to Texas. He left, he left his railroad service and moved to Texas (laughter). So, that was one thing that I had remember from what my father had told me. But, he also indicated that he didn't get to go to school until he was twelve years old. But, at the end of six years, he had completed all of his schooling though high school. And, he was able to go to theological seminary. Speaker 1: And, what sem- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And became a Methodist minister. Speaker 1: What seminary was that? Speaker 2: It was either Paine [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia] or Gammon [Gammon Theological Seminary, Atlanta, Georgia]. I've forgotten which was first. I don't remember whether it was Gammon and became consolidated with Paine. But, I know those two names are associated. Speaker 1: What led him into the ministry? Do you know what the influence was (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He never did say. Speaker 1: And, what was his denomination? Speaker 2: Methodist-- Speaker 1: Methodist. Speaker 2: --Christian Methodist Episcopal [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal (C.M.E.)]. In fact that is the denomination that founded the college I first attended, Texas College in Tyler, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 375863 Speaker 1: Was he a circuit preacher, or did he have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Methodist ministers are. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Tell me about his circuit ministry. How do you remember-- Speaker 2: Well, we would visit him. Mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] did not, as I said, did not want to disrupt my schooling. So, that we did not live where he pastored. But, we would visit in the summer and he would visit where we lived. My father [Millard Fillmore Jefferson] was the only person in the world who knew I was perfect. My poor mother even though she was a teacher and never did reach that high level of perception. So, since my father knew I was perfect, it really doesn't matter (laughter) what other people think of me (laughter). Speaker 1: How long did he pastor? Because, he passed away in 1988. Speaker 2: Yes, my father died in his ninety-fifth year (laughter). Speaker 1: Was he still pastoring? Speaker 2: He had returned to pastoring. Unfortunately, in our denominations there are always certain divergences and schisms and because there is, had been quite a bit of that in his Methodist [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal (C.M.E.)] church, he actually for a few years of his life became a Seventh-day Adventist. And then, in the last years of his life returned to the Methodist church. Speaker 1: Let's see. Speaker 2: But, he was someone who, like my mother, loved to read, was very well read. And, became an [U.S.] Army chaplain. Speaker 1: When did he do that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was one of the first. Speaker 1: When was that (unclear)? Speaker 2: That was in 19-, let's see; perhaps '47 [1947]. But, he was in Korea. Speaker 1: He was in Korea? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, there was more separation than from you and him (unclear)? Speaker 2: He was always somewhere. He wasn't-- Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: Or, vice versa. Speaker 1: So, when he served as an Army chaplain, you never went to those places yourself? 'Course you were older. Speaker 2: Just here in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: In Boston? Speaker 2: Because he--the first camp to which he was assigned was Camp Myles Standish [Taunton, Massachusetts], which was in South Boston [sic.], which is no longer there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I would visit him at that camp. Speaker 1: During the summers, or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, I enjoyed visiting the post (laughter). Speaker 1: How long did you stay on these visits (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I was living at home in Boston. But, I could go on the subway out to South Boston to visit (laughter), so. Speaker 1: Oh, then you were in your late teen years then, you were? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I see. Uh-huh. Very interesting. Story_ID: 375864 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up in Texas? How far back can you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, I can remember quite far back. I can remember as far back as two and three years old. Because I've always been very curious about things, and seeing things. I remember when my mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] first brought me back to live with her mother [Fannie Deramus Roberts] because she couldn't find people available to take care of me during the day. She was trying to--we were with my father [Millard Fillmore Jefferson] then and she was trying to teach there. But, she had no one to leave me with. So, she brought me and left me in Texas with her mother. But, I would not eat what her mother cooked. Speaker 1: (Laughter) What did she cook (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, I remember seeing these little dried black things, which were bacon. It was these so-called fatback bacon. And, she would cook an egg for me and give me one of these little ugly things, and I just would not eat them. And, so, (laughter) mother had to give up teaching and come (laughter) to live with her mother and find a teaching job there. So, at least I would not starve to death. And, when people say, oh, if the child gets hungry enough, they'll eat. No, they won't. Because once you're hungry beyond a certain point, your appetite is suppressed (laughter). Speaker 1: Any other far back memories that you think about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I had lot of fun. I was the leader of the pack. Because my older cousins, first cousins, had moved to California. So, that left me as the oldest child and the others came about stair steps--one year or less than a year behind me. I was an only child and my first, first cousin was an only child. She remained an only child for twenty-five years then her mother had five additional children. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: (Laughter) But, she was somewhat less, shall we say, inquisitive than I. But, even though she would be afraid of some of our exploits, she would follow valiantly along (laughter), even though she was afraid to come. It's a wonder I ever survived my childhood because we explore the woods. When school was out, I would disappear as soon as I had breakfast in the morning, and mother would not see me again until the sun started setting. And, we explored everything. And, you know, there are rivers and creeks in that area, and rattlesnakes and water moccasins and almost any other venomous thing you can imagine. And, we braved all of those and survived (laughter). But, I learned many good lessons because when I feel uneasy about someone that I see when I'm walking and I was--if I'm walking my dogs as I was then, I would see the same unease in them. Story_ID: 373616 Speaker 1: While your father [Millard Fillmore Jefferson] was away a great deal because of his work and profession [as a minister], I'm sure there were times, however, when you and your parents, and perhaps cousins and grandparents were together. And, what kind of things did you do as family? What are some of the memories that you have as a family? Speaker 2: Well ac-- Speaker 1: (AUDIO DISTURBANCE) Speaker 2: --not do many things as a family because rarely were we together. We went to visit him in summer. But, usually that was just a matter of visiting; maybe we would be there over a weekend so we would go to church with him. But, usually activities were at home and didn't go out for things. Mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] was someone who enjoyed bring family together so that she was the one responsible for the family gatherings. But, almost always these were the gatherings of her family that remained in their family seat [Panola County] in East Texas. Although the rest of their family was scattered elsewhere (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you travel to these other places to see family with your mother? Did you? Speaker 2: We did. But, again, usually it was just mother and me visiting a short while and then going back. We did not do too many things collectively. When we were in her family seat area, we had--would visit different family members and maybe have dinner with them. But, not the big collective dinner over the holidays. She did those when she moved to Boston [Massachusetts] after she retired from teaching. But most of the time when we were in Texas there wasn't the opportunity for that. Story_ID: 373617 Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in Texas. Speaker 2: Nothing really. Because I have lived in the world of books and what was physically in fact around me made very little impact. I enjoyed watching things grow. By the time I reached college [Texas College, Tyler, Texas], I could identify all of the growing plants on farms. So, that traveling through even now, I like to see if I can remember what a given plant growing is going to be when it finishes. Whatever growing it's going to do or what it's likely to produce. But, I lived a world apart a world I had--in which I happened to be. So, that my life growing up in the same area [Panola County] of Texas with my cousins is far different. Because they lived a life around them. I lived a life in the world that I created inside. So, that we don't have any similar outlooks on anything. And I always had the sense that I was on the way somewhere else. So I just expected to be passing through. Speaker 1: But you had a, you had a feeling for nature? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Of living things at a very, very young age? Speaker 2: Simply because I was in the country. And, when you are in the country, you naturally look at things, you have any curiosity at all. You see the birds. You see the eggs. You see the worms. You see the cocoons. You see the larvae. You just follow all of these things. And there're those who accuse me of dissections that I didn't do. But, I was always curious about how things worked, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have any home pets? Speaker 2: Oh, yes; had dogs, cats, goats, pigs. Whatever I could have b- follow me (laughter) became a pet. And, there were chickens, of course. Speaker 1: So, you took care of these animals around your, your home then? Speaker 2: I didn't have any responsibility for caring for them. But, I simply became friends with them. I usually become friends with whatever animals that are around me. Or, try to anyway. Story_ID: 373618 Speaker 1: Let's move into your--beginning of your quote formal education. How old were you when you started elementary school? What school did you attend? Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you remember about those early years in school? Speaker 2: The first thing I remember is that I can't really remember when I couldn't read. Because I remember watching my mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson], and earlier her mother [Fannie Deramus Roberts], teaching the other children to read. But, I don't remember them formally teaching me to read. But, I certain did follow what they were teaching the others. And, finally I picked up the book one day and I took it to mother. I said, "Mother I can read." And, she said, "Well, let me hear you." I said, "See spot. See spot run," (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I don't know why I pronounced it spot. But, it was S-P-O-T, why not spot. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: The beginning of school (background noise). Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that like? What school did you attend? Speaker 2: Well, the first school I attended was Roberts School [ph.]. And, I started in first grade because that's where you start. However, I didn't stay in the first grade very long. 'Cause I could do all of the things that the children could do, that they were learning, I already knew. And, I could add and I could subtract. And, I remember one day my mother and her mother had come in and I had put some algebra upon the board. And, I heard mother come in and she screamed and then she called her mother in and they just said, "Oh." I didn't know what they were oh-ing about. And, she said, "Baby, where did you get this?" I said, "In the book." And, she said, "But, what you wrote up there is not what's in the book." I said, "Well, I did it the way, the one that's in the book is." And, I had started th- I didn't take algebra until later and I didn't really learn anything I just followed the way they had done it and it worked out. But she couldn't understand how I had done the problem (laughter) when I hadn't had any algebra. But, just following the example that was there. It was easy enough to reason how they had done it. But, by the time I got a little bit beyond third grade, it was clear to me that I knew more than some of the teachers I had, did. Speaker 1: What was the method of teaching at that time? Can you describe how you were taught by the teachers? Speaker 2: Generally, you were expected to read and answer questions. And, they would talk and try to lead you through workbooks and things that they were doing. They didn't have formal workbooks so they had to make their own. I remember seeing mother work, working many hours creating lessons for the students and so on. And, the other teachers had a similar thing. But the problem is that I was already reading beyond any of the things that they were trying to teach. Speaker 1: Was there any science instruction, natural science, or health education in elementary school? Speaker 2: Yes. They had health education. There were textbooks of that kind. And, I did them just, it was a pro forma thing, there were no labs in-- Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in the elementary school that were particularly influential in your development that you recall (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Because for most of my elementary teachers they really didn't--I didn't think they knew very much (laughter). So I didn't, I was not disrespectful and I did not say anything. But I felt most of them didn't know as much as I did (laughter). But I would s- did not--I tried never to act in a way that reflected that. Speaker 1: What was the el- name of the elementary school you attended? Speaker 2: Roberts School. Speaker 1: Roberts. That's right, you mentioned that earlier. How many years did you spend at Roberts? Was that through the sixth grade, seventh grade, or--? Speaker 2: Through the seventh grade, but it was only six years. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And then what was your next school? Where did you-- Speaker 2: I spent one year in school in an area called Hollands Quarter [sic. Holland Quarters, Texas], which was not too far. Because mother was teaching there. Speaker 1: Hollands Quarter? Speaker 2: Um-hm. But, then when she was sent to teacher at another school, whose name I don't remember, the school was just considered inadequate for me. So, even though I entered late, I then started at Carthage High School, which was then called Carthage Colored High School [Carthage, Texas]. It's now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Carthage Colored High School? Speaker 2: Carthage Colored High School, which is now called Benton Turner High School [A.L. Turner High School] in Carthage, Texas. Story_ID: 373619 Speaker 1: As you moved through the elementary grades, middle school, and then beginning the high school [Carthage Colored High School, Carthage, Texas], did you have any notion at that time of what you wanted to do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Speaker 1: --and be, and be? Speaker 2: I started to school knowing I wanted to become a doctor. Speaker 1: How old were you when you first had that notion? Speaker 2: Oh, four or five or six. We had a wonderful family physician named Dr., I thought, Alamo Baker, A-L-A-M-O, Alamo Baker. But, one day I was in his office and I looked up and his certificate said Allen Moore Baker. But, he was very, very thoughtful and he was impressed that I was a curious child. And, I was impressed that every time he came, people got well. I didn't know it 'til much later that there was a selection and sorting process involved there. Because unless they thought someone could get well, they wouldn't go get the doctor. If they weren't going to get well, they'd let them finishing dying first and then get the doctor so he wouldn't have to make (laughter) so many trips. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, he was, he was your inspiration then, you would say? Speaker 2: One of them. And, because he would--explained everything I asked. He could've said, you know, run away; don't bother me. But, he didn't. He was very patient. And, when--one day I said, "I think I want to be a doctor when I grow up." He said, "Well now, if you want to do that, you just go right ahead." And, I kept it in mind. And, that's--never did intend to do anything else. Story_ID: 373620 Speaker 1: Who were the other people in your life besides the doctor [Allen Moore Baker] who aided and helped you with this, this desire that you had? Were there others who helped you along the way? Speaker 2: Well, I was always very much impressed with a teacher, an English teacher I had who was Dr. Fredda Witherspoon [Fredda Dolly Witherspoon]. At the time she was teaching us, she was Dr. Fredda Lee Dolly. But, then she became Dr. Fredda, F-R-E-D-D-A, Witherspoon when she married a prominent attorney in St. Louis [Missouri] and left Texas. But, she had I think a shaping influence in the sense that she enriched our high school [Carthage Colored High School, Carthage, Texas] curriculum. But I think the most substantial thing of all was that the Carthage School District [Carthage Independent School District] had a superintendent whose name was Quintin Martin [Quintin M. Martin], who was far, far beyond his time. And, far beyond what anyone would've considered in what is referred to as the Jim Crow era. Because he was very much concerned with the enrichment of the education of the students. We were in a segregated high school. But, he was the first superintendent to introduce the IQ test. And, when the results came back and the three highest IQs were in my school, he had the first combined assembly of the two schools, two high schools, so that the students could get to know each other. And he invited us to the other school to introduce us to the school body. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Were you number one? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were? Speaker 2: But, number two was the young man who became the--in charge of the computers that controlled the internal environment of the space vehicles. His name was Walter D. McClennan. He went to California. I think Northrop [Northrop Grumman Corporation]. I've forgotten which company. But, and the third was a cousin, Zelma Brooks [ph.], who became--who decided she wanted, she always said she wanted a career at home. Because she felt that her greatest contribution could be being an effective mother at home. And, I believe that is a very worthy calling because the hand that rocks the cradle still rules the world. Story_ID: 373621 Speaker 1: Who was your favorite subject in high school? Were there anyone that you really latched on to? Speaker 2: My favorite subjects of all has been science and English-- Speaker 1: While you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with languages second. Speaker 1: While you went through Carthage High School [Carthage Colored High School, Carthage, Texas], did you have extracurricular-- Speaker 2: Oh, everything. Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) activities after school? Did you work part-time at all during your high school years? Speaker 2: Well, since I was 14, 15, 13, 14, 15, work was sort of a joke. I did the jobs, but I didn't get paid. The other students had salaries. I think I was paid something like fifty cents a month. (Laughter) But it didn't really matter because I felt that I was doing something worthwhile. But I participated in all of the non-sports extracurricular activities. I did gymnastics and calisthenics. But I didn't do any sports because it wasn't at an age group that enabled it. And, one time I was playing a pickup basketball game with some of the girls and one of the taller--bigger girls hit me on the head with a basketball, and that could've caused me serious injury. And, I did not like that malevolent attitude. So, I never, ever went near anything basketball again (laughter). Had it not taken time from academics, I might have considered track. But, the only sports I've ever put any time into were tennis and skiing. Story_ID: 373622 Speaker 1: Going back to your doctor [Allen Moore Baker] when you were a child who inspired you to think about medicine, where did he prepare medicine? Where did he study? Do you know (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. But, he was a Texan so he must have gone to a Texan, Texas institution. But, he had had great tragedy in his life. His only son had been killed in a gun accident, which is not too unusual in Texas. And-- Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me. Speaker 2: He had actually become an alcoholic but I didn't see any of that. I just saw this doctor who was patient and kind and didn't hurt me when he gave me the shot. Mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] had me vaccinated or immunized against anything she even read of approaching the Texas border. And, that's again, why I survived because I've lived through typhoid epidemics, diphtheria epidemics, almost anything, polio epidemics, almost anything you can think of. But, there was another thing they learned early about Clorox and Lysol. So that Clorox and Lysol (laughter) the way of dealing with everything. So that not even tuberculosis epidemics actually took their toll. But, on--when I entered Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts], they had a project underway then, where they did the antibody titers of incoming medical students. And, I had the highest anti-diphtheria antibody titer ever done in the state lab at that time (laughter), which wasn't surprising because I had watched a three year old die of diphtheria. And the only time I ever saw that, that eschar that strangles you as you're being paralyzed by the toxins that are deactivating your ability to breathe, was in this baby. Story_ID: 373623 Speaker 1: How did you mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] and father [Millard Fillmore Jefferson] react and what did they think about your desire to be a physician? Did they have any comments that they--what was their (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Whatever I chose to do was what was going to be done. So, that I started college in pre-med, and medical school was to be the destination when the time came for me to consider where I was going, it was my father who suggested Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts]. And I pointed out at that time that no women were being accepted. He said, "But, you don't know what the circumstance will be when it comes time for you to apply." So that when the time came to apply, women were being accepted. Speaker 1: Well, where did you do your pre-med work, you undergraduate studies? What college? Speaker 2: At--I did my pre-med at Texas College in Tyler, Texas. And, I did a Bachelor of Arts degree, which I was awarded with highest praise, summa cum laude. And, I did--because I did get out a little early and was waiting the two years, did a Master of Science degree from Tufts University [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's after the four years at Texas? Speaker 2: Didn't--did the-- Speaker 1: Texas? Speaker 2: --time in Texas in less than four years. I did my bachelor's degree in three. Speaker 1: In three. Speaker 2: Then took two years to do the Master of Science Degree at Tufts University here in Medford [Massachusetts], and then to Harvard Medical School (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you major in at Texas College? Speaker 2: I majored, I had a double major in biology and Spanish, and a minor in English. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Speaker 2: See, I've always tried to keep the arts and the classics because I think doctors have to keep the sense of the humanities. They need a broader understanding than science alone gives them. Story_ID: 373624 Speaker 1: Boston [Massachusetts] and Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University] in Medford, Massachusetts is a long ways from East Texas-- Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: --Texas College [Tyler, Texas]. How did you make that jump here? Speaker 2: Because I've never (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, how did you decide to come all the way to the Northeast? Speaker 2: Because I, as a child in the piney woods of East Texas, I fell in love with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the City of Boston. I expected to become an educated woman and Boston was where I expected I needed to be because I b- expected to be part of the literary circles of Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts]. And, that is what I did (laughter). Speaker 1: So, you had read a lot about Boston then (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Speaker 1: Did you know people who had lived here, or had-- Speaker 2: Nope. I only knew them through the books. And, I expected to find them. And, some of them, you know, I didn't find Amy Lowell and Ralph Waldo Emerson. But I found some of their relatives (laughter). And certainly the first day when I got to Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts], I really felt that I was being greeted by some of the portraits that were hanging on the walls. And, in the, again, because I've always lived in the world of books rather than the world in which I happened to be, wasn't that great a transition. Speaker 1: So you came to Boston then aiming to start medical studies right away? That was your--? Speaker 2: Yes. But, I decided when I found that it would be better to wait those two years. I could use them with, I felt very good time because the physics department in the school that I had come from couldn't possibly be as strong as that at Tufts which was a, had an engineering department. So, I did physics at Tufts and not just the invertebrate zoology, which was the field in which I got the advanced degree. Story_ID: 373625 Speaker 1: When you first came to Boston [Massachusetts], you're coming out of undergraduate studies with a bachelor's degree [from Texas College, Tyler, Texas]. What was Boston like? What was it like when you arrived here? How do you remember your first days here? Speaker 2: Well, the first days I remember first of all getting on the bus and exploring the places around Boston. For some reason I discovered Brockton [Massachusetts] and the shoe industry and that fascinated me. Also, my father [Millard Fillmore Jefferson] had friends there. So, I would go and visit them. But, then I would take a bus from Brockton to explore the southeastern part of Massachusetts. But, my explorations here in Boston would start with the Boston Public Library [Boston, Massachusetts], and then go from there. Speaker 1: Where did you first live when you came to Boston? Speaker 2: Well, we lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. My father owned a house there. Speaker 1: How did he happen to own a house there? Speaker 2: Just happened; just bought one, since he knew I was going to medical school, I might as well have a house here. Speaker 1: I see. What street was that on? Speaker 2: Otisfield--number 1 Otisfield Street. And, I held that house until I lost it through a tax foreclosure, I think in 1994. I still intend to go back to court on that because I was sent the wrong date for the hearing. And, when I got to court it had been foreclosed by default. And, in the--I appealed that, and the judge who was sitting on being told by the att- the council for the city that they weren't going to do anything about it, just let it go because I said I expected to redeem it. But, somehow or the other, it got out of my hands. I did not get to redeem it. So, I shall go back over all of the records and determine what happened. I still will bring suit very likely in federal court because I do think that something has gone wrong. It was non-mortgaged property. Speaker 1: Your father of course had been in this area because he served at Standish [Camp Myles Standish, Taunton, Massachusetts], right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: So, he was familiar with Boston then, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, did he come and stay with you? Did you mother [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] come here also? Speaker 2: No, my father used that has his residence even though he lived on the post. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So that when he came back from Korea, he came back to the house at 1 Otisfield Street (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so, he had the house? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. So, you lived there? So, you had a place, okay. Speaker 2: I lived there throughout medical school. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Lived there actually until I got married in 1963. Story_ID: 373626 Speaker 1: Tell me about Tufts University [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Oh, I loved Tufts. Speaker 1: Yeah? Speaker 2: It had a wonderful campus (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you happen to go there? Speaker 2: I went there because I had heard a lot about the school. I knew--I had met one of its famous professors just in, I don't even remember how. But, I happened to like him and I decided an institution that had professors like that (laughter) was worthwhile. It also had a very good German department, and I decided I wanted to study German. I'd only had Spanish and French in my Texas school [Texas College, Tyler, Texas]. So, I decided I wanted to add German, and Tufts had a very strong German department. And, it was a lovely ride to go out to Medford [Massachusetts] each day. Speaker 1: So, you commuted every day? Speaker 2: Yeah. I commuted. Speaker 1: By bus? Speaker 2: By bus. And, there was a returning serviceman named Charles Defriend, who was also pre-med. He became a psychiatrist who settled in California; Dr. Charles Defriend. And, we use to have great time, my hearing about his stories of being in the [U.S.] military as we rode on the bus back and forth (laughter). Speaker 1: What was it like being a woman of color at Tufts at that time? Were there other African American students there? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were. Because Tufts has a long tradition of students and the campus was a very friendly campus. And they were very congenial to the off hill students. We even had a chorus and I conducted the chorus in the Christm- one of the Christmas concerts (background noise). But, I enjoyed Tufts very much. Speaker 1: And, the courses you took there; what were the courses? Speaker 2: (Leans forward). Speaker 1: The courses that you took, you took physics? Speaker 2: I don't remember everything I took but I did take German and several of the--let's see what else; comparative anatomy, embryology and invertebrate zoology. I think there was a physiology course. But, and or--or I think organic chemistry. Speaker 1: During those two years that you studied at Tufts for your master's degree-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did you work part-time or full-time-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in any scientific medical area? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You didn't. Story_ID: 373627 Speaker 1: So two years [at Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] and then you were admitted to-- Speaker 2: Medical school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts]. And, that was what year, again? Speaker 2: That was in 1947. We were the third class that had women in it. Speaker 1: Third class? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. You were the first woman of color-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --African American to graduate from Harvard Medical School (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was it like being there? Tell me about those-- Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed it. Because first of all this was essentially the first time I had been in place, so to speak, because you're there for four years. You had to establish what you're going to do and where you're going to fit in the order of things. I was aware that there might be some people who thought that maybe this wasn't the place for girls. But, after all, I got there the same way they did. It was my school as much theirs, so. Speaker 1: Did you face any overt obstacles as you entered? Speaker 2: No. I remember during one of my interviews someone of the assistant deans who was interviewing me said, "You will go perhaps days, weeks, without ever seeing another dark face." I said, "Well, what difference does that make? I see one in the mirror every day," (laughter). Speaker 1: Who were the professors at Harvard who were influential in your being there and in--that you got to know well? Were there any particular-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know exactly who was influential in my being there. Because you never can know who made the case for you or not. Speaker 1: Oh, I was thinking after you got there-- Speaker 2: Oh, after I got there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) were any particular professors-- Speaker 2: Oh, there were several-- Speaker 1: --that were-- Speaker 2: --that I had great regard for, did things that I felt were special in helping me. I mentioned Dr. Sidney Farber, who was a great pathologist. There was a great internist and cardiologist, Dr. Hermann Blumgart. He was a great scholar. And, I certainly was--I felt influenced by him, 'cause I just liked his academic approach, and his scholarship, and the manner in which he treated his patients. And, among the surgeons there was a great chest surgeon named Dr. Edward Delos Churchill. And, my favorite among the general surgeons was Dr. Carl Walter [Carl W. Walter], who essentially was my patron in the sense that he gave me extra opportunity in the dog lab. And, he had one of his residents who was David Hume [David M. Hume], who later went to the Medical College of Virginia [Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia]. And, unfortunately was killed in a plane crash. A plane that he was piloting. But, because Harvard has a tutorial program, you can take special courses. You could take special projects as well as do research project. And, in my chose--my tutorial program to be in general surgery with Dr. Carl Walter and Dr. David Hume. So, by the time I started my internship, I was trained as well as most junior assistant residents in surgery. So, my very first night as an intern at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], I did a mid-thigh amputation. And, if you (laughter) look at the actual time that I spent getting my surgical training, it is the equivalent of three complete general surgical residencies. Story_ID: 375077 Speaker 1: You were beginning to tell me about your preparation at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] to move into surgery. But before we get back to that, you mentioned earlier, the dog lab, and I wanted to--what was that about? Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did that fit into your studies and research? Speaker 2: In the, the second year, when we were beginning our clinical studies, in order to prepare us for being able to assist in the operating room, we were given basic operating and surgical technique in a dog lab. And, although I'm just one step removed from being an antivivisectionist because I knew we took good care of the dogs. And I knew that the handlers, who took care of them after we finished, treated them well. I could accept doing our operations on the dogs. 'Cause after all you had to treat your patient well to have him or her survive. So, I could do that, but that was one benefit of being in Harvard Medical School. We did have a very, very good program. And, Dr. Carl Walter [Carl W. Walter], who headed that department and Dr. David Hume [David M. Hume], who was another one of my professors, who was only as resident at that, was the chief resident at that time, gave me the opportunity of putting in extra time. So, I had fairly advanced surgical technique by the time I even got to my internship. Speaker 1: Well, tell me about that preparation then, the third and fourth years, and the surgical experiences (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I took every course that I thought would be of value and I certainly took everything that I thought would make up for what would be, expected to be shortcomings. So, that I did an elective in urology because most people would expect that a woman doctor would not be very strong in urology. Although, obviously women have urological problems as well. In most urological practice I think most urologists see more men than women in their practices. So that in medical school I not only did special work with--in urology, but I took the course with Dr. J. Hartwell Harrison, one of my favorites, who was one of the great urologists of his time. And, he said to me, to work helping him with sections of a book that he was working on. So, that if you look in that textbook, and I've forgotten which one it is, you will see in the charts and the diagrams. He always gave me credit for the things that I did. So, he'd make sure my name was listed (laughter). So, if we lo- go back to those old editions of that textbook, you will see that work. Story_ID: 375078 Speaker 1: In addition to the work and preparation in the dog lab, what were the other kinds of experiences that advanced your surgical knowledge and technique? Speaker 2: Just the fact that we had the opportunity of doing electives whenever and wherever we wanted them, and with whom. And I had an opportunity to fill in on a neurosurgical service for a resident, it's called striking [ph.]. So, even though I was only a fourth year student, I was able to strike on the neurosurgical service for one of the residents who was out. That gave me very good experience. So that people like to think that when they see a resident they are seeing very inexperienced doctor. But, that's not necessarily the case. Speaker 1: So when you say that you fulfilled or achieved the equivalent of three complete surgical residencies, what are they again, now? What are those three (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the problem is that from the time I started my surgical internship until I actually had my boards in surgery, which is the highest certification as a specialist in general surgery, I had served the equivalent of three complete general surgical residences. That came about because I am the first of the line of women from Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] to go into surgery. And, at the beginning, I finally got an internship, but not in one of the three major Harvard hospitals. I got my--an internship in what was Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] on an open service. The advantage of being on the open service is that we had better opportunities for actually doing surgery than on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Boston City Hospital? Speaker 2: Yeah. At that time, it was the third largest general hospital in the country; second only to Cook County [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County] in Chicago [Illinois], and Bellevue [Bellevue Hospital; Bellevue Hospital Center] in New York City [New York, New York]. So, that when you were at Boston City Hospital you were in a very desirable place to be for actually surgical practice. We also had Nobel Prize-winning hematologists there. So that it was quite an institution. And, even though it is associated with a mayor of Boston [Massachusetts], Mayor Curley [James Michael Curley]. He was considered something of a rogue, he did well by the people of the city. And, no matter what accusations and complaints there may have been against him for various chicaneries, he always put the welfare of the people of Boston first. And, that's what I think has been lost now in the privatization of everything-- Story_ID: 375079 Speaker 1: Just jumping back quickly to your training at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts], and then moving to your internship, how were you treated by the, by the men who were in your class (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) It depends. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: For the men in my class, I had no problem. The first unpleasant experience I had was when I started my internship and one of the men on the service refused to shake hands with me and said, "You're no longer at Harvard," (laughter). Well, I knew I wasn't. He didn't have to remind me. I never did understand what axe he was grinding because his manner became so hostile that I simply told the chief that I would not work with him. And, I would rather that he made sure we were never assigned together. And, he did that. Speaker 1: How long was your internship at Boston [Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Internships are one year. Speaker 1: One year. Speaker 2: I served one year general surgical residency and after that, you get different titles, junior assistant resident, senior assistant resident, senior resident, then chief resident. Speaker 1: Did you look, did you go through all of those (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The problem that is that as I went up the ladder, upheaval and revolution took place in the surgical department. The medical schools finally were able to essentially oust the non-teaching services. And, it was reorganized so that all of the interns and residents were then assigned to the three teaching hospitals. And, I went from my open service, and a chief who took great pride in having me on his service, he liked the fact that he had the smallest and the largest of the surgical residences--residents. I was the smallest, and my chief resident at that time had been a pro football player. And, he loved to see us operate together (laughter). But, I was assigned to the Tufts [New England Medical Center Hospital; Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] service, and a chief who did not want women on his service because he felt that they wouldn't use their training and it would be wasted. I later discovered that he had prevented his own doctor--wife from ever practicing. And, he just assumed that the fate of his wife would be the fate of doctors in general. But, he also wanted to have residents who were socially and financially able not to be influenced by the length of time that surgical training took. It was just sheer snobbery. But, many of the people that he chose by that model could not make it in the environment that a very large, active, municipal hospital provides. So, I got to see most of those he preferred go before me. But, he did not enable me to advance to chief resident and he took me off the ladder at a point where you usually cannot walk into another job. And, the usually fate of residents in that circumstance is to go from hospital to hospital, promised that senior job and never getting it. But, I refused to do that. Because there wasn't a program I considered worth going in and stepping down a single year because I'd already had much more experience than other residents had at my level and wasn't going to do that. So, instead of going into a program at a lower level, with no guarantee of getting the senior year, I instead did different specialties. So, I've been trained in every specialty in medicine except robotics and cryogenics (laughter), or cryonics, or whatever they want to call it. So, that's why I said, if you want to go just by the time put in and the experience obtained, I perhaps might be the very best trained surgeon every produced (laughter) in this country. Speaker 1: Very good. Speaker 2: But, in spite of the little setbacks and handicaps, I enjoyed it. And, I can't really complain too much because some of the people who did not help, and some of the people who put a few obstacles in my way were among those to sort of, "Oh, I helped train her," (laughter). Story_ID: 375080 Speaker 1: So what came next? Speaker 2: (Leans forward). Speaker 1: What came next? Speaker 2: Well, after that, I went on the staff of Boston University Medical Center [Boston University Medical Center Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]. And, that's where I did most, that's where I've remained, had remained until they did the merger [with Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], which I opposed. So, it went forward without me. And, I'm on sabbatical as I've been since the merger became final. Speaker 1: Now, the merger was when? I've lost track-- Speaker 2: I forgotten when the, when it was formally concluded. But, I do know, I didn't get any formal notice that I was no longer a member of the staff. I heard it from someone in the media. So I said maybe the letter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, you had been practicing surgery then? You were practicing surgery? Speaker 2: Yeah, but the--from the time the merger became a fait accompli, I was nowhere near. I did not go to the staff meetings because I really still feel very strongly that it was the wrong thing for the people of Boston [Massachusetts]. And, for the one hospital that was created to serve their needs. Speaker 1: All right, so you oppose- you were not in favor of the merger and-- Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: So, you didn't go along. So, what did you do then? Speaker 2: I'm on sabbatical trying to get some books written. Once I do that then I will determine what I do next. Because I'm not going to practice medicine dictated by an insurance company clerk looking on a list that they are pulling up on the computer. So, that I have to do some very serious thinking about what I will do in active practice. Because I will not retire. I will retire when they turn off the respirator and I can't reach it. Speaker 1: Well, you were doing surgery then. What types of surgeries were you doing? Speaker 2: I'm a general surgeon. And, that generally as I said is what the other specialties don't want to stay up all night doing. They want to do their pieces. But, when it comes to taking care of the whole patient and staying up all night with them, if you don't have a trauma center, or a burn center, or other specialized surgical centers, they want the general surgeon to take care of the whole patient. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 375081 Speaker 1: Well, you had developed some other interests in medicine, medical politics and the interface between medicine and law and jurisprudence and medical ethics and so on. And so, have you spent more time now in that area? Speaker 2: Well, I've spent as much time as I can actively as a member of my state medical society [Massachusetts Medical Society] and district. And, I also am a member of the American Medical Association, and I do support some of the allied somewhat more aggressively oriented medical associations. Not because I have any lack of confidence in the American Medical Association, but because I like to support what I consider worthy endeavors. And, whenever doctors take the responsibility of trying to help shape the world in which we live, instead of staying in that comfortable groove of home, hospital, and office, I like to encourage that (laughter). Speaker 1: Let me come back to one other thing. You were elected to the Boston Surgical Society [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Which I think was a first for a woman. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. When was that and how did you (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've forgotten the year. I would have to look it up, and I will do that and leave it in the things that I will send you. Speaker 1: That was based on what achievements? I mean, did you, how you were elected? Speaker 2: Well, I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you become elected, too? Speaker 2: First you are nominated by members who are already there. And it's based on your training in surgery, your experience, and your contributions to the field. Story_ID: 375082 Speaker 1: Let me go back to the medical school. I wanna just finish up a few things, and then I wanna move on to your right to life work. One of the professors at the medical school was Dr. William Augustus Hinton-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --an African American. And he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who is known because of the Hinton test [Davies-Hinton test]. Before, you could not even get your marriage license without getting the Hinton test to determine whether or not you had syphilis at a time when there was a serious understanding and willingness to curb the spread of sex transmitted diseases, which might have harmful effects on the coming generation; newborn children for example. Speaker 1: What kind of interaction did you have with Dr. Hinton? How did you know him? Speaker 2: Well, I knew him because he gave all of the critical lectures on the subject. And, I knew him simply because I just went up and introduced myself as I did to any of the professors that we saw just at lectures. I was never in any section that he taught. But, we did have the opportunity of trying to get to know the professors who spoke to us. I had read a great deal about him and I just certainly felt that having a lecturer, a professor with such history and with such significant contribution that all three medical schools insisted that he be on their faculties. And, certainly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, he was on the faculty at Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Tufts [Medical School of Tufts College; Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston University] and BU [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And, B-, I didn't know about BU. Tufts was through the New England Medical Center [New England Medical Center Hospital; Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right? That was the affiliation. What was he like as a person? How do you remember him? Speaker 2: Quiet. Not confident. Quiet, but not overbearing in any way and not assertive. But, obviously, fully knowledgeable about what he was saying. Speaker 1: Well, he certainly was a giant in American medicine as a pathologist, and as a professor, and so on. Story_ID: 375083 Speaker 1: You are well known certainly in Greater Boston, Massachusetts and nationally for your work in the right to life movement. The National Right to Life Committee, caucus, tell us when did you first move into being concerned about right to life and what--? Speaker 2: Well, in 1970, and one of my colleagues at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] when I was an intern and resident there, was a Dr. Barbara Rockett, who was the second women to follow me as an intern in surgery at Boston City Hospital. At that time, I was serving as a chief resident in Boston University medical school's [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts] new affiliated resident program. So, she called and asked me if I knew about, in 1970 she called and asked if I knew about a resolution that had been introduced in the AMA [American Medical Association], which didn't condone abortion, but just sort of bent its founding position against it by holding that a doctor who did abortion under his state's laws would not be considered guilty of unethical practice. And, I told her, no, that didn't seem appropriate that the one organization that was supposed to maintain the ethical integrity was going to accommodate that on such pragmatic grounds. So, then she told me that Dr. Joseph Stanton [Joseph R. Stanton] would call because he was trying to get doctors to sign a petition objecting to this resolution. Well, he did call and I did sign the petition. But, when the, at the annual AMA meeting unfortunately the delegates voted by a narrow margin to accept the resolution. So those of us who had signed the resolution in Massachusetts decided that something seriously amiss was underway. So that we gathered together to provide lectures and someone to speak to counteract what we saw as a developing trend. And then it became clear that that wasn't enough. We had to organize and I became part of the Value of Life Committee [Value of Life Committee of Massachusetts] with Dr. Stanton and Dr. Rockett, and other theologians and doctors and one philosopher and one housewife (laughter) and a few nurses (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this was in the early '70s [1970s] now? This was-- Speaker 2: It was in 1970. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, you were one of the helping founders then-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of the National Right to Life Committee? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 375084 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because we found after a year or so that the Value of Life Committee [Value of Life Committee of Massachusetts] was somewhat passive. You have to wait for people to invite you to speak. (Laughter) You can't just go speaking to them if they haven't invited you. And because it was really intense promotion and accelerated promotion of the abortion acceptance, we decided we'd better get something more formal. But, we were pushed because the pro-abortion groups got, in 1972, got a non-binding referendum on the ballots of twenty carefully selected cities and towns that would repeal the abortion laws of the Commonwealth [Commonwealth of Massachusetts]. So that many of the people that we had spoken to at other times came together in ad-hoc groups to fight that issue. And, we joined them together and that's--was the nucleus that became Massachusetts Citizens for Life [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Although, we lost that referendum by 55/45. When we finally got our applications in and articles of incorporation, we got them back about ten days or two weeks before January 22nd, '73 [1973] when the U.S. Supreme Court handed down its landmark abortion decisions, Roe versus Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973] and Doe versus Bolton [Doe v. Bolton, 1973]. But, in June of that year, we formally created National Right to Life Committee. And, I had the honor of giving the keynote address that launched the organization. Story_ID: 375085 Speaker 1: You served in the '70s [1970s] as an officer of the committee (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. In fact, I was the third president; first woman and third president of National Right to Life Committee. It became a national organization during the three years of my presidency from 1975 through '78 [1978]. I was the first president to succeed in getting re-elected. The first was a very fine businessman from Upper New York State. The second was a fine lawyer from Washington State. But, I was the first doctor. And, doctors deal with people differently from lawyers or businessmen. And I think that is what enabled me not only to get re-elected but to be able to bring the people together so that we could advance from names and address, and telephone numbers with a few organizations on it to a bona fide fifty state national organization. And, I'm also am happy that during the years of my presidency, we came from the bottom of the religious pages in the back of the paper to the front of The New York Times, (laughter) and The Washington Post. Speaker 1: What were your major challenges as the president in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Well, just to build an organization. We were dealing with forces that had been part of the public presences for forty years. Margaret Sanger's birth control movement and the allied population control organizations that had sprung up around it and in harmony had unlimited money, unlimited media access. And they started from the beginning to have their influence in the sectors that influence and shape public opinion. And, they had absolutely monopolized and conquered the academy. So, we had to do what the people have to do, mobilize the people, the force of the people to try to gain the time to correct the problem. Story_ID: 375086 Speaker 1: Through all of this organization there was group called Feminists for Life [Feminists for Life of America]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: There was also a group called Black Americans for Life (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Would you speak to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the Feminists and then to the-- Speaker 2: Feminists for Life were actually thrown out of NOW [National Organization for Women] because (laughter) they simply could not tolerate that someone would challenge their notion that it somehow is a benefit to a woman to be willing to get rid of her own child. It seems so strange that if you're going to resent woman at her very greatest, able to leap tall buildings in a single bound, better educated than ever before, wealthier than ever before with high power jobs, that she can't manage to change her decisions just because she finds she's pregnant. That even with all of these new capabilities, she still has to go back to the Margaret Sanger notion that somehow she is imprisoned by being able to conceive. Because after all, Margaret Sanger justified her birth control movement on two critical things. Number one, improving the American people by breeding a race of thoroughbreds. And number two, to improve the lot of women by freeing them from the prison of the marriage bed. So, that Feminists for Life simply would not accept any of that. They said, we are all for having women do whatever women are capable of doing. But that should not be having to sacrifice the one thing that makes her a woman; her ability to bring forth fruit and multiply, and save humankind. Story_ID: 375087 Speaker 1: Why was there a Black Americans for Life? What, where did that spring up, and what was that about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That did spring up because every time you look into the political system you've got, let's see, you may have, all of these little groups, political parties tend to balkanize. Because they think if they can deliver said votes that this will enhance their overall ability to win. There're some who believe that if you have a Spanish name or Hispanics or people of Spanish descent are going to vote for you. That if you have an Italian name, all people who have Italian names will vote for you. Or, if you have an Irish name, all people of Irish descent will vote for you. There's some b- who believe that if you have a dark skin, all people who have dark skins will vote for you. Well, I don't think that's necessarily true. But, in order to have a caucus, they decided, we'll, if they're going to play that game, we will have Black Americans for Life. There was also a previous African Americans for Life, headed by Erma Clardy Craven, one of our great social workers who's already gone to that great right to life convention in the sky. And, Dr. Dolores Grier, who was the vice chancellor of the Archdiocese of New York [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York]. The first layman appointed to that job, and think the highest position that any woman has ever held in the Archdiocese of New York. But, they only bring that out when there's a special need for it; that title. I, myself, don't ever formally participate in anything with gender or racial designations in the title. Story_ID: 375088 Speaker 1: You have, have testified or spoken before congressional committees-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: [U.S.] Congress, state legislative-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --groups and local government. Speaker 2: City and town. Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell me about some of your presentations. Tell me about your first time before a congressional group. Speaker 2: Well, first of all, usually it's very unusual that I go before a committee that I don't know someone on it. Because when you have been part of--shall we say, citizen in action for the length of time we've had to be, it's very rare that there will be any assembly at any level where we don't know at least one person on the committee. But, it doesn't really matter whether I know them or not. I give the same information and tried to be as clearly understood as possible. And, I don't ever shape or slant the information. I give the information in a way that I hope can be clearly understood. And, I try to give it in a way that any reasonable person will certainly be able to understand the points that I'm trying to make. Story_ID: 375089 Speaker 1: The Massachusetts Citizens for Life [Boston, Massachusetts] where you are currently involved at several levels--tell me about the overall program of this organization right now. What is it actively doing and-- Speaker 2: It's ac- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where do you fi- and what is your role? Speaker 2: Massachusetts Citizens for Life is first of all a citizenship action organization. And, its effectiveness and its success in the past reflected specifically that objective. Mobilizing the people to try to build a society in which their values are reflected to build the kind of world in which they wish to life. When they move away from that, copying the models of the better funded organizations, run by paid staff that puts out papers and articles and journals and maybe pull out a few citizens from time to time sort of as window dressing, they--we fail. And, right now Massachusetts Citizens for Life is rebuilding its base to return to the effectiveness that it previously had. And, as a founder of the organization and one who helped build that initial foundation, I'm fully committed to helping rebuild and-- Speaker 1: And, what is your specific role right now? Or, roles-- Speaker 2: My specific role right now is head of the chapter development. Chapter formation is the only key for maintaining a citizenship action organization. And, since I've had the longest experience doing it, I think it's reasonable that I take the responsibility for doing it. I normally don't take committee chairmanships because I already know how to do things. Our objective is not keeping the same people doing things but to build this ever widening pool of capable trained, focused, effective people. And, that's what we're trying to do now. Story_ID: 375090 Speaker 1: Because the media, Boston [Massachusetts] media and other media across the country do not honestly look at your values and your principles in your program, you have to counter that-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with media. What have you done with regards with media to strengthen and promote things that you value? Speaker 2: Well, all I can do is present the message that I have. But, I also have to do the things that let get around the roadblock. Because according to one of the senior reporters in Washington [D.C.] who gave us a transcript once, our adversaries, who are very influential with the large segment of the major media, have spent substantial time trying to see how they can limit any effectiveness I might have. I have a reach that many other people don't have. I am a doctor. I am a woman. I have a brown face. But, I've already had experience in public. And, that gives me the opportunity of speaking across the usual barriers. I also am a Protestant. So that in order to deal with this, his transcript indicated that they started first by trying to keep me from saying anything. So, that when I would be invited on a program, they'd have two opponents to the one me. And, with a moderator also sharing the opposite point of view, they would try to just sort of drown me out. But, they final discovered that when that happens, the audience listens much more closely to the person they are trying drown out. So, they decided to give that up. But, one thing that they did adopt which has been very effective, is to keep me out of the news, and to keep me off the programs. Speaker 1: But, you have used the media yourself, right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Tell me how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have, for example-- Speaker 1: What have you done in terms of using media directly? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, there is cable, and community cable at that. So, that currently I co-host a program on Boston Neighborhood Network cable. At least two times a month I host that program. It runs 2:30 on Thursday afternoons and then it has three to five replays during the week until that next live program takes place. That helps a great deal. Often men and women that I have met in stations in smaller markets, as soon as they get to the big time, will book me on their show. The first national show they get to book, and they get me on. That maybe the only time (laughter) but at least they get me on that one time. A friend owned a station once WPXQ [WPXQ-TV, Providence, Rhode Island], the only UHF [ultra high frequency] commercial station in Rhode Island, and he made me the editorial director for the station. So, I had a program on it, called 'Ocean State Chronicles' [sic. 'Ocean State Chronicle'], which was a weekly program. So, that little by little we get the message out. But, often until they were able to get good participation and the closeout, I did an average of three to ten major news conferences a month visiting in different cities. And, that has fallen off recently because we found that it has become the habit of them to find something else to do when we announce news conferences. But it doesn't matter because we are getting the word out to the people. Now with VHS and DVD we can send them to the chapters. The chapters can get them played locally. And, I find it very strange that those who were given by our constitution special privileges in this democratic republic would almost violate them by printing only what they want to tell, or airing only what they want to tell, instead of what the public really needs to know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 375091 Speaker 1: You've been very active in the Republican Party-- Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: --locally and nationally. What has been your role there over the years and how has that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my role-- Speaker 1: --been connected with your pro-life-- Speaker 2: Yes. Well, my role in elective and partisan politics is only an extension of my role in creating political effectiveness for the right to life movement. The right to life movement has no one political party, no one politics. It bring together people from across the political spectrum. The majority of people are middle of the road Democrats. But, of our elected leadership you will find perhaps and little slightly larger percentage of conservative Republicans. But, as the one who created the foundation for national right to life politics, I've lead our forces to fight on both sides of the aisle. The left wing of the Democratic Party defeated us for their apparatus. We defeated the Rockefeller wing of the Republican Party for their apparatus. So that as long as things remain as they are, no pro-life Democrat is going to win the nomination for president on the Democratic ticket. And, no pro-abortion Republican is going to win the nomination for president on the Republican ticket. And, we fight each battle state by state, seat by seat. But, there's a certain principle in politics. You've got to be practical to win from time of time. You've got to have a stronghold so that we went fully into the Republican Party hoping we would get in there and pick up the places, which were open before Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] might happen to look around and see. He didn't have to keep banging his head against the wall. He could move in and take over. But, he didn't see that, and we got in. And, since then it's been fighting every step to hold the influence we have because the Rockefeller pro-population, pro-abortion, pro-population control, pro-abortion Republicans are always trying to throw us out. It's always big tent when we control the vote. But, as soon as they get it, they try to throw us out so, we keep the fight going. But, my objective is to have both major parties with the right to life plank. Only the Republican Party has one right now. But, we want both because the majority of Democrats know there's something wrong with putting this democratic republic in position of giving an individual the private right to decide who will live or die. We're supposed to be a government of the people, by the people, and for the people and no one person can have that responsibility over someone's life in our form of government. These are socialist notions and the whole idea of social planning abortion and control of the social problems by getting rid of the people who cause the problems is a socialist notion, has no place here. Story_ID: 375092 Speaker 1: What was the intent of the draft, I think which you accepted, to run for the U.S. Senate in 1996? Speaker 2: No, actually, that started in '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 2: The last time I ran was then. Well, we had spent a great deal of time getting Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] elected. And, that was indeed the person I considered my president (laughter). Because we had been brought together through strange circumstances. Public Broadcasting [Public Broadcasting Service (PBS)] had a program called 'The Advocates,' and former governor of the Commonwealth [Commonwealth of Massachusetts], Michael Dukakis, one time was host on that program. Well, in December of '72 [1972] the program was aired from the state house [California State Capitol] in Sacramento [California] so that when then-governor Reagan saw the program, he got a video tape to pay for key members of his staff, and got my address from Public Broadcasting and wrote to me. And, he told me in that letter, if he had known what he had learned in the program from what I had said, when the lucent [ph.] California abortion bill was on his desk, he never would have signed it. He said, no sooner than he had signed it, since it had a provision that, you know, statement from a psychiatrist would enable one to undergo abortion. He said they came in, you know, almost a nickel a dozen. And, then as our correspondence went back and forth, Roe versus Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973] was handed down. So, then he wrote to say he felt responsible having signed the lucent California law [Therapeutic Abortion Act of 1967]. And he pledged himself to do whatever he could to bring about the reversal of those two abortion decisions. Now, at that time, he was leaving office as governor of California, he had no defined plans of having a political future. Yet, when we started National Right to Life Committee in Detroit [Michigan] in June of that year, 1973, I knew we had someone who could take the banner into the White House [Washington, D.C.]. And, as things worked out, we did. But, I had honor of leading the first non-governmental group that he had saw after this inauguration in 1981. And, when he came into the Oval Office to the assembled media, he introduced, when he introduced me he told them, "I'm a fan of hers." So, (laughter) that I will never forget that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so, you two did get together then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How many times did you meet with him? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't even count. This was in '72 [1972] that the correspondence took place. Somewhere within that next year, and I can't remember whether it was before or after he had left office, I was somewhere in California and discovered he was speaking in the same hotel in which I was. And, that's when we formally got to meet. And, then, from time to time, we would run into each other. And, then when he started campaigning, I obviously was mobilizing the right to life forces wherever we could. Story_ID: 375093 Speaker 1: And then in the critical campaign in 1980, there was one unfortunate news release quoting him, issued from Florida. I happened to be in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] speaking at a dinner, and the gal who was running the dinner was a daughter of a former governor of the state, and she knew all of the hotels inside out. So, that we found which ho- which hotel he'd be staying. So, we presented ourselves there because I wanted to get a statement from him correcting the comment that had--I knew he had been, in which he had been misquoted. So, we finally got to the base of the elevator that was going up to his suite. And, when the [U.S.] Secret Service found us there, they were flabbergasted (laughter). They could not image how on earth we had gotten there. We didn't tell them. But--because she knew the hotel so well, she knew of an entrance that they had not discovered. But, I told them that we just had to see Governor Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan]. And, he said, "Well, he's not seeing anyone." I said, "If you tell him that we are here, he will see us." So, they sent word up and Lyn Nofziger came down. And, and Lyn died last week, I noticed. Speaker 2: Who was he? Speaker 1: Lyn Nofziger, he was one of President Reagan's right hand men from California (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: But, he said, "Well, you know, he didn't even see the media." I said, "But, he will see me, I know. We've got to get this corrected, Lyn." So, he went back up and came down. He said, "He wants to see you." So, we went up. I explained to him what the trouble was. He had Lyn take down the statement correcting it then and there and release it so it would be in the papers by the afternoon and morning of the day and the day following. And, we got it corrected. Because people in our movement sometimes are very sensitive, and even a slight misquote could send them running in the wrong direction. But, we got that corrected and the end result was that he won in 1980. But, the very best of that is that he even won Massachusetts in 1980. In '84 [1984] he won on his own, and by landslide. But, everybody said we could not win in Massachusetts. The national party [Republican Party] had signed off long before the general election. And, the state campaign had spent so much of its money, it couldn't spend any more the week or so before the general election and still have an event on election night. But, many of those Democrats especially in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], who could not vote for him in the primary; that was won by I think John Anderson [John B. Anderson], and Bush [George Herbert Walker Bush] came out ahead of him in that primary. But, when the votes were counted at three o'clock in the morning, Massachusetts tumbled into the Reagan column. All those people who said, "We can't do anything for you now, but in the general election, we'll be there," and they were there. So, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's interesting history. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 375094 Speaker 1: What was behind your running for U.S. Senate? What was the intent there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, with President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] there, we had helped put the majority that was in the U.S. Senate, majority Republican, about six or eight of them. We had been instrumental in helping get elected. And, you see, if we could've gotten my campaign underway successfully in '82 [1982], we could've gotten some of those people to raise money for me in their states. And, we could've had President Reagan come in to campaign for me in Massachusetts. Because if you look at all of the political analysts and all of the things that they add up, I was the only Republican who could get that 49.6 percent that could beat Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy]. Not any of their favorite male millionaires, not any of the other people that they would've preferred having the seat. But, first of all, I had been campaigning in his base for almost ten years. And, in that base, I think it was 19 percent of people who described themselves as ultraliberal said that if my name were on the ballot they would feel compelled to vote for me. Story_ID: 375095 Speaker 1: In the autobiographical piece that appeared in a Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] publication, authored by Nora Nercessian called 'Against All Odds' ['Against All Odds: The Legacy of Students of African Descent At Harvard Medical School Before Affirmative Action, 1850-1968,' Nora N. Nercessian]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you indicated as you did in this interview that you were on sabbatical to finish four books, and I wanna talk about your writings also in a few minutes. And, that you never plan to retire. And, then I'm quoting, but recognizes that her resistance to the accelerated drive to force medical practice into techno social utilitarianism will make it difficult for her to find a suitable appointment in a department of surgery. Could you elaborate on that? Speaker 2: Yes. Because number one, I will not have my medical decisions dictated by an insurance company clerk who is pulling up indicators on some computer screen. Secondly, I will never accept the cost benefit analysis approach to the management of care. I never accept the financial aspect as having anything to do with providing quality care. And, the welfare of the individual person apart from any third party payer, any inconvenience to relatives, any burden on the society, will never have any meaning to me. Because, I think the most important thing of all is for every person to be able to live out his life without having to be pursued by somebody who's trying to make him feel unwanted, unnecessary, or if he's somehow is using up something that should've been saved or provided for someone else. So, because I believe that way, and I'm not ever going to go along to get along. I think it's many of my adversaries who don't have the s- courage to stand face-to-face to challenge me will try to do their little underhanded things. Story_ID: 375096 Speaker 1: I'd like to get your viewpoint on, on another issue. The publication that I just referred to 'Against All Odds,' the subtitle is 'The Legacy of Students of African Descent at Harvard Medical School Before Affirmative Action' ['Against All Odds: The Legacy of Students of African Descent At Harvard Medical School Before Affirmative Action, 1850-1968,' Nora N. Nercessian]. Speaker 2: Before affirmative action. Speaker 1: Did you title that (laughter) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I didn't, but I would've (laughter). Speaker 1: That's why I asked you, is that your title? Speaker 2: I didn't but I would have. Speaker 1: But you like that? But you like that, like before? Speaker 2: I like that. Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell me why. Speaker 2: Because although it was very well intended and people forget affirmative action came about through an executive order of [President] Richard Milhous Nixon. He really was anxious to balance what he s- thought were inequalities in the society. But, I don't think he thought it would ever reach the point where people who don't need the crutch are reaching for the crutch. I see young people who have every opportunity and they don't think they can manage unless they're giving a special set-aside, or a special quota. They don't feel that they can compete without that. And, I think that's dead wrong. And, I think they have not understood that when you're waiting for someone else to assign your place in the line or your position of advancement, it's going to be what they think of your capabilities, not what you may be capable of doing. And, I think the whole concept ends up being cripplingly condescending and I think they need to shake off what has become an almost obsessive attachment to it. Speaker 1: As you have being against abortion, the anti-abortion-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm for the right to life. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear) it's just that I don't even like my name associated with abortion. But, obviously it's right to life against abortion-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --infanticide, euthanasia, and all of these other things. Speaker 1: All right. Have you done anything overt in terms of speaking out against affirmative action? 'Cause I'm saying that you really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Don't have an opportunity. They will not include me in discussions where (laughter) that point of view would be represented. I've actually had some poor people in some of the schools here call in tears because they've invited me to speak and then have someone else tell them they can't have me there. Because they don't want the children to understand there is a different point of view. Story_ID: 375097 Speaker 1: You've received a number of awards and citations for your work in medicine and the other areas that we've talked about. And, I understand you were the first physician to be given the Father Flanagan-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Award [Father Flanagan Award for Service to Youth]-- Speaker 2: In Boys Town [Boys Town, Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Of Boys Town. How did that come--what was that for (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. Because I never know who recommends me sometime for these things. And, I know people in so many different places. For example, on some of these honorary degrees, it has been students who have asked the boards of trustees to do so. Sometimes it's been individual trustees. Sometimes people who I have met in someplace who finally get in position to be able to make a recommendation. So I sometimes don't ever know. But I was truly delighted because Boys Town, which is now Boys and Girls Town [sic.], has always been one of the endeavors that I thought so highly of. And, to think that they would have given me the award was very gratifying. But, I've had since I was given an opportunity to have another experience associated with. Because when Mrs. Nancy Reagan was given the Father Flanagan Award, she couldn't come in an evening so they had to award hers at a lunch. And I was the only previous recipient who could come. And if you had heard her telling those children about the experiences that she and her mother [Edith Luckett Davis] went through as she was growing up, and the times when they didn't have food, when she didn't have proper clothing. And how her mother had to manage to try to get shelter for her. And then later years when her mother had married Dr. Loyal Davis and she had been adopted by him; one of our great surgeons. It was just so amazing and I couldn't understand how people who had been so cruel to her in the news, could've not been able to see what she really was and the kind of person she really was. But, I saw her truly for what she was when she was talking to the children at Boys Town. Story_ID: 375098 Speaker 1: Another award, which among the many that you received, which I was interested in asking about was the Lantern Award for Patriotism-- Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of the Massachusetts State Council of the Knights of Columbus. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was that about? How did you-- Speaker 2: Well, the Knights of Columbus here in Massachusetts and across the country in fact, has been sort of big brothers in the development in the right to life movement. Here in Massachusetts, the right to life movement actually was brought--mobilized by doctors, lawyers, some clergymen, some theologians, but not through churches directly so that we had the mobilization of the people. But, no money. So that, when we first started, for example, we didn't have materials to distribute other than things that were, you know, runoff copies from articles that were clipped form publications and so on. But, the Knights of Columbus had publications and they would print materials and enable us to have pamphlets. Drawings that would show the development of the child before birth. And, they made them available to us at little cost or no cost. And, that was why we often considered them the big brothers of our getting started. But, we then started trying to recruit among them and develop their awareness more. And, the year that the state council of the Knights of Columbus here in Massachusetts used the pro-life theme for their recruiting, they had such a surge in membership that they actually won one of their awards, the highest awards, at their Supreme Council, which is the name of their annual convention. And, because I would often go on the road with their pro-life coordinator, we sometimes would do three, four programs a week all over the state from the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] to the far west. I was just honored that they decided because I think I was the first person who was not a bishop to be given the honor, and the first woman. Story_ID: 375099 Speaker 1: I take it that both of these awards [Father Flanagan Award for Service to Youth and Lantern Award for Patriotism] are very meaningful to you and I'm sure that all of them are. Is there one other award that you've received that you have a special feeling for? Speaker 2: Oh, I must admit, it's when my own college, Texas College [Tyler, Texas], gave me the Alumna of the Decade Award (laughter). Because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was gonna ask you if you have-- Speaker 2: Yes, because-- Speaker 1: --been going back to Texas. Speaker 2: To think that my own alma mater thought that my accomplishments were noteworthy was very, very, gratifying to me. And, my father [Millard Fillmore Jefferson] as a Methodist [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal (C.M.E.)] minister had to face what people would always assume that the preacher's kid is going to be the worst kids (laughter). But, I've never, had never been motivated along that kind of rebellious streak. And, in fact, I wanted to make certain that there was never anything in my behavior that could in any way reflect negatively upon my father as a preacher. But, I was quite honored that my own alma mater recognized me. Story_ID: 373651 Speaker 1: I started my career many, many years ago in early '60s [1960s] as a biology teacher-- Speaker 2: Oh, wonderful (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which was, which was my major. And, I believe that I was teaching about sex and sex education, and I understand that's another one area of your interest and thinking-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Tell me about your viewpoints on sex education (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Where we've been, where we're at-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, where we should be. Speaker 2: Well, in the first place, I think we have departed from any sane notion of sex education in general. And, we have now entered an era of sex indoctrination, which is robbing children of their childhood and setting them on a path that's going to lead to destroying their bodies and their reproductive capabilities. The focus on, is so much on the almost impersonal, obsessive preoccupation with sex activity that the matter of relationships is simply going by the board. And, we have had introduced here into Massachusetts since it's been targeted as the state in which they want to get for the first time, state mandated curriculum, a health framework s- curriculum, which includes a sex education pre-k [pre-kindergarten] through twelve [twelfth grade]. And the objective is to completely reorient and destroy the basic principles that have guided the education of young people as they develop based in the Judeo-Christian moral tradition. To set aside constraint. To set aside traditional attitudes toward privacy. And, to set aside the traditional understanding is that your body develops a little bit beyond the ability of your brain and your judgment to govern your behavior. And because of that, we have a mechanistic (unclear) school approach in most of the sex education that is thrust and foisted into various curricula. Story_ID: 373652 Speaker 1: I believe young people should be taught accurately and soundly about the development of their bodies, from a health perspective, as early as they can understand washing their teeth, washing their hands. When I talk to kindergarteners, I always teach them simple things. Always remember to wash your hands. Don't put things in your mouth that are going to carry germs. Now, you don't want to be impolite but when you are with your mommy and the doctor or the nurse comes in to examine you, if you don't see them wash their hands, you whisper to your mommy that they didn't wash their hands and see that they do. And, somewhere along through that I tried to instill the understanding, you don't ever need to learn how to do something you shouldn't be doing in the first place. And, as you get along, I try to help them understand, first of all, you've got to learn to control your brain first. You've got to know the difference between right and wrong. It doesn't matter who's watching. You've got to be able to look at that face in the mirror and know that you're not going to do something that you're going to have to pay a price for that you can't afford. And that you're going to make someone else have to pay for you. Whether it's your parents, your friends, somebody else who loves you, or some poor little baby that wasn't responsible at all for growing where they happened to be. But, I also try to tell them that there are lot of people who are going to rush them into decisions that they aren't ready for. You know, you might see that beautiful sports car out there that somebody borrowed from the Indianapolis Speedway [Indianapolis Motor Speedway, Indianapolis, Indiana] and you may want to drive, and wan- get in it and go two hundred miles an hour. But, if someone just suddenly put you behind the wheel when you had no driving lessons at all, you'd get some understanding that this wasn't right for you and wasn't anything you could handle. The same thing essentially happens with your body as you begin to develop, the hormones flow. You have no idea what you will do or not because your brain and your intent may not be functioning on the same level. That's why you have to learn early not to put yourself into circumstances that you cannot control. And you're always fooling yourself when you think you can control a situation that you've not been in. And, that you must not let other people push you into something where you are going to suffer the damage or pay the price. But, I also warn them that drugs and alcohol are the two key things that help rob you of your sense and of your capability in controlling what you do. And, when you get yourself in a circumstance where you're involved with either one or both, you're going to have trouble. And, you have to learn early to keep yourself out of places that are gonna let you stagger from one kind of accident to another that you can't control. And, I don't like the fact that so much bombards young people today, in the music, in the videos, and everything else. There some people who just look upon them as little sex automatons, doesn't matter the damage that's being caused to them. It doesn't matter that the earlier they get these little girls involved in sex activity and multiple partners, the earlier they're going to get cervical cancer. They don't care about any of that. They just want to promote what's going to sell, the music sell, the DVDs, whatever. And this is a tragedy. And I think the only way that can be stopped is that parents are going to have to become parents again. They are going to have to exclude some things from their children or having them exposed to that. At least until the pendulum swings back a little bit. Story_ID: 373653 Speaker 1: Where do you get your main support from? Are there individuals who are giving you the support you need to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Financial support? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Well, I'll-- Speaker 2: Moral support? Speaker 1: --we'll answer that too. The moral support for you to continue the tough job that you have in the pro-life movement? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Who are the people that are supportive? Speaker 2: It's the people of the grassroots because I go around as an orphan and indeed my parents [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson and Millard Fillmore Jefferson] are dead. But I have a very large birth family that's scattered all around. They're still the larges nucleus in East Texas. But parts of it are scattered all around. My father's nieces and nephews are in California in a fairly concentrated area. But most of my direct day-to-day support, I know that they love me, all of my relatives, but my direct day-to-day support comes from all of my (laughter) adopted families in the right to life movement. Because it is difficult work. But, people have to understand the difference in movement activity and just people doing things is that when it is a difficult endeavors this is, you have to be joined at the heart and when that fragment and when you pull apart, pull away, first of all, you're not going to be as effective. And, secondly, you're not going to be able to do it without burning out or collapsing. And, from my personal standpoint, I have spent every Christmas, Easter, Thanksgiving, with one family in Arlington, Massachusetts. And, the changes since 1977 and the changes that have taken place, some of the children who are around the table now weren't even there then. Now they have six children and four of them are married and now they have twenty-four little grandchildren. And when I see all of these wonderful little people coming out of nowhere with their different personalities and how they grow. And, on every side and across the state, we have people and families like this. But, my main support has come from the people of the grassroots. Speaker 1: What about financial support. How do you manage and continue your work? 'Cause you have to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, again-- Speaker 1: --have to pay for these things. Speaker 2: Again, it's the people of the grassroots. Because with their nickels and dimes and big sales, and rose drives, they are the ones who have funded our movement. I have never had the support from the business community that the effectiveness of my efforts should have earned. I can count on just two hands all of the major business support we have had over the entire time we've been out here, since 1970. Then I once had a bank of my fellow physicians and about four or five lawyers on that list. But, now unfortunately all of them have either retired, moved away, and no longer have the incomes they had, so they can't put as much into this effort. Fortunately, a few doctors are still in practice from that era. But, we have not had any flood tide of people coming to replace them. Most of our work is supported by direct mail, with small contributions. Story_ID: 373654 Speaker 1: Can we turn to your writings-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because you have been working on, you said, four books? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Would you, could you tell us what the subjects are of these books and what you're working on (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the first will be, will deal with the right to life so that I would have in one place most of the things I say. My speeches I usually leave on tape for the groups that sponsor the programs. So, I often end up without even a copy of the speech that I've given in a given place. And, any of the tapes and videos that they make of that they circulate through their local state venues. The second is on my view of the role of women in the 21st century. The third is my political manifesto. And, the fourth has to do with my view of race non-relations in the United States, since almost everything done in the traditional racial party line view I oppose. Speaker 1: Which one is gonna be published first? Speaker 2: I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How far along are you with each of them? Speaker 2: --the right to life one is the one that will get out first. But, sometimes it looks as if the one on women might edge it out. But I know whichever one I get through first will facilitate getting the rest of them done (laughter). Story_ID: 373655 Speaker 1: Once you have your writings published, what do you see yourself doing next? I mean, I know you're going to continue with the right to life, but what else do you see? Where are you going from there? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: And, what else would you like to do? Speaker 2: Well, I would eventually like to have a newspaper. I would like to have a string of newspapers. Because I will never be completely friendly toward technology. I enjoy holding the paper, and I feel that pa- newspapers should not be allowed to die. In my final dream of accomplishments on this earth is to own a string of newspapers. Story_ID: 373656 Speaker 1: We have some wrap up questions and I think we're at that point. Is there anything else that you would like to add to this interview that I did not ask you about? Speaker 2: Well, it--little bit has to do, I think my whole view of life, and my attitude toward people in general springs form the little area of Texas [Panola County, Texas] that I came from. I look upon myself as one of the little mustangs that runs around the prairie; will never be bridled, never be completely tamed, and will never be content being closed in. I love Boston [Massachusetts]. But, I will never, ever quite get accustomed to have it as crowded as it is and see every day having buildings jammed up so that it will soon come to point that not one ray of sunshine will get to the ground in downtown City of Boston. But, other than that, it's fine. And, I didn't need the genome project, the Human Genome Project, to let me know that all people are one. And, have come from the same genetic pool. I knew that instinctively. And, I've never understood the differences that people see in each other and why they feel that somehow the difference they feel must separate them. And, it--everything wrong with regard to racial attitudes in the area that I came from. Because I couldn't understand why there were supposed to be some people that you didn't associate with. And, there was a very, very poor family that lived near us, and there were--I didn't understand that when they would say it running it fast together, I couldn't under--what is poor white trash? Poor whi- I looked in the dictionary and there was nothing starting with P. And, it was only later that they were saying poor white trash. And, I couldn't understand why they would refer to these poor little girls that way. There was one little girl who was always, be very, very dirty and my--the aunt that I was visiting because it was always to her yard that they would come. And, they were almost always hungry. One was about four or five, and the other was about ten or eleven. And, they had flaxen hair, but it would be so dirty you couldn't really tell. And, we would play and she would always bring little chairs out. But, first she send all of the boys far, far away from the house. And, then when they left, I noticed she always scrubbed the little chairs that they sat on. She would always feed us, you know, she fed them with us. But, I could never understand why should she do this? And, why--she didn't do this when cousin Jim [ph.] and cousin Sally [ph.] came. And, they looked like these two little girls. But, she didn't wash up everything when they left. So, I had it all wrong. When I finally found that we were the ones that was supposed to be as separate and somehow inferior. When I learned that, and then noticed the signs, I would not let the children with me drink from a fountain if it had a sign on it. And, one time I was buying a bus ticket and I knew all of the girls who sold the tickets. So, I simply went to the windows to get a ticket. And, I heard a woman say, "Why are you letting this little girl, that little girl go to the wrong window?" And, the girl said to her, "Can't you see, she's too little to read," (laughter). Story_ID: 373657 Speaker 1: But, it was an, it was an area [Panola County, Texas] like that. I didn't know that eighteen miles away people were being lynched. I only heard about that later in the section that I came from. Apparently, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] lost road in the--end of the 19th century and when the head of the klavern came through, his skull was crushed through with brass knuckles. They didn't ride again. And, in one time when things were getting difficult in a neighborhood around, which wasn't in the little community that we lived in, but one of the adjacent ones. One sheriff, who was known as someone who was very, very mean to people who he didn't like and certainly if they had the wrong color, was found dead. Just found dead. Nobody knows how or why. He just was found dead with holes in his head. But, in the area that I came from, when a boy got to be fourteen, you automatically got a rifle. If there were no boys in the family, the girl got the rifle because in the winter when protein stores were scarce, it's the skill of the hunter that supplemented the family diet. And, all of mother's [Gurthie Roberts Jefferson] brothers and nephews who went into the [U.S. military] service were very skilled marksmen. And, they all had marksmanship medals. But, it stood them in good stead even later because one of my cousin's, first cousins, was telling me of an experience, I think it might have been the breakthrough that the reptiles were making to try to make some bridge to mankind. But she said, she looked out her kitchen door and there was a rattlesnake (laughter) on her top step (laughter). And, she said she screamed and of course the poor snake went under the house. Now he was just, I think this was the first overture. 'Cause I've never ever heard of a rattlesnake being that close to someone's house. But her son, who had been in the service was there. And, she unfortunately call him. So, this poor rattlesnake when he finally came out from other the house lost his head. But, with one shot, he took the poor things head off and spoiled that attempt to (laughter) communicate with mankind. But, the essences of my childhood was escaping from things that could sting, bite, crawl, or do something else to you (laughter). And, that's why I had said earlier, it was remarkable that I survived my childhood at all. But, just as I didn't know that around me there were horrid things happening within this little community, both in the country and the urban part of the area. The people worked in harmony. So, actually that section of Texas desegregated before the Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], decision was finally handed down. I was not there then. But, I'm told that they did. So, they desegregated before they were legally required to do so. And, many of the people I knew in the community were the merchants. And, one of the merchants was the lady who had the most fashionable dress shop. And, while my mother was winding up her bachelor's degree requirements in Saturday classes, I would spend the day talking with her. And, some of her customers would come in, "Why do you spend all that time talking to that little girl?" Said, "Well because she's my friend and I like to talk to her," (laughter). But, I'd always had a strong interest in fashion. And even though my mother and her mother [Fannie Deramus Roberts] were out in the woods, they still when--before the days of the current fashion magazines being available to them, they received something in the mail called Godey's Lady's Book, and that's where they got their idea of style. But, from the time they became able to buy Vogue magazine at a drugstore, it became part of what they would always buy at least once a year (laughter). And, then, as I grew older, they would buy the fashion magazines for me. So, that I always lived in a world outside the actual world I was in. Story_ID: 373658 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life? Speaker 2: I have deliberately chosen to live it that way. No one else assigned it to me. And, I have chosen to do both my profession of medicine and the right to life movement, plus the political and social aspect of my medical society as a crusade. So, that I specifically limit other things that I do. Because I prefer to spend my time in these endeavors. So, I don't do any of the things that might, that I might normally do before we started the right to life movement. I was a patron of the theatre, both legitimate and motion picture. I've always loved music. I've always had season tickets for the Metropolitan Opera on the road because I first started listening to the Met on a battery powered radio sitting in the country [in Panola County, Texas]. And, the, being able to follow and to hear the great symphony orchestra, actually being here was fine. I never did have a season ticket to the Boston Symphony [Boston Symphony Orchestra], though, because I never, ever had consistent time to do so. So, that I always was using someone else's seat. And, the funny thing happened that the seats I used on a Saturday matinee were the same seats that another friend had for Tuesday evening. So, for a long time, I got the symphony but since we started the right to life movement, I've had to give up skiing. I'd had to give up the theatre. I've had to give up everything because it takes both my time and money. So, I have deliberately created a life that excludes the things that I would do personally. In a sense, I am an exile from my own life, or own previous life. Speaker 1: In addition to completing the four books that you're working on and getting them published, what else do you still wanna do that you have not yet done? Speaker 2: There's very little that I want to do that I haven't already done. Because I do whatever I think is necessary to be done. And, the opportunities that have come to me just in the experience of being a crusading activist both political (laughter) and medical has taken me many, many places. Story_ID: 373659 Speaker 1: Why do you this history is important? You have given of your time to this history project, a very unique contribu- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because I think it is so very necessary that we record the fact accurately. So much has not been recorded. It has been left to word of mouth. And, unless we have something tangible, it's so easy to have that distorted. One thing that I want to do is to write the accurate and complete history of the right to life movement. And, I see us doing something akin to what you're doing in each state to help them supplement recording their history. I hope we will have fifty-two volumes when we finally get it done; one for each state. And, then too that will cover the national effort and what happened in the territories. But, I've never seen any article that has been completely accurate regarding anything that we've done. Or, what someone else has attributed to us. And, even when I read accounts from our own organizations, I read a history of Mass Citizens for Life [Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Boston, Massachusetts] without the name of single person. I've never understood how you could record history using no names (laughter). Story_ID: 373660 Speaker 1: Two final wrap up questions, what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My great hope is that they will learn that they are human beings that are created in the image of God. They do not have to have anyone else's permission to live. They do not have to have anyone else's permission to be free, or to achieve whatever their hearts, wishes, and dreams might be. And, I would like for them to turn a deaf ear to people who are always putting cages around them. Or, insist that they carry a cage around as if they were tortoises or turtles because they limit everything. For slavery to exist, the slave has to believe he is slave. And that the master is master. And the master has to believe that he is master and the slave is slave. You cannot have slavery when you can never convince the slave that he's a slave. And, they will never accept the master as a master. Because there is no slave or master. And I would like them to understand that I try to treat every person as I would want to be treated. I do not look up to nor down upon any man. But I can consider every man my brother. Speaker 1: Last question, how do you wanna be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: That my life made a difference. And that others lived because of the work I did. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: I thank you. Speaker 1: Great...