 Story_ID: 238369 Speaker 1: Good morning sir. Speaker 2: Good morning. Speaker 1: I'd like to begin by slating that my name is Jodi Merriday and I'll be your interview for today. Scott Stearns is the videographer, and there are no observers. Could you begin by stating and spelling your name including your middle name? Speaker 2: Okay, Emmanuel Lemuel McCall Senior, E-M-M-A-N-U-E-L, the middle name is L-E-M-U-E-L, the last name is M-C-C-A-L-L, Sr. Speaker 1: Could you tell us today's date? Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry, September 25, I believe 2004. Speaker 1: And the location including the address of this interview? Speaker 2: Christian Fellowship Baptist Church, 1500 Norman Drive, College Park, Georgia 30349. Story_ID: 238370 Speaker 1: I'd like to begin by asking five People magazine-ish kind of questions just to begin to warm the interview a bit. Could you please tell us what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Goodness, I have a lot of favorite foods. I don't know that there's anyone that outdoes the others. I suppose my own version of Louisiana gumbo is one of my favorites. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: And when is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I enjoy the Hawaiian Islands. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: There is none that are more outstanding than the other. I have a collection of them. It all depends on the situation. Story_ID: 238371 Speaker 1: We'd like to begin by exploring your early years. Could you begin by telling us your mother's name, place of birth and where she was raised? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Myra Mae Preston she was born in Wheatland, Pennsylvania. It's a little suburb out from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]; the year was 1917, 1918 I'm sorry. Speaker 1: And did she share any stories with you related to her upbringing, her early rearing? Speaker 2: Yes, we heard quite a bit of that because it wasn't too much to do in those days. So we heard a whole lot about Wheatland, Farrell [Pennsylvania], Sharon [Pennsylvania] these are the little villages around which the family rotated. The school days we heard a lot about the friends that she had who for the most part still were in and out of our lives because of church or the community or the farm that my dad had. So she told quite a bit about those years. Speaker 1: Could you tell us your father's name place of birth and where he was raised? Speaker 2: His name is George McCall--his name was George McCall born in Cheraw, South Carolina in 1913, April 5th. He was there until age fourteen and then came to Pennsylvania and lived the rest of his life there in that little village of West Middlesex [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you related to his growing up? Speaker 2: He had a very painful experience and for that reason he tried to avoid it. He did not talk much about his growing up years. He was--his father died when he was two, his mother died when he, I believe, was thirteen. He was raised by an adopted father, an adopted man. What happened was at age thirteen he went to the saw mills to work. He called a man--a man, some older men were picking on him, and he picked up a club to defend himself and hit one of them pretty good. And so the word was out in the community there'll be a lynching that night, and they're coming after him. A man named Sam [Samuel] DeLane, who was a minister from Wheatland, Pennsylvania was in Cheraw doing a revival service. And when the word got to the black community that there was gonna be a lynching Reverend DeLane put my father in the back of a car. They went to the next town caught a train, brought him to Pennsylvania, and he raised him, he adopted him and raised him. Story_ID: 238372 Speaker 1: And Sam [Reverend Samuel] DeLane became a very forceful person in our family life; not only because he was my dad's [George McCall] adopted father, spiritual mentor to us. He also had the privilege in naming me. And so that's why I have two biblical names, Emmanuel Lemuel. He was very--I want to say legalistic in religious affairs. He took very seriously that in the Old Testament they dedicated babies after eight days. And so on the eighth day after my birth they--a group of the members had a fellowship and that fellowship was for my naming. And my dad gave him the privilege of giving me the name. And he made a prediction his prediction was that I would preach. And for that reason he gave me the biblical names Emmanuel, which means "God with us," Lemuel, which is "son of wisdom," coming out Solomon. And then he made the eight people who were witnesses to that swear that they would not say a word about it until it actually happened. And at age fourteen I announced my sense of call to ministry. And on the day that I was presented to do an initial sermon Reverend DeLane, who was no longer pastor of the church then, but he was present. And he called on the eight people who were eyewitnesses to stand, and he recounted my naming on that eighth day. Story_ID: 238373 Speaker 1: But beyond that my dad [George McCall] would not talk about his early years. It wasn't until 1963 that he would go back to South Carolina at all thinking that those who might have remembered that incident were probably now deceased. He went back couple times afterward, and I wanted to go with him so that I could get to know the McCall family and never did have that opportunity; we could never get our schedules together. Speaker 2: Did he know the names of his parents? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: What were their names? Speaker 1: His mother's name was Sarah [ph.], and I'm sorry I don't recall the name of his father. Story_ID: 238374 Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents on your mother's [Myra Mae Preston McCall] side? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Clarence [ph.] Preston. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Myrtle Preston, I remembered my grandfather very well. Heavyset boisterous kind of fellow. He died young of a heart attack, forty-two years old when he died (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Do you know where he was born? Speaker 2: No I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he worked in the steel mills of Sharon, Pennsylvania. And was a heavy drinker man about town and my dad [George McCall] had the responsibility because my grand-dad left my grandmother with nothing. My dad had the responsibility of caring for her for all of her life and so I got to know her very well she was a strong influence in my life. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Myrtle Ellen Preston. Her original name was Lancaster but after she married Preston. Speaker 1: Do you know where she was born? Speaker 2: She was born in Virginia, but she couldn't tell you where in Virginia. She was of Cherokee Indian [Native American] descent, and it was a rural community. And she could not even identify that particular community. But she migrated to Pennsylvania as many people did when the steel mills opened in western Pennsylvania. She did not work in the steel mills, but there were side things such as cooking, cleaning. And many people left the rural community to go to those centers so that they would be employed. Speaker 1: Did she identify strongly with being an African American or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was she grounded in Native American culture? Speaker 2: She was grounded in her Native American background, but she could only identify in the African American community. And that's where she did, so all of her singing, her artistic temperament all of that was African American. When you looked at her, you knew that she was not from African stock. Long hair that went all the way down to her hips, medium complexion full Cherokee in every sense. Speaker 1: Wow, did your grandmother ever share any stories with you related to her growing up? Speaker 2: No, and I suppose we never asked, but I don't remember her volunteering any stories. I learned a lot from her by osmosis. She would in the fall of the year or late summer we would go into the woods. My dad had a farm; he bought a farm. We would go into the woods, and she would pick out the plants and the roots that she wanted gathered. And so I with a shovel would dig for the roots or help pick the plants and these she would bring back, and dad gave her special place in our barn. She would hang the plants up to dry as well as the roots. And whenever we had any kind of physical situation she knew exactly which root or which plant to go get make a tea from it and it worked. So that much of her heritage she was able to retain. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: I think she was in a sense embarrassed maybe that she was Indian. That wasn't too popular I guess in those days. Story_ID: 238375 Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry? Speaker 2: I would have to stop with my grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And with my grandparents on my mother's [Myra Mae Preston McCall] side 'cause there was no opportunity to know those on my dad's [George McCall] side. Speaker 1: Are there any fables or legends related to your family that were passed down that you might've heard growing up? Speaker 2: No fables or legends mostly things that were experiences which they had that they passed on. My dad is what is referred to over in the South Carolina community as a Geechee [Gullah]. Meaning that he was from--he could identify with a tribe from Africa that learned how to develop their own language for communication purposes. And so they--he and others from South Carolina who also had migrated to that community when they wanted to they, they could fall its a Geechee talk, Creole would be somewhat similar to that. But I was fascinated because they could do this, and I couldn't understand what they were saying and they could go in and out of regular English or the Geechee language whenever they chose. Speaker 1: And you never learned any components of the Geechee language? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was embarrassed at first by it because it sounded ignorant I didn't understand at that time. I did not understand the importance of what they were doing in their communication. Now I wish I'd a gone back and done it, and I've made a couple trips over to South Carolina just to be in that environment, just to see what I can glean. But, unfortunately, I didn't know then how valuable that was. Story_ID: 238376 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest remembrance is a--as a four-year-old I had two experiences that I'll never forget. One was the little church that we were members of took a train trip to Niagara Falls. And I still remember the train, and I remember the, the falls. The second experience was catching my first fish. We were at Lake Pymatuning, and there was a cross bridge that connected two bodies of water. Many people fished from the cross bridge on both sides of it. And I was fishing with a bamboo pole cane pole as they were called. And my dad [George McCall] would tell me when I saw the cork as we actually fished with a cork that was used to stop bottles that would split down the side and line running through it with thread. He told me whenever I saw that going down to pull up and I got real anxious and pulled it up. And went over my head and the fish landed in the dress of a lady on the other side right in the cleavage. And there was a jumping, fussing, screaming that you would never believe. And that I remember those two experiences out of my four-year-old, I was only four at that time I remember that vividly. Speaker 1: And at this time where are you living? Speaker 2: Pennsylvania, so for the first eighteen years of my life I lived there, and I was raised there. Speaker 1: Do you recall the name of the street that you lived on? Speaker 2: Yes, Darr Avenue when we lived in Farrell [Pennsylvania] in town then we moved out to the farm when I was five years old, six years old I'm sorry. And it was a rural route then, RFD2 Hubbard, Ohio. We got our mail through Ohio because Pennsylvania would take a week to get the mail to us, but we could get it in two days from Ohio. Story_ID: 238377 Speaker 1: Do you recall any of the sights, sounds or smells in your earlier years of life? Speaker 2: Um-hm, the nearby community that we were raised in had a number of European ethnic groups many of them first generation, most of them first-generation. And each group had an area of the city of the community area where they lived. So we had seventeen different identifiable ethnic groups. What my dad [George McCall] did was to raise hogs, one of the things that he did and on New Year's Eve we butchered we raised hogs that would be what we call shoats. A shoat would be a pig between 35, 50 pounds. And on New Year's Eve we'd butcher, we would do probably 25, 30 of these hogs. And in Pennsylvania it's cold, so when we butchered them, we just hung them up in a tree to freeze overnight. Then on New Year's day we delivered them to these various ethnic homes; my dad had contracted with them. And for them the thing that you often see with the pig with the apple in its mouth brought in on a tray that was one of their celebrations. Most of the European first-generations celebrated with that pig. And so my dad provided it, and so it would take us maybe three hours to deliver those pigs on New Year's Day. Then we would come back and rest because we had worked usually mo--overnight cleaning them. And then we cleaned chitterlings. A smelled that you'll never forget if you never smelled the process of cleaning chitterlings these would be sold to the black community. And so we would sleep maybe three or four hours and then start the chitterlings cleaning process. Hog intestines. And that would go on until nine or ten that night. So yeah those are, those are sites, sounds, smells that one could never get out of your, your mind. But there were plenty of others. There foods and in that region the various ethnic foods. We were eating pizza before that became popular. Because the Italian community saw to it that it was distributed around, so we had Italian neighbor in the next farm, and so they taught my mother [Myra Mae Preston McCall] how to do pizza. So pizza was one of those things that you enjoyed even before it became popular. But the various ethnic foods we became very familiar with, and then of course the foods from our, our black culture. The turnip greens, and collard greens, and cornbread. And all of that kind of stuff, the--my dad also would cure--there is a process called curing hogs. We had a smokehouse where we would hang up our meat after we had cut it. Smoke it or put it in a salty brine. There was a special salt, and you put water with it, and it would mature, age for three or four months before we used it. So all of that along with the farmyard's smells the hogs, the cows, the stable, the chicken all of that are vivid memories for me. Other pleasant smells yes, but those I remember more distinctly. Story_ID: 238378 Speaker 1: What was your immediate community and neighborhood like? Speaker 2: Okay, I want to jump over the first five years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because that was the town of Farrell [Pennsylvania], and I don't remember a whole lot about that. I do remember the farm, on the farm we were the only African Americans. The only blacks out there. And there were Germans, Italians, Russians, Czechoslovakians, and they all had farms within five-mile radius of where we were. And then at that five-mile point there was the Amish. This special group of religious people. And there was a lot of interchange between the rest of us and the Amish. There were things that they could not do that we could. And there was a mutual trade-off which farmers did for one another. We did not know racial segregation there because we were surrounded by first-generation Europeans. And they had their own survival problems, and so we all banded together. The nearby town that I referred to Farrell, Sharon [Pennsylvania] had an interesting thing where there were the pockets of people of ethnic groups. And they usually clustered, they--those clusters would be interlaced with blacks and Jews. Sort of a buffers. Speaker 1: Would that be European Jews (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Or American Jews? Speaker 2: No, these, these would be American Jews, some European yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But for Jewish people there was no distinction between European and American. If you were a Jew you banded together you are, you are one. So there was a lot of camaraderie in those days. We would go to each others farms to help. When it came time to thresh the wheat on our farm, there was a machine that was called a threshing machine; one man owned it and he would go from farm to farm, and it would cut the wheat automatically tie it into bundles. And then we would go behind it collect the bundles, and put them in what was called a sheaf into a shock I'm sorry. There would be eight, ten sheaves to a shock, and then we would put couple across to slant it. The purpose was for the grain to dry out, and we were trying to protect it from the rain. If it rained, then the rain would run off with those sheaves that we put on top. And then after a two, three-week drying period we had threshing. And we would each go to each others farm to help each other in the threshing process. There would be a big machine that would be backed up near to where the barn was, and we would feed we would collect these sheaves with horse-drawn wagons. Collect them, bring them, feed them into the machine. The machine would separate, beat out the grain from the straw. The straw would be shot out one end the grain caught at another end and, and we would put it in the granary. But we helped each other from farm to farm. And because we were interdependent we all relied on each other. And even ethnic differences that might have separated the Europeans for whatever reasons historic or otherwise were forgotten. And we all worked together in that particular community. Story_ID: 238379 Speaker 1: How did the American whites respond to the relationships that were occurring between the African Americans and the other ethnic groups in this, this particular area? Speaker 2: There is no particularly--no noticeable racial hostility in Pennsylvania. It may have occurred, but in the community that I grew up in I did not know it. My first experience with racial separation was when I left Louisville [Kentucky] to come to Louisville--when I left Pennsylvania to come to Louisville to begin college [Simmons Bible College; Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky]. And that was when I got to Cincinnati [Ohio]. Riding on what was called the Baltimore [and] Ohio [Railroad] list, B&O. And then when I got to Cincinnati we changed to the Louisville and Nashville [Railroad] the L&N. And I noticed the conductor standing on the platform. He was saying all right you go to this car; you go to this car. You go to this car; I noticed very quickly that the blacks were being sent to one car and the whites were being sent to another car. And when I got into my car I noticed--this is 1953. I noticed everybody in there was black. When we got to Lousiville, I just assumed that I could get a taxi and go to my destination. But then I ran into, segregation. I could only ride in a black taxi. There was one lady who when she saw me trying to get a taxi, and I was eighteen, seventeen at the time and it was a little consternated that this fellow ignored me. She says, "Son, you aren't from here are you?" "No ma'am." "Say, well, down here black folks go in black cabs; you don't get into a white cab." Well, that was my first exposure to racial differencing. Speaker 1: How did you feel about that? Speaker 2: Confused, because I had not experienced it. And while I heard stories from those who had migrated from the South to Pennsylvania while I had heard stories I had forgotten them until suddenly faced with the reality. Then it began to come into life. Speaker 1: So do you think that race in the, the early '50s [1950s] in Pennsylvania in your community it sounds to me as if it was more rural-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was different because it was a rural community as distinguished from a more urban community? Speaker 2: It was different because of the ethnic (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Situation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the ethics had--they were called all kinds of things. You know, you--there were a lot of negative words aimed at Italians, at Russians, at Germans and especially following World War II [WWII]. Those hostilities were raised, so it wasn't as much black white as it was nationality, against nationality. Speaker 1: Do you recall any early incidents within your community of American whites doing something to the other ethnic white groups? Speaker 2: Nothing more than just name referrals, name references. But there were no violence [sic.] acts that I can remember. Story_ID: 238380 Speaker 1: Could you state your siblings and their birth order? Speaker 2: Yeah, following me, I'm the older, following me is my brother Tim [Timothy McCall]. Who was born November 27th, 1938 and then my sister Myrtle Ellen [McCall] named after my grandmother [Myrtle Ellen Preston] and she was born in May, May 23rd, 1941. Speaker 1: And you all were all raised within the same community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Same house, same house. Story_ID: 238381 Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary or primary school? Speaker 2: Stoney Hill [School, West Middlesex, Pennsylvania], a one-room country school. Sat up on top of a hill that had a lot of stones. And there protest how it got its name and the foundation set on stones. They had concretized pillars of stones and, and I remember the lady who taught all seven grades in the same room. Carolyn Gringer [ph.], and I remember her mostly because of the emphasis on penmanship. Each year we would be recognized our little school would be recognized for penmanship. And even to this day there are those who make note of my writing; I haven't lost that touch. Speaker 1: And where, where exactly is the school located? Speaker 2: It's in this rural community, so it was within two miles walk from my home. We did not have but transportation so all of us walked. Some who had bikes rode them occasionally there would be someone who would ride his pony. But that began to be problematical 'cause what do you do with a pony tied up, you know, for the length of time we were in school. But for the most part, all of us walked. Speaker 1: And what was your elementary school like? Speaker 2: Well we would--Ms. Gringer would call the--those of us in the first together, and she would do reading, English, mathematics, whatever geography. And then after she spent fifteen minutes with us she would go to the next group and the next group, and the next group and then come around back to us for something else another subject. And she would do that with, with the whole group. Occasionally those who were fifth and sixth grade she might put them together if they were studying similar things. But it was a rotation thing, she would spend time fifteen, twenty minutes with one class with one group three or four students then to another then to another. We did have class--I mean school picnics. We didn't have any field trips or anything like that. But we would celebration Halloween, Christmas, Thanksgiving, Valentine's Day. And she did her best to make your day meaningful experience for us. It was a learning experience, and surprisingly when we moved--when I graduated from the seventh grade and went to the consolidated school [West Middlesex Joint Consolidated School, West Middlesex, Pennsylvania], I could keep pace with the rest of the students who had grown up in a better academic environment. So she was very thorough in what she did. Speaker 1: How many students were there in your elementary school? Speaker 2: It would usually run between thirty to thirty-five depending on the families living in the community. There was not a whole lot of transition lot, lot of movement, so these were the children that were born and raised right there. Speaker 1: And what was the racial composition of your elementary school? Speaker 2: I--my brother [Timothy McCall] and sister [Myrtle McCall] were the only African Americans everybody else was Anglo. Speaker 1: And what was that experience like for you as a young person? Speaker 2: No problem. We just happened to be darker-skinned, but there was no distinction make by the teacher or the students, we were well-accepted. Speaker 1: So from K [kindergarten] through seven you have one teacher? Speaker 2: Well from first grade 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --they didn't have kindergarten there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First grade through seventh one teacher. Speaker 1: And was she a strong influence or are there any reflections that you have about how she impacted your early education? Speaker 2: I mentioned the penmanship she also had great emphasis on music and the arts. She--now as I, you know, we used to make fun of her singing. But she taught us an appreciation for music with what limited facilities we had. I wonder how much more she could've done if she would've had some of the things that we have now. Recorders and all of that, but he had a little mouth harp, as they call it. She would pitch the tone and then play it for us with, with that mouth harp. And then we would learn to sing we had little song books that we learned music with. She also taught us an appreciation for poetry. Her emphasis were the arts and that's what she, she taught us. Story_ID: 238382 Speaker 1: Were there any other influences that you can reflect upon in your primary years? Speaker 2: That of the church. Speaker 1: Where were you going to church? Speaker 2: There was a little village called Wheatland [Pennsylvania], and it was a steel mill town too. You had a bunch of steel mill towns that--grew up. And that was the church that most of the people from the rule or any of the other communities went to set right alongside a railroad track. So that the pastor had to be careful to get his sermon timed there was always a train that came through at tenth, 12:10. And so he would always had--try to have a part of the worship so that that ten-minute disruption would not confound the worship. But we had--there was what was called the junior mission society; it was a program for young people. And then there were the adult programs the Bible study on Sunday morning, the worship Sunday morning, and Sunday evening we had an evening worship. During the week, we had a midweek prayer service there was always the annual observance of youth day. When the children led the worship, there was a special celebration at the end of the school year. And recognition for those who've graduated, but the influence of the church was very strong church picnic we had. We had several of them, because of rural community--because we were in the rural community. My--there were often picnics held out of our farm because of the space for--to play. There was one park public park Bureau Park [ph.], but it was always so crowded with folks that they would look for an alternative and, and my dad's [George McCall] farm became one of those alternatives. 'Cause you could go to any of the fields and put you down a base and play softball, or whatever else you wanted to do. So those are some of the general reflections of that period. Story_ID: 238383 Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? Speaker 2: I remember always getting good grades all through primary, elementary school [Stoney Hill School, West Middlesex, Pennsylvania] and into high school. I did have a love for learning. A love for, for reading but I also had the farm and that took quite a bit of time. So there were some things that I wish I could've done. Especially in high school that I could not have done because the distance to the consolidated school [West Middlesex Joint Consolidated School, West Middlesex, Pennsylvania] and lack of transportation. I was involved in drama, in music we could do that during school hours. And quite often I was called on to sing, at many of the local meetings; the Coronas [ph.], the Rotarians they knew if they could get kids from the school wouldn't have to pay anything. So I was among a group that our music teacher Betty Cobbler [ph.] would pull in to do special music for those events. Speaker 1: And what kind of child were you? Speaker 2: You to have much opportunity to do anything else but straightening up because there was work. My dad [George McCall] was not a harsh taskmaster not by any sense of means, but he did have a strong work ethic and that he passed on to us. And if there was anything that I got from him it was that work ethic. There came a time when the farm well let me say it another way. There came a time when co-ops as, as food chain stores began to develop; this would've been '49 [1949], '50 [1950], 1949, 1950 in our area. The small farmer no longer could make a living from his farm. We could not sell milk, they were mass-producing hogs and chickens, and so we had to find a clientele with whom we could sell our goods. So dad had to go to the steel mill to work so that there would be a meaningful income. And I recall him working the eight hours in Sharon Steel [Corporation]. And usually it was afternoon four to twelve at night and then get up early the next morning and work the farm. In the summers I was there with him in the fall there would be chores that I would have to do that he could not do with me 'cause he was in the mill. And I would have task that I would have to do it at night. My brother [Timothy McCall] had a asthmatic problem growing up. So a whole lot was not demanded of him but I spent many evening many night down in the field husking out corn. What we did was cut the corn, put it in shocks let it dry and then at a later time go back and husk that ears out. And with the aid of a coal lantern, coal oil lantern. I would go down and stay at night sometimes 10, 11, 12 o'clock depending upon how energetic I felt. So I learned a strong work ethic from my dad. Story_ID: 238384 Speaker 1: What was the name of the school that you were attending when transitioned from your elementary school [Stoney Hill School, West Middlesex, Pennsylvania] into the seventh grade? Speaker 2: It was the West Middlesex Joint Consolidated School [West Middlesex, Pennsylvania] (laughter). What that meant was from all of these rural communities the children were bused in, and we got to ride the bus that was a big excitement to ride the bus. But West Middlesex Joint Consolidated School. Speaker 1: How far from your home was this school? Speaker 2: About six miles. Speaker 1: And you were riding the bus that six miles? Speaker 2: (Nodding yes). Speaker 1: And what was the school like what was your first day the experience of your first day like? Speaker 2: Well to have everybody the same age in one class and one room was--that was phenomenal. Speaker 1: How many students were there? Speaker 2: Oh there were probably about four hundred students, four to five hundred students. But to have two or three classes of freshmen students and two to three classes of sophomore students. And to go from one room to the next or to have a laboratory when we were doing biology where you can go in. And of course, there was so much that we knew from the farm about biology. I guess it was just systematizing about how you dissected a frog, but otherwise we knew about all of this stuff. I, I think the information that those of us who came from the farm over against those who were raised in town was different. Speaker 1: How was it different? Speaker 2: We felt like we know more than they did. We had an edge on--we knew all about you put us in a biology class, and we knew what to do. Because we had all been used to butchering hogs and chickens and turning roosters into capons and all of this kind of stuff so. Speaker 1: What is a capon? Speaker 2: Capon is a castrated rooster. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: One of the things to make then grow--you can take a regular rooster whose weight would be five, four pounds let's say four or five pounds castrate that rooster. And he--his weight could go up to nine or ten pounds and quite often that was preferred over turkey or geese or ducks. But those were the kinds of things that we knew how to do coming from the farm. We felt like the kids that was raised in town was disadvantaged. Speaker 1: And what was the ethnic competition of the school now? Speaker 2: Still, well there about eight more blacks than there were (laughter) at the little one room country school. But far more of the range of other people. Speaker 1: And was there any racial tension or any kind of racial distinction or the climate was the same? Speaker 2: No the climate was the same, for that whole community the climate was pretty much the same. I don't recall there ever being--I don't recall being called out of, the name out of place. I don't recall any slights at least from the people who live there. There were times when people passing through might, you know, say something or do something, but that was a rare thing to have happen. Speaker 1: Did you have any African American teachers? Speaker 2: No, no that was not something that was in that community in that area. Story_ID: 238385 Speaker 1: And was your church primarily African American? Speaker 2: (Nodding head). Speaker 1: Was it all African American? Speaker 2: No, there was some Anglos [Anglo-Saxon] there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was quite a bit of fellowship between our church and the other churches, they--we would worship together Thanksgiving. There were two or three times a year when our church worship with the other churches and interracial service was not a new thing for us; that was something that we, we did. Speaker 1: So what would you say was some of your strongest influences as you are coming into your manhood? Speaker 2: Again, the church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was some strong personalities in that church. People that I would tend to look up to, to emulate, people who took an interest in me. Speaker 1: Who were some of those people? Speaker 2: There was one man whose son is a member here, Will Hosey [ph.]. Will was a tall, imposing feller he stood about 6'5", 6'6". He had an unusual habit he could stand straight, but he could also stand and sort of hunch. It was though he raised a full height and then sort of sort of a squat kind of thing not down, but his knees would bend a bit. But he became sort of the dominant, strong figure in the church, and in that community and a good role model. There was some other women that I remember who had a strong influence on me. Sunday school teachers, music directors. So the church was my strong influence. Story_ID: 238386 Speaker 1: Were you involved in any extracurricular activities related to school [West Middlesex Joint Consolidated School, West Middlesex, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: No, because of the travel distance. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Couldn't, when the bus brought me home that was it. 'Cause my dad [George McCall] had the truck and he was at work. So no there were no other curricular activities. Speaker 1: What were your aspirations as a young man, did you know what you wanted to be? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I knew at age eight that I was going to go into ministry. Speaker 1: How did you know? Speaker 2: There was just an intuition. Nobody told me, and I can't explain it except by the idea of divine call that God plants the idea in your mind. And I became, I became a bit concerned about that probably around age ten because I saw what my adopted grandfather [Reverend Samuel DeLane] went through. He went through quite a bit of hostility in that little church that he was pastoring. They had what was called the annual call. Every year on the first Sunday of December they would ask the pastor to leave, and then they would vote on whether he could be the pastor the next year. And I remember the slander, the gossip, the hatred that developed and I didn't want a part of that, and so my interest moved to something that my dad's brother was doing. My dad's brother is a musician; he's still alive living now down in Macon [Georgia]. But he was a musician and directed the Youngstown Symphony Orchestra. And again one of my childhood remembrances is going to the bandshell which was in the Idora Park [Youngstown, Ohio] with Aunt Liz [ph.] to hear the concerts. He was a trumpeteer, and he got me interested in the trombone. And so that's--my interest moved at age ten to the music, but the music was the way of trying to get out of--get away from this idea of the ministry. I didn't want to go that direction. That lasted in until age fourteen when the sense of urgency toward the ministry came very strong. And I went to my pastor, the man who was pastoring then, [Reverend] Frank Waller and indicated to him that sense of call. Reverend Waller's idea was that--and he agreed that he felt that all did have a sense of divine call. His idea was that if God has called you then the best way to prepare is by doing it. So instead of waiting until I'd gone through college to begin preaching he had me presented to the church and license at age fourteen, November 5, 1950. And it was at that occasion when I told you about my adopted grandfather revealing my naming. Speaker 1: Could you share that story again, please? Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that on the day that I did my initial sermon. Reverend [Samuel] DeLane came to the church in ask Reverend Waller for permission to make his statement after I had preached my initials sermon. And he had the eight people who were there as witnesses at my naming the eighth day celebration stand. And they were witnesses to the fact that on that eighth day when I was dedicated, he prophesied--forecasted that I would preach. And that's when he publicly revealed it, and they were free to tell it. And so than I, I began serving in the church as a minister in training and Reverend Waller had some strange ideas. They're strange to me now, but he would not let the regular man who did the janitorial duties of the church, come behind the pulpit stand. He said that was sacred ground, so one of my tasks was to clean up in the area of the pulpit stand and be sure that it was right. But he also took me to--with him when he went to visit sick when he did funerals. Anything that he did and I was free from school and available to go with him I did. He took me to denominational meetings, to convention meetings, he saw to it that I was well-oriented even as a fourteen-year-old into the life of the ministry. Story_ID: 238387 Speaker 1: Did you know then where you wanted to go to college? Speaker 2: No, I simply knew that I needed to prepare, and he [Reverend Frank Waller] planted that seed in my mind. He wanted me to go to the school that he had gone to, and that was the institution--when he went it was called Simmons University [Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky]. It was a full-fledged university when he went there. It had what was called a normal school; that was to prepare people who would be teaching. It had a college a department of theology, a department of medicine, department of law, a department of home economics. But in the 1930s they had lost all of that with the recession. And what they salvaged was the theological department. And he wanted me still to go there not understanding the dynamics of what being unaccredited meant, so when I finish high school obediently following him, I went to Simmons [Bible College, Louisville, Kentucky]. And there I met Garland Offutt. Garland was the first black person to get a theological degree from any of the seminaries sponsored by the Southern Baptist Convention. He went all the way to the Ph.D. Garland was teaching at Simmons, and he said to me, "Young man you don't belong here. This is a school for those who really do not have opportunity to do better; you can do better. Get into college go to University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] get your degree and then prepared to go out to [The] Southern Baptist [Theological] Seminary [Louisville, Kentucky]." So he became then my educational mentor, and I did go to University of Louisville finished it and then to Southern Seminary for the theological training. Speaker 1: What was your college experience like where you in any clubs or did you belong to any organization? Speaker 2: I belong to one organization the Baptist Student Union [BSU] and that was really all that I had time for because I had to work. Scholarships for blacks were almost nonexistent then. So I worked at a parking lot; I worked at a children's store. I did housework yard work all of these kinds of things in order to get through college. But the only thing that I did belong to was the Baptist Student Union which was an organization led by the Baptist denomination, it was open to anyone but led by the Baptist. Speaker 1: What was your major? Speaker 2: English, English, and literature. Speaker 1: So you're graduating with a degree in English and literature what is next for you? Speaker 2: Seminary. Speaker 1: So you go directly from there to--? Speaker 2: From college to seminary for the theological training. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at Southern Seminary I went through three-degree programs. The basic degree at that time was called the Bachelor of Divinity, three-year program. And then I added an additional year to do the Master of Christian Education. And then I was among a group that wanted to do another advanced degrees then it's now the basic degree. But then it was an advanced degree the master in divinity. And that was with a major in counseling and church administration. So I did the three-degree programs at Southern Seminary. Story_ID: 238388 Speaker 1: Were there any other things that were happening in your life at this time that are notable? Had you married--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Had you had any children? Speaker 2: No, no children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At that time but yeah I, I met [Emma] Marie [Johnson McCall], my wife at the church where I was a member. I went there as a minister in training. Assisting Orval Carol [ph.] and Marie was a pianist in the church. At the time that I met her, she was fifteen, and we were not allowed to date but became "girlfriend-boyfriend." For whatever that meant, at sixteen she was allowed to date, so dating consisted mostly of walking her home the nine blocks from the church to her home at night. And then walking back to University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky]. When I finished the University of Louisville, I began working at the, at Simmons Bible College [Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky] where I go on at first. They had a program to take men and women who felt a calling into ministry but needed basic elementary education. And so I was teaching in that basic elementary education program and then continued to teach as Simmons for the ten year period that I was there. Two years after finishing college I was called to my first church. Small congregation 28th Street Baptist Church [Louisville, Kentucky]. And I served it for the next eight years, and I concurrently taught at Simmons, pastored the church until coming to Atlanta [Georgia] in 1968. Story_ID: 238389 Speaker 1: So you're arriving in 1968 in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What exactly are you doing? Speaker 2: Well the pilgrimage to Atlanta was an interesting one. I had a feeling while in seminary that there might be some more meaningful thing that I was going to do than pastor. I was pastoring the church I was involved in the denominational life, but at Southern Seminary in [The] Southern Baptist [Theological] Seminary [Louisville, Kentucky] is one of the historic institutions, theological institutions. And especially for Baptists it, it's been the premier institution that has trained most--well it began as training most of the Baptist faculty for the other six Southern Baptist seminaries. And many of the other seminaries of other denominations. But out of the student body of 2800 again I was the only African American on campus this is 1960, well '59 [1959] I'm sorry when I first entered. The school had been open since 1950, but most blacks had gone to Simmons Bible College [Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky]. Not to Southern, because number one they were still trying to deal with the racial thing in Kentucky. And it was not the warmest environment to be in. I could cope with the environment because of what I came out of in Pennsylvania. So being the only black person on the campus was not a problem for me. There was an eagerness on the part of the whites on Southern Seminary campus to make me feel welcome. I was treated differently than the Africans; now there were some African students there may be five or six. There were a couple of Caribbean students, but they were treated differently. They were given preferential treatment there was something about the accent and the fact that they came from another place that, that allowed them to, to get around. In fact, one of the experiences that I often tell was in 1958 when the picture of 'A Man Called Peter' was playing at the [W.L. Lyons] Brown Theatre [Louisville, Kentucky] at that time, the theaters were not integrated and assuming that this was a biblical picture. I and a friend of mine from the seminary decided we wanted to go see it. So we went up--walked up to the Brown Theatre ticket window. And at the same time we're walking up to the ticket window TV station WHAS[-TV, Louisville, Kentucky] is passing by, and they see two black guys at the ticket window. And so they stopped, and they get the picture of our being turned away from Brown Theatre. It makes the late news, my roommate who was an African, Salman E. Salman [ph.], a medical student. Salman had seen it on television, and he came in and said, "You dumb fool I could get you in," and I said, "You're darker than I am. How could you get me in?" So the next night he handed me one of his robes and a fez, and he and I went back to the Brown Theatre, and he said, "Keep your mouth shut." He ordered the tickets we got in to see 'A Man Called Peter.' But I was very disappointed because it was not about the biblical Peter, it was about Peter Marshall, Marshall, chaplain of the U.S. Senate. Story_ID: 238390 Speaker 1: But when I went to [The] Southern [Baptist Theological] Seminary [Louisville, Kentucky] I was well-accepted. There was just the beginning then of what was called the hate stare. In which Anglos [Anglo-Saxon] would look at African Americans and just stare at you, blank expression. And it was intended to intimidate, well there were some students who brought some of that with them. They brought their racism and their prejudices with them. Speaker 2: Now for you this is pretty much the first time you're encountering this? Speaker 1: No, remember I had been at the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] now. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I had already encountered this at University of Louisville. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I had to do battle with it in the Baptist Student Union [BSU]. Not that those who were Baptist students were not in that genre. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But the Baptist Student Union was directed or overseen by the Atlantic Baptist Association, which made up of pastors. And the pastors did not want those of us who were African American or anyone other than Anglo in there. In fact they sent a delegation to tell the student director that we had to leave, he refused to do it. And the students when they heard about that refused--I'll never forget the meeting. We sat down with these three representatives and they gave their demands, and the students said, "We will close this building if you insist that Mac and Bob," Bob Carter [ph.] was another African American student there. "If you insist that Mac and Bob"--and then there was another Chinese lady who was attending say "if they have to leave we'll close it down." And so then these associational people did not want the public embarrassment. So they simply sat quiet on it and we continued as a part of the Baptist Student Union and what they did though was to take it out on the director. And he had to leave he transferred to another school the next--at the end of that year. So I was familiar with this now, but I determined not to let it get the best of me. That the Lord had equipped me prepared me and he had 'cause I could relate to all that was going on. And even at the seminary campus rose to be class president in my graduating year. So that was all turned to, to my advantage. But those years that seminary were good for me in that they introduced me to the Southern Baptist, which was the dominant religious community of the South. It introduced me to the makers players; there were many instances in which I was the first black I got so tired of that, being the first black. You know integrating, integrating. I was glad to see the doors opening I was glad to see the system busted but I got a little tired of that being the first. Story_ID: 238391 Speaker 1: Following seminary, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s movement, of course, had been in strength but in Louisville [Kentucky] we, we were not feeling the kinds of hostilities other places were feeling. And one of the things that happened, there was a man at one of the prominent churches, Crescent Hill Baptist [Church, Louisville, Kentucky], a man named John Claypool; John also was adjunct faculty at [The] Southern [Baptist Theological] Seminary [Louisville, Kentucky], taught preaching. John and I became friends, and we came up with an idea let's get a small group of white a small group of blacks together. And let's get to know each other, and so we did. He picked six whites I picked six blacks and for a period of about five, six months we met privately quietly and just got to know each other. We had some knock down drag out sessions what ended though was that we became a bond, a group that bonded. Speaker 2: What was the--what was at the core of some of your locked down draw out types of sessions (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Oh just getting to know each other dealing with racial myths. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Misunderstandings, helping us to know them, them to know us (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All of that kind of stuff, at the end of the period of time that we spent together. We decided that what we had learned and what we had experience is shared with the larger ministry. Black-and-white in Louisville might move Louisville in a progress direction and overcome racial--whatever racial hostilities were there. The restaurants still were not open nor the hotels or the theaters. So the group of us who were black appealed to the African American ministers conference that met weekly to give up one week that we would meet with our white brethren. The others did the same we agreed on the time, and John Claypool was appointed the first president of the Louisville Baptist interracial ministers conference [interracial Louisville Baptist Ministers Conference]. And we did all kinds of things to get to know each other to bridge the racial gap. So Louisville more peacefully crossed the gap and did many other places. John served four years at the end of his four years he left to accept another church. And I was his successor and served in that capacity for two years until I left. Story_ID: 238392 Speaker 1: But during those two years I had made--during that span of time I'd made a reputation for myself as one who could help deal with interracial situations. One of my colleague--one of my seminary professors had come to what was the Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia] here in Atlanta [Georgia], as the director of missions. His name was Hugo [H.] Culpepper, and Hugo was a part of our activity in Louisville [Kentucky] and persuaded the Home Mission Board. That there ought to be a black staff person to help Southern Baptists nationally deal with the matter of race. And he in time convinced the leadership including the board of directors and then they said well find the man. And I was chosen, so in May of 1968, I was elected first black to have an executive position in the Southern Baptist Convention. And I did not give to move to Atlanta until August of that year because my wife [Emma Marie Johnson McCall] was pregnant with my daughter [Evalya McCall Morris]. And we needed for her to not only have the birth which occurred in June but time for the healing. So we moved here in August. Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: And I worked at the Baptist Home Mission Board for twenty-three years from '68 [1968] to '91 [1991]. And during that time the first from '68 [1968] to '74 [1974] I was an associate to Victor Gladys [ph.]. And then in '75 [1975] I became the director of the department. And then an '85 [1985] director of the division. They expanded the operation I had close oh to three hundred people in this states. All of the states where we had Southern Baptists organize, they were doing several things racial reconciliation (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Working for the development of African American churches, assisting historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs] in their existent survival. Story_ID: 238393 Speaker 1: How did the political climate in that particular era impact the kinds of work that you were doing? Speaker 2: You're talking about national political climate or religious (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) National, the national political climate because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --we're moving forward into the, the early '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had the, we had the, the emphasis of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. And all that SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] did NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. We also had the backing of what was happening with the Kennedys and their emphasis and thrust. We also had the impact of the 1960s change era, a lot of changes to place in 1960s that were still reaping the winds and whirlwinds from so yeah, all of that impacted to what we were doing. It was as though the time was right and ready for the kind of emphasis that our department was giving through the Southern Baptist Convention. And we had a networking of doing it we had the national office, which gave direction to the state conventions which gave directions to the associations smaller units within each state. And we were able to leverage quite a bit of change among a convention that was predominantly white. Speaker 1: What was the response at this time of the convention let's say early 1970s to Black Nationalism? Speaker 2: Scared of it, and blacks were scared of Black Nationalism too. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: We had learned from Dr. King the matter of nonviolence. And to have the counter communication from Stokely [Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and for all of those that were hauler hollering for black power, we were aware that violence would not work. Some of us knew that there were already incarceration camps ready to put anybody who got out of hand in place. One of those concentration camps was in the area where I grew up. During World War II [WWII], there was a military base call Camp Reynolds [Pennsylvania]. And the German prisoners of war and the Japanese prisoners of war were brought there. Well, after the war is over, and the dissemination the barracks at, at Camp Reynolds sat vacant. And around 1960 when I went home to visit I happen to be driving to Lake Pymatuning, and I saw a revitalization going on of those old barracks. And I inquired and discovered that that was going to be that if there was a national conflict racially that was where blacks--that was one of the places that blacks would be placed. Well, when that word got around, and they began identifying a number of places. Then those of us, especially from the religious community. And those who were influenced by Dr. King, made sure that the black power stuff and the violent emphasis was crushed as quickly as we could, we knew what the consequences would be. Speaker 1: And in your communication with those who were on site the day that you went in to inquire. Did they make it clear that this would be where these people would be put? Speaker 2: Yeah, I could get that information at Camp Reynolds. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Because of that being the area where I grew up, and I could get that kind of direct information. It was almost as though they were glad to tell me you all get out of line this where you gone be placed. So, that, that became common knowledge too, to a number of us. Story_ID: 238394 Speaker 1: Okay so let's continue to move forward with some of the work that you're doing; I think you brought us to about 1978 early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, 1968 was when our division was changed--when we were made a division I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Uh-hm. Speaker 2: Moved from a department to a division and then I stayed continuing to do the work. We had teams of people during racial reconciliation bringing blacks and whites together in the communities all over the nation. And that emphasis continued until about 1985 then another phenomenon took place in the Southern Baptist Convention. And that was the number of black churches that were accepted into the convention. And it's like that number skyrocketed. Unfortunately, the black Baptist conventions were not capable of providing the resources the churches is needed such as literature, training, people to do teaching, people to teach training--things that churches need. And so when these people saw when these pastors and other leaders saw that this was available in the Southern Baptist Convention then they began joining the Southern Baptist Convention. They have what was called dual alignment meaning that they belong to one of the five black Baptist conventions and also joined Southern Baptists they could do that. Speaker 1: Uh-hm. Speaker 2: And thereby take advantage of those resources so then our emphasis shifted. No longer was talking about racial reconciliation a prime concern. The concern then became now that the convention is open now that whites are accepting all blacks. How do we work together to help the kingdom of God come into fruition? So our title was again changed to black church relations the Department of Black Church Relations [sic. Black Church Relations Department]. And we were responsible for helping all of the Southern Baptist Convention. And the foreign mission board, the Sunday school board, the seminaries all twenty-one agencies. We were responsible for helping them to relate in a very positive way to all of the black community and that's what I did until 1991. At which time I was getting tired of the denominational life; I was tired of travel and I felt like I wanted to be back in the local church. Story_ID: 238395 Speaker 1: And at the same time the church that I was a member of, Union Baptist [Church, Atlanta, Georgia], which was at the corner of Hightower [Road] Summerson Road [ph.]--it's now Hamilton [E.] Holmes [Drive]--Union Baptist Church faced a split and that group of people that no longer wanted to worship there asked me if I would become their leader. And so that led to the formation of Christian Fellowship Baptist Church [College Park, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Why was there a split? Speaker 1: The historical reality is that the pastor had become a strong domineering person. He was close to the age of retirement. He wanted one of his sons to succeed him. The son that, that wanted to succeed him and that he wanted to succeed him had a very bad reputation in the church. He could not handle money; he was careless in his relationship with women; and the church had voted it down. Well, the pastor was insistent that that particular son was going to be his co-pastor and successor. He had picked up on what happened at Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] when [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was co-pastor with M.L. Senior [Martin Luther King, Sr.]. And there is one Sunday the last Sunday 30th of March. Speaker 2: In 1991. Speaker 1: In 1991 when he came before the congregation laid his .38 [pistol] on the pulpit stand. And had three people that he deputized, and they could do that then. Elder Bell [ph.] as sheriff had given deputy privileges to a number of black preachers. Well, three of these--there were three people deputized to stand at the doors. So that anybody who disagrees with what Pastor Wilborn was saying would be arrested. And so he just announced that as of this day Reginald Wilborn is co-pastor, and he named the salary the fringe benefits and all of that. He would not let anybody say anything contradictory. And so there were those who were determined they would never again come into that church. I was not there that Sunday I was in Houston [Texas] preaching in a weeklong revival. But my wife [Emma Marie Johnson McCall] called me after service and told me what had happened. And my response to her was well there's a little mission's church that Reginald Robbins is starting. And let's go and help him get that little mission church going. But that night around some time after midnight, one o'clock I guess I had one of the clearest sense of divine leadership that I've ever had. There were no lights, no phenomenal, no bells, no angels just waking up with a resolute gather the people that are going to be scattered and formed a church. And when my wife came out to join me on Monday morning I told her because people had been calling all afternoon and evening trying to reach me. They were hurt, crushed. There were those who wanted to know what we do to get our church back how do we get out of this mess? And she wisely would not give them a number because it would have disturbed what I was trying to do there. But when I talked with her late Saturday, Sunday night and she mentioned the number of calls and difficulty. I said why don't you come on out here, so I called Delta Air Lines got her--paid for her ticket pre-prepaid ticket. And so she joined me the next morning, and the told me that there were two groups who had met on Sunday night. A group of men who were trying to see what legal things they could do to recapture the church a group of women who were just crushed. Well, I called the representative of both of those two groups and shared with them. The sense of vision that I had that night now I did not intend to be pastor. I was simply going to get them together because we have seen close to six hundred people leave that church over a five-year period because of the antics of the pastor and the son. And this group of people wanted to stay together; they did not want further division. But I shared with them the idea they said, "Can you get us together?" So I worked with them in finding a place for us to meet and then and doing a telephone thing to get the word out that anyone interested in meeting with us could meet with us. Story_ID: 238396 Speaker 1: We found a place at Woodward Academy [College Park, Georgia] over here in East Point [Georgia] the chapel, and we were able to get a hold of it. And my wife [Emma Marie Johnson McCall] and I put together the bulletin for the worship experience. I called the Baptist bookstore and ordered the communion trays, the offering plates everything else that we needed. So we started off with a full-blown worship service and I again my intent was to help them get organized but not be pastor help them to find somebody to be pastor. But after four weeks there were one man whom I'll never forget. He stop me after service looked me dead in the eye, and he said look if you aren't going to be the pastor then I'm walking out of this thing. Either you make a decision that you're going to be the pastor or forget it. Well, that sentiment was echoed by the other people and the more I thought about it, the more I felt led to go ahead and become pastor. So I stayed with the Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia] I let them know what I had done. I stayed with them--this was by now this was probably last of April, first of May. And they said well can you say till we find you a successor? Sure. I didn't have any money and the church didn't have any money we were just getting organized. So I stayed until October and was bringing this congregation together at that time. We out grew Woodward Academy chapel and then moved over to Benjamin Mays' [Benjamin E. Mays High School, Atlanta, Georgia] theater, and that's where we worshipped for a year until we found out about this facility. And then we came here--this congregation was getting ready to move or wanted to move because they had at once been 1800, and they, they had lost their members to racial transition. They were down to about 300 left, and they wanted to move where their membership had moved which was down at Fairfield [ph.]. So for we worked it out--so that for two years we worshipped together. We paid them rent for the first year we got our monies together. And we then--we took ownership of the building, and they paid us rent for the next year. And that was a very mutual experience it was one of the best experiences I've had. And I, I felt all the while that all that I had learned. Growing up at University of Loyola [sic. University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], at [The] Southern [Baptist Theological] Seminary [Louisville, Kentucky], at the Home Mission Board had been preparing me for the thirteen years now that I've been a part of this congregation [at Christian Fellowship Baptist Church, College Park, Georgia]. Speaker 2: How many members did your congregation start with? Speaker 1: Two hundred nineteen on the first Sunday. Speaker 2: And how many do you have now? Speaker 1: We're somewhere over 1600. And I'm saying somewhere they're doing a--they're tabulating a more accurate count. 'Cause we don't count people that are moved or no longer functioning. We're thinking that it's close to 1640, [16]47 somewhere in that range. Story_ID: 238397 Speaker 1: I'd just like to go back a little bit to your first experience actually leading a congregation in a church 1960 to 1968 when you were at the 28th Street Baptist Church [Louisville, Kentucky]. What were your experiences there--and you were pretty young at that time; how was that transition? Speaker 2: The secretary at Simmons Bible College [Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky] came to know me. As she belongs to the 28th Street Baptist Church and had mentioned to the members that were left in that church that she knew of someone who could be good pastoral material. What had happened in the life of that church was there had been a pastor who had a series of emotional breakdowns. As a result, the congregation dribbled away there were fourteen people left. And this lady's concern was that somebody could come who could help revive the church. I wanted a church it didn't matter (laughter) what kind of church it was because I wanted to be a pastor. And I did feel a sense of challenge and a sense of call to their congregation. And they did call me as pastor I came and did initial sermon they interviewed me and felt led to extend me a call. My wife [Emma Marie Johnson McCall] being a musician was able to provide music and lead the choir. So they got both pastor and choir director-musician at the same time. It was a congregation that was battered they had been abused by the former pastor. And for me the challenge was to help the congregation, come alive and to reach its potential in that particular community. So I had an eight year period to--in which to there was an eight year period in which I, I did this. The church when I left did have a membership of close to about 260, eight years later when I left. It was a difficult thing though because we were located right in the heart of about four other large churches that had drawn well on that neighborhood and community. And so the--growing that church to become strong was a very difficult challenge. Had a lot of growing up things that happened I really matured in concept and perspective in ministry. One of the first things was that the--when the former pastor saw the church coming back in strength then he decided to sue the church for what was back salary. And the judge threw out the case because he said that the church went down under his leadership. And he gone and had left he could have left in strength but it diminished during his watch. But there was the trauma of the courtroom and my first time ever being in court. And not knowing how things were gonna come out and then seeing some of the people who was still in the church who was so much in love with him that they turned on me. And that was a difficult thing to, to swallow. So I did a lot of growing in those years. I had to learn how to accept pastoral love that I could not understand as they reflected it towards this fellow. There were even a couple of people who insisted that when relatives died they wanted him to come back and do the funeral. And that was one that--I just put my foot down on we went through some crises over that. Because I refused to let him back into the building in view of what he had done to the church and what he had done to me personally. I've learned, though, and I would probably do it differently I would do a lot of things differently, so that was a growing experience for me. The congregation when I left them I left them in love, and I left them to come to this position at the Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia]. And I did it with the feeling that I had made my contribution there; now it was time to move on. Story_ID: 238398 Speaker 1: So in 1991 coming into being a pastor and leading a congregation [at Union Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] again, what were some of your hopes and concerns? Speaker 2: I had a lot of healing to do with the people that were in that group that went out. There were people who--seeing that gun laying on the pulpit stand felt a sense of betrayal. That here's a man they had looked up to who in the last six years seem to have lost his bearing. They were crushed by seeing a church that they had come to love fall apart. They were not sure of what the future would hold. They had been sacrificial in giving to see a- an addition put on that building. Only to discover that when it came time for the checks to be written and the money had already been given the money was there. Well, I'm sorry the money had been there that the pastor and his son [Reginald Wilborn] had used all of that money nine hundred and something thousand. They had bought Cadillacs for each for themselves, a Lincoln for the wife of the younger man, a new [Chevrolet] Caprice for the wife of the older man, recreational vehicles, a Jeep, a truck bought a new home. This congregation was pretty well decimated. And I'm sure in their mind was the question, "Can we ever trust another preacher?" But my walk among them in the years that I had been a member was as such that they trusted me. And together we put together this organization. So my first task was to love them back to health nurture them back to health. And so, the preaching, the organization, everything else that was done was designed to bring them to a health perspective. Then there's a matter of how do we become church? And moving to this facility helped us to put into actuality things that I knew churches ought to be doing could be doing. And that I had been a part of the training for many of these people in the old setting. Because in the old setting the pastor asked me to without salary to do the work of a minister Christian education. So I had the privilege of training many of the people into what church ought to be could be. And we were able to actualize that and live that out in this experience [at Christian Fellowship Baptist Church, College Park, Georgia]. Story_ID: 238399 Speaker 1: When did you get your doctorate in divinity from Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: A doctorate in ministry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it came in 1976 I did it while I was working at the Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia] full-time. Speaker 1: What was that experience like at Emory University? Speaker 2: Oh I will never do that again. That is to work a full-time job and to study in a graduate level. And I wouldn't advise anybody to do it I should've taken a leave of absence. I didn't, with doctoral seminars I went out on the days that our seminars met. One day a week usually three hours and we got to set the date that the seminar groupings would meet. We were all thrown together those doing Ph.D., doctorate of sacred theology, doctorate of ministry we all met. The difference came when we did dissertations. That was a strenuous period of time because even as I--every waking hour that I found I was reading, studying, writing. When I would do my travel and quite a bit of traveling was included in my work with Home Mission Board. In airports every chance that I got while waiting on the plane while on the plane after I got where I was going and had some free time it was in a book. And when that-when, when I went before my community in the spring of it was February of '72 [1972] of '76 [1976] and did my oral defense. And then they sent me out of the room and after about ten minutes brought me back in and said, "Congratulations, Doctor." That was the happiest moment of my life I think 'cause it meant that from now on I could ride. I could go to an airport and look at people and interact with people. And I didn't have to read a book unless I wanted to I didn't have to do any other the thing unless I chose to do it. Emory was very demanding, very exacting, I expected it to be. But it was an experience I'll always treasure and never forget but never do it again. Story_ID: 238400 Speaker 1: Were there any other persons in your [D.Min.] program that you remember that you had a really strong relationships with? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ed Wheeler [Edward L. Wheeler], who ended up being a staff member with me at the Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia]. He is now president of the Christian Theological Seminary in the Indianapolis, Indiana. Ed Wheeler and I did a lot of studying together a lot of interaction together there were couple Korean students that I've lost track with, but we really bonded. There were some ideas that we shared that were very beneficial, but the class always changed because there were a number of students in the doctoral programs. And you were with them for a semester and after that went your separate ways. Ed Wheeler would be I guessed the ones that I really related to and bonded with in a special way. Speaker 1: And what was the foundation of that bond? Speaker 2: First because we both were members of the same church he was a member of Union [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] as I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Secondly because we were both in the doctoral programs, and I saw something in him that I needed on our staff. And so I asked him to join my staff at the Home Mission Board, and he did. And so we both were studying, working at the same time. Story_ID: 238401 Speaker 1: What is your philosophy of religion? What pedagogies are the closest to you? Speaker 2: Oh goodness, probably, and here is where the pastoral instinct in me comes out, helping people discover their gifts and to magnify those gifts unto God. That's what I enjoy doing I did that before coming to the Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia]. I did that when I was on the faculty at Simmons [Bible College; Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky]. I did that on the faculty at [The] Southern [Baptist Theological] Seminary [Louisville, Kentucky] I went back to teach at Southern Seminary as an adjunct. I'm doing that now at McAfee School of Theology at Mercer University [Cecil B. Day Campus, Atlanta, Georgia]. And so I would suppose helping people who have discovered their gifts, to magnify those gifts. Speaker 1: What exactly does that mean? Could you provide an example? Speaker 2: There are people who feel called a sense of defined leadership direction to do any number of things. For example, I'll draw on two people at our congregation both of these are women who have a sense of call to ministry. One of them feels called to help people in the business world discovered their own personhood and magnified those gifts. Her, her gifts are Christian education and counseling. So I'm trying to help her know what academic programs, what work programs, what professional programs, to be related to that we'll prepare her in competency for that. The other lady feels called to be a counselor, she in the past have helped people going through crises all of that. So I've been one to help her to know what academic study what program should you be involved in, what practical, practical things should you be doing. What should you, would you waste your time in doing how could you better use your time. And so those would be two examples of how I do that. But also help laypeople in our church and if Christian Fellowship Baptist Church [College Park, Georgia] has had any success it's because we have empowered laity to be the people of God on mission. And whatever skills they have and I have said this repeatedly whatever skills you have God can use it. What you need to do is discover whatever it is, how to develop it, and to magnify. So we got we have a program here call personal help program PHP, there are four people who are retired they were once professional counselors in one area or another. But they didn't feel like they were making any contribution or having anything to contribute, and I helped them to see how their gifts could be used here. So they've formed counseling teams they've got a 12 point program. We got a room upstairs for them for privacy, and they're all week counseling people. And counseling people properly is one of the greatest needs that any church can get into now. There are people hurting from all kinds of things all kinds of ways, and, and they are part of that helping team. Story_ID: 238402 Speaker 1: What do you think distinguishes your church? Speaker 2: Loving care, anybody that walks into this facility experiences that. They meet it on the parking lot because we have greeters on the parking lot to help people get their cars parked, to assist them if they need help in getting to the facility, and to express love once they get inside. There are greeters who greet them express caring love to them. And every ministry that we have in the church is about caring love. The people that have become a part of this fellowship testified that this is what drew them here. Speaker 1: What do you think distinguishes your congregation [at Christian Fellowship Baptist Church, College Park, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Caring love. Speaker 1: The same? Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: And if you were comparing or contrasting your congregation here to the congregation at the 20th, 28th Street Baptist Church [Louisville, Kentucky] what would be some of the things that you would remark? Speaker 2: It would be difficult make that comparison because for the most part this was an older group of people who just needed to be loved. Here is a group of people who have skills and gifts that they want to use, and all they need to be is set free to use them. That would be the biggest difference between the two. Story_ID: 238403 Speaker 1: How do you feel about mega-churches? Speaker 2: My philosophy is that a church can become too large to become a caring congregation. This church, for example, has reached that point where it is large, perhaps large enough. And so what we've done we've commissioned four of our ministers to go out and start new churches. Some of the people in here will eventually go to one of those small churches. We have birthed four churches out of this church. Where we had people coming from Smyrna [Georgia], Marietta [Georgia] and they would still be coming except that I said if we were to put a church like Christian Fellowship [Baptist Church, College Park, Georgia] in your community would you go to it? And so we gave up about forty people to go start a church in the Smyrna area. We did so with Brother Wilborn [ph.], and the people have followed him. We did so out in Lithonia [Georgia] with Craig Lawson [ph.], and the people have followed him. So we have birth four churches out of this congregation. In reality, the people that do church growth George Burnham [ph.] the other professional schools will tell you that when a church reaches 350 that's more than one man can handle. So you gotta bring you multiple ministers then in order to serve the needs of that congregation. When you get large like some of the mega-churches, then you're too large to be caring. When the people have to make an appointment months ahead or years ahead just to talk to the pastor. That's unreal--when you could never get to the pastor 'cause he has an entourage that is protecting him or surrounding him, that's too large. My conviction is that the pastor ought to be accessible ought to be amenable. And any member of our church knows that all they have to do is call, and we can set up a time when we can get together within that day or the next two days at the latest. Story_ID: 238404 Speaker 1: What do you think about holy rap? Speaker 2: Because of the identification with--of rap with the negative I don't have a lot of appreciation for it. Now you may call that my age or that generational gap. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But there are so much identification with the negative in rap they're trying to put it in religious guides does little for me it may for somebody else. And God bless them if it does it doesn't do much for me. Speaker 1: So how would you respond to or how could you respond to the emergence of the church of Pastor Ma$e [Mason Betha], the former rapper Ma$e? Speaker 2: I think he needs theological training desperately. For someone to get up and start talking theology, religion without having been disciplined it's a disservice to the church. And I have problems with several of these who have come me off this public fare who may have been good singers, artists, whatever. But have no theological, biblical orientation I have serious concerns and problems with that. One of the things and we have birth thirteen ministers in this church one of the things I insist if a person comes and says, "The Lord has called me to ministry." My first response is, "No, the Lord has called you to prepare" and before we will do anything else they have to make a commitment for preparation. And they will get in college, or one of the seminaries and we have a financial scholarship package ready for them to be sure that they get the theological preparation that, that's needed. Story_ID: 238405 Speaker 1: What do you think can be done to bridge the generation gap? In many churches there's just a bridge that has not been crossed. Speaker 2: One of the research things that I'm going to do when I'm finally retired from here, I want to discover what happened in the black church between 1985 and now. Something happened, and we lost contact with basic spiritual values that were a part of the black tradition. What we're hearing now is not the black tradition, not the tradition that I grew up knowing, and I had a well-understanding. Churches were--there is the idea that prosperity gospel is the only message you're supposed to give. How to get rich quick, how to get all of the blessings that God is supposed to give you. All of this comes out of a era that is foreign to what my generation knew the church to be and the Gospel to be. The idea of self-sacrifice, uplift of the race--these are values that have long passed. And so there are those of us who have an obligation to help the younger generation to understand at least what was there whether they buy into it or not. But they least, at least ought to understand what was there. I teach a course at McAfee and McAfee School of Theology [Mercer University, Cecil B. Day Campus, Atlanta, Georgia] has a large number of African American students, but it's for everybody not just African Americans. In which I go into the history of black worship, and I was one of those persons who wrote early on when there were no books about our worship our history and all of that. I, I--that course I tried to help the students understand what went on, how did it develop, why did it develop what does it mean and how can we appropriate it. And I've been doing that for some years I did it at [The] Southern [Baptist Theological] Seminary [Louisville, Kentucky] when I taught there I'm doing now at McAfee. And that's what I will do in retirement. Speaker 1: I'm gonna make a comment and asked for your response. Some argued the phenomenon that you were just mentioning is the result of the expectations after integration. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: I think, I think you're exactly right these were expectations. I think one of the things we did not do in the Civil Rights Movement was to prepare our people for what happens after you get freedom after you get privileged. We did not prepare them we taught them how to march, how to protest, how to get what you want. We did not teach them how to be responsible, and I think we've done a disservice and that we've not--in that we've not done that much. Story_ID: 238406 Speaker 1: What are the titles of your books? Speaker 2: I did one entitled 'Black Church Lifestyles' and a second one 'What Jesus Means to Me.' It was the testimony of seven, of seven black preachers. The 'Black Church Lifestyles' we've done in two revisions because as new information came we've gone back and revised so we could be as updated as possible. And then I have two books that are not related they're more--they deal with histories the history of the Kentucky Baptist Convention the General Association. And the history of the Simmons Bible College [Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky] I did that for them. Speaker 1: What inspired you to write 'Black Church Lifestyles'? Speaker 2: Seeing the ignorance which both blacks and whites had about the black church. The ignorance being that black people didn't understand their own heritage. What were our links to Africa, how much are the African diaspora is included in our worship? Where did we get the shouting, how much of what we do is a related to the American phenomena of worship? What did the great awakenings these periods of great revivals in the United States how did that influence black worship? How do we get the potential styles of preaching, music, worship? How did all this develop? And so that's what 'Black Church Lifestyles' is about and what I've done is to call on other people who have research and expertise to collaborate with me in that that--in that book. Story_ID: 238407 Speaker 1: We haven't discussed your travels, and I know that you've traveled extensively. Could you kind of take us on a, a sightseeing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --journey through your travels? Speaker 2: Quite a bit of my travel was related to my work with the Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia]. And they provided a travel budget and I--where I needed to go to fulfill the assignments in the United States I did. And it was not a pleasure thing, it was here's something that needs to be done here, here and so I went. Quite often I was invited by colleges, universities as special speaker sometimes churches, often churches special speakers. So that that has allowed me to crisscross the nation. In fact, the only states that I've not been in would be Montana, North [Dakota] and South Dakota, and Wyoming. Other than that I've been in every other state in the nation, but it's been work related it's not been vacation. The denominational work though has also carried me overseas. And that's because the Home Mission Board was involved in the work of the Baptist World Alliance, which is an international organization composed of Baptists from 211 nations. And in time I became part of the executive group of the Baptist World Alliance which meant that at least once a year I'd be going to some place around the world wherever we were meeting. And, and the general counsel meets in various places around the world. Last July, I was elected as vice president of the Baptist World Alliance which means that when I take office in 2005, July 2005. There will still be quite a bit of world travel involved. Among the things the Baptist World Alliance does is negotiate religious freedom in nations where it does not exist. Meet before potentates whatever their title be when there are disasters and need for the Baptist World Alliance to be involved in that I will be expected to be one of those persons. So I've traveled now Asia, Europe, South Africa, both North and South Africa, Australia. I've been on every continent except the Antarctic. Story_ID: 238408 Speaker 1: What was your first trip to Africa like? Speaker 2: It was mind blowing. My first trip to Africa, my first stop on African soil, was in Liberia. At that time, Liberia was a stable nation and for me to look out the window and see black people doing all the professional things that you do at airports it blew my mind. Then when I got out and walked in and, of course, I don't know what I expected but in Africa there was nothing but black people doing all of these professional things that you do. Then getting back on the plane going on to Ghana, which was my original destination ran into the same thing again. So it was an eye opener for me to discover black people who were in charge. And then to begin meeting people who had positions of responsibility. And to know that you're no longer just talking to Joe or Mac you're talking to the mayor, to the governor or whatever title that person may have. That for me was--then, of course, there was the obverse side of that. There was also seeing the poverty the neglect, the abuse the being taken advantage of there were all those aspects of it. It awakened me a desire to know more about Africa and then to begin discovering there was so much to know, you have to just grab a little piece of it. You can never grab the whole thing. Speaker 1: How were you received by Africans in Africa? Speaker 2: Some of them had some problems and in younger years I had a fuller head hair of head, head of hair. And the fact that my hair is not typical of African, my grandmother's [Myrtle Ellen Preston] Indian [Native American] heritage comes through gave them some concern. They was trying to figure out who is this guy? A larger concern though was were there or not I was CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] because they all suspected anybody who comes to our country is related to CIA spying on us. And so quite often I was asked bluntly and then another indirect ways what my official reason for being there was. When they discovered that I was connected to the Southern Baptist Convention, then they had other questions. All the Southern Baptists they had ever seen were white. How did I get in there? Then I began hearing about things that were of concerns that they had that needed to be addressed. So would I become their advocate in addressing those concerns. Speaker 1: What were their concerns? Speaker 2: Well those who were called missionaries quite often lived life of rich. They lived in houses just like we live in here where as the other people might be in huts or lesser houses. They all had servants two or three house servants as many yard servant as they needed. They sort of used an imperial colonialism in their attitude. And they need is somebody that they could say this isn't right, and I became that advocate for them. Speaker 1: Do you still sustain strong ties with any congregations in Africa? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yeah, our church [Christian Fellowship Baptist Church, College Park, Georgia] has a partnership with Liberia. And I have for the last seven years been the person who from the Southern Baptist churches in Georgia have recruited the monies to keep the Liberia Baptist Theological Seminary [Monrovia, Liberia] open. They have no economy there 87 percent unemployment. So in order for the seminary to remain open the money is--it was until this spring filter through our church is sent to Liberia to the tune of about $235,000 a year. In addition we collected--we would collect two container loads two 40 foot container loads just imagine a big 40-foot semi-trailer of goods that we would send for the support of the seminary. So yeah even this morning I had a call from the president of the seminary in Liberia. There is constant contact and through him and the seminary to the churches in Liberia. I'm also in contact with the churches in Nigeria. I will be doing some teaching at the Nigeria[n] Baptist [Theological] Seminary as well as the Liberia seminary. And I'll also be in the out of Panama [sic. Colombia] there is a small island called San Andres. The people who inhabit that were former slaves too and so I will be working with them in theological education. So yeah I keep all of those ties open and alive. Story_ID: 238409 Speaker 1: What was your response to The [Original] African Heritage [Study] Bible? Speaker 2: I didn't get excited about it. Some of the content needed to be researched better. I don't think it was quite accurate according to scripture. I don't think it was quite accurate according to some historical things. It's a good PR [public relations] piece, but it could be better researched. Speaker 1: Who benefits from that PR? Speaker 2: The people who publish it. Speaker 1: Okay. Exclusively the publishers? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How do you feel about people who racialize Christ? Speaker 2: We know that Christ would have been in the Aryan race. We have to accept history for what it is. I don't try to make him African. I don't try to make him Euro. My tendency is to accept him as Aryan, which is what he would've been. Speaker 1: Being Aryan? Speaker 2: Being those who are of Palestinian vintage. Speaker 1: Oh okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was a Palestinian. Straight--to try to put an Afro on him or to pretend that Mary was black takes it too far. It does not do--it does violence to work geography and the situation demands. And I can still worship him being Aryan. I can still worship him as my Lord, and he doesn't have to be black. For those that need a color identification--I was just in Korea, and it struck me as interesting to see Christ in Korean then they drew slanted eyes and all. For those who need that, you know, okay. I don't have to have that for him to be my Lord. Story_ID: 238410 Speaker 1: Is there anything that I haven't asked today perhaps that you'd like to share or discuss? Speaker 2: I think you've covered the ground very thoroughly (laughter). I can't think of anything of a general nature if this were another interview that had to do with some specific things about Southern Baptist [Convention]. You know, I, I did a whole thing that some time ago but (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The things that you would be what would be the some of the things that you would highlight if this were a discussion about Southern Baptist? Speaker 2: Oh some of the squabbles that I've had; some of the evaluations I would make on current Southern Baptists. I don't identify with current leadership. The current leadership is very fundamentalist, right wing politically. I have problems with all of that. Speaker 1: What are some of your problems with it? That's actually content that we would be after because it's historically significant. Speaker 2: Well, I was part of the structures when I saw the takeover. And the fundamentalism is a mask for political power. In other words those who went to the extreme in a fundamentalist expression such as the inerrancy of Scripture the position of women in the church. They did this in order to distinguish themselves but what they were really after was power. Because the people that they turned against many of them believed the same things, they believe, but they weren't in office. And so what is expressed itself as a fundamental a recovery of fundamental theology is really a cover-up for political power. I saw this work at [The] Southern [Baptist Theological] Seminary while I was national alumni president at the time that the transfer of the convention power came. I saw that the Baptist Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia] as I was leaving where the transfer of power came. I saw people who were supposed to be Christian act as ungodly as anything I've ever seen all for political power. So I, I have trouble respecting the current leadership because I know how they got it and why they got it. Speaker 1: What are some of the political campaigns that you, you believe they are launching? I know that prayer in school has had quite serious political implications in the South. Would that be one that you would (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I'm more concerned about the attitude towards women that women have to be inferior or have an imperial place. They don't want women in ministry they don't want women doing anything in the church. I'm concerned that they would take the strong stand against abortion and yet do nothing to help women who have pregnancies who need to be loved, nurtured, and cared for there is a contradiction there. If you're that much in favor of rights to life, then you gotta do something about that mother and that child that have a right to full and meaningful existence. That's where they draw the line they simply stop at abortion I have problems with that. Their love for gun control, for example, bothers me. I'm sorry not gun control--the availability of weapons because they encouraged the National Rifle Association [NRA]. Now, I'm saying that and as a child as a young man I used to I love to hunt rabbits, quails, squirrels, deer all of that. I have a problem though with the ownership of guns. I have a problem with AKAs [sic. AK-47s] being available to people on the street I see the murderers a bedlam that is being created. And yet they're all, you know--they've got the hunting clubs in the churches where they all bring in wild game and have a big feast. And all of that is supporting the National Rifle Association. Now if I were political, that's where I would have concerns because of the damage that it does in non-hunting situations. I've had to preside over too many funerals where people were killed because of stupidity and wantonness. Story_ID: 238411 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: It would be well expressed by what came out of a banquet here last Saturday night. Last Saturday night the Clayton County NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had it's annual fundraising banquet here [Christian Fellowship Baptist Church, College Park, Georgia]. One of the things that we do is let them use our facilities free and for an provide the meals so that all of the money goes to the organization. But I heard representatives [David] Scott, I heard Victor Hill, the new Clayton County [Georgia] sheriff, I heard Barbara Plumeau [ph.], the superintendent of schools. And every other political person who had anything to say greetings or speech say we want to enlarge the table. We're not trying to kick anybody away from the table. We want to enlarge the table so that everybody Anglo [Saxon], Hispanic, Asian whoever they are in Clayton County can sit at the table and helped us decide our future. I'm a part of two organizations in Clayton County that is looking at what happens after this. Well with the building of this fifth runway which is right up the street, what happens to the quality of life in Clayton County? And my hope is that we as African Americans will still keep the table open. We're now the majority in Clayton County, North Clayton County. I hope we will keep the table open there are a lot of people of good will who want to join us at the table. We saw them to me one of the most beautiful things was the rainbow that I saw it the banquet. We were black, we were white, we were Asian, we were Hispanic--even though the organization was called the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. We were all sitting around the tables enjoying each other's company. And at the end everybody stood up together to sing 'Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing.' Glorious experience. Story_ID: 238412 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done that you would've done differently given your current sight? Speaker 2: You mean the physical location of this church [Christian Fellowship Baptist Church, College Park, Georgia] or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In general. Speaker 2: Current sight meaning? Speaker 1: Current meaning hindsight being 20/20. Speaker 2: Oh, oh there a lot of things yeah there are things I've said that I would not have said things that I've did thinking that I was doing right. I don't think that I've done anything maliciously but stupidly (laughter). You can say things meaning right and do things meaning right and do them wrong I've done some of that. Speaker 1: What have you not done that you would still like to do? When you think of the future-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what are you anticipating? Speaker 2: I just wanted to do more of what I've been doing. I asked the church when they asked me what I wanted as a parting gift? They took note of the fact that I've always driven Taurus, Ford Taurus. And there have been those across the years who have said you ought to be driving a Mercedes [Benz] or Lexus. And they were surprised when they asked me what I wanted as parting gift I did not say a car. 'Cause they were prepared to do it. They had even sent somebody one person to sort of feel them out what kind of car would he like to drive. And when I told them that all I wanted as a parting gift was for them to put a fund somewhere in the mission account that would allow me to travel to mission sites to do mission work such as going to Liberia. Helping that seminary develop, going to San Andres [Colombia] helping that seminary to develop that all I wanted for the next three years was resources. So I didn't have to go into my savings to do that. I meant it and so what I want to do is more of what I've been doing. Story_ID: 238413 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: That I was a servant-leader. If you go into the sanctuary, there is a basin sitting on the Lord's Table in addition to the open Bible and the cross that was given to me by Curtis Patterson. Curtis Patterson is an architect--no not architect that's not the right word sculptor. You may be familiar with the frieze that is on the south park of the airport on the Delta side there's an African frieze, bronze that covers that whole thing 60, 70 feet. Well, they may have taken it down now that they've started remodeling. Curtis Patterson did that he's a member here [Christian Fellowship Baptist Church, College Park, Georgia]. But Curtis did this bowl it's a bronze bowl sits in there, and it was his perceptions of my ministry. And the citation on the plaque that is set on said a servant-leader. That was the way Curtis perceived me and that perception has sort of stuck that's the way the congregation also perceives me. And if there is any way that I wanted to be remembered it would be that. Story_ID: 238414 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That I've helped people become servant-leaders. Story_ID: 238415 Speaker 1: Lastly, what message do you have for those coming in the future? Children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, the younger generation--what is your message to them? Speaker 2: I would fall back on the statement of Jesus and the command. To love the Lord our God with all our heart mind soul and strength. To love the very next person we meet as we love ourselves. If we can do that, the kingdom will have come. Speaker 1: I'd just like to thank you so much for the time that you've (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh thank you. Speaker 1: --extended today in this interview; you have been most gracious. Story_ID: 238416 Speaker 1: --Who, when and where? Speaker 2: This is when I was elected alumni president for [The] Southern [Baptist Theological] Seminary [Louisville, Kentucky]. And standing with me are the immediate past president and the current president, their names are on the bottom. Bob Terry is the man in the black suit, and Floyd Roebuck is the man in the opposite in the lighter suit. But we formed the national alumni association we had to do battle with the new political force that was taken over Southern Baptist Convention. Speaker 1: (Off-camera discussion) Speaker 2: Okay, okay I'm sorry this is me when I was elected to the position of associate director of the Department of Work with National Baptist of the Home Mission Board [North American Mission Board, Alpharetta, Georgia] 1968. Sitting with me is Victor Glass, who was the director. He's the man initially responsible for bringing me to that position. I succeeded him in 1975. Speaker 1: As part of the retirement celebration the church developed a golf tournament in my, it bears my name. And each year a scholarship will go from the proceeds of that tournament to one of our ministers in training. Here are the winners of this year's tournament. I'm on the extreme left Jim Akins [ph.] otherwise known as Little Jimmy is in the middle and Roi oh goodness Roi Johnson [ph.] is the gentleman on the other side. We were the winners of the first place. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: Okay next. Speaker 1: We taken that at the Southern Baptist Convention; they had a booth that did free pictures as a way of getting you to get into the directories. The church directories, so that was a freebie they gave me. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: What year? Speaker 1: I'm sorry I don't remember the year. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: You know approximate? Speaker 1: Probably that would've been '85 [1985]. Now this is at Simmons Bible College [Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky]. President [W.H.] Holmes is on the left, Wilbur Goalie [ph.] is in between, and they were presenting me a plaque upon my departure. The plaque was presented at in a chapel service, but they did this for the photo opt. Speaker 2: This photo was made in 1980 no special significance except that I was asked to make it. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: Good shot, okay next. Speaker 2: This is a congregational picture made at the 28th Street Baptist Church [Louisville, Kentucky]. This is the little congregation that I served this picture was made 1967. You'll notice my wife [Emma Marie Johnson McCall], my son [Emmanuel McCall, Jr.] and I were on an inset because this was published in one of the volumes of the General Association of Baptist in Kentucky. This was my congregation there at that time. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: Good enough. Speaker 2: An installation service when I went to 28th Street church as pastor. February 1961 is when this was taken. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: Very good next. Speaker 2: Most recent picture made of my wife and I it was made as part of the retirement celebration here at the church it was done in May of 2004. Speaker 1: This is an earlier picture of my son, my daughter [Evalya McCall Morris], my wife and I, I want to say this was made around 1975. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: Okay. Speaker 1: This is the picture of my graduate professor and I when I completed my doctorate administrated at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] Doctor Bill Mallard, William Mallard is the professor standing to my right. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: Okay. Speaker 1: Picture is an artistic and artist picture off all no. I'm sorry this is the real picture of my home in Pennsylvania this is where I grew up first eight well from age six to age eighteen. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: From what town? Speaker 1: This is at West Shenango Township, Pennsylvania, it's out in the country. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: Right. Speaker 1: Stoney Hill School [West Middlesex, Pennsylvania] elementary school for back--lack of a better term. It's a one-room country school, and I did the first to the seventh grades in this school. Story_ID: 238417 Speaker 1: This picture is of my son [Emmanuel McCall, Jr.] and his family. It too was made in May of 2004 as a part of the retirement group. To the--my son and his wife Holly [ph.] are standing immediately behind us. Behind [Emma] Marie [Johnson McCall] is our granddaughter Victoria [ph.] and behind me is Joshua [ph.]. They are twins twelve years old. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA MALE VOICE: Okay now. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: The top photo is me at graduation, this was in my commencement yearbook from high school at age sixteen. The bottom is a picture of me at age twenty-one. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA MALE VOICE: Okay, good next. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is me at age four my parents [Myra Mae Preston McCall and George McCall] were living temporarily in a little house in Farrell, Pennsylvania, which is one of the suburbs out from where we eventually moved. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE: Right next. Speaker 1: And this is me at age eight. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: This is a picture made at [Stoney Hill] School [West Middlesex, Pennsylvania] at age eight...