 Story_ID: 289710 Speaker 1: This [The] HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with [HistoryMaker] Dr. Deborah Prothrow-Stith at her home, 53 Parsons Street, Boston, Massachusetts. And the date is December 7, 2005. The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Madam HistoryMaker, Dr. HistoryMaker-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --would you give me your full name-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and would you spell your name for me? Speaker 2: Sure. Deborah Prothrow-Stith, D-E-B-O-R-A-H, P-R-O-T-H-R-O-W hyphen S-T-I-T-H. Speaker 1: Would you give me your date of birth and the place of your birth? Speaker 2: February 6, 1954, and I was born in Marshall, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you define or describe briefly your profession? What do you do very briefly? What is your profession? Speaker 2: I am an academic public health practitioner (laughter). I trained as a physician and I do more teaching and research now than anything, but my role at the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts] is as both associate dean for faculty development, so I do some administration and as professor of public health practice. So I do teaching. Story_ID: 289711 Speaker 1: Before we begin to explore your family background-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --so that the viewers of your interview will see the context in which you've grown up and achieved what you have achieved, we have some People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Sure, no problem (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Human-interest questions-- Speaker 2: No problem (laughter). Speaker 1: --that give another sense of your personality just to warm things up. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Wow, I'd have to say gumbo maybe or lemon meringue pie. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or chocolate. Probably chocolate, gumbo, lemon meringue pie, something like that. Speaker 1: All together--all at once? Speaker 2: No, separately, but you know consistently. Speaker 1: I know people go to these buffets and they take a little bit of each. Speaker 2: Some of everything. Well I will start with dessert on occasion. Speaker 1: Oh I see. Speaker 2: No, no the chocolate and the lemon meringue pie are top of the list, yeah. Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Well that's a hard question because here in Boston [Massachusetts] it's probably autumn just because it's such a beautiful time in terms of the weather and the change of the foliage. But in my ideal location, it would be spring, but we just don't get much of a spring here in Boston (laughter), so it's hard for me to enjoy it. Speaker 1: That could change. We don't know what's going to happen this year. Speaker 2: Well with global warming may be, but we'll see, we'll see. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I'm a pretty colorful person I'd say in terms of dress I would wear black a lot. I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Good. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Saint Martin. Speaker 1: Saint Martin. Speaker 2: Yep, we go same destination for three weeks and we've done it for about sixteen, seventeen years. So it's got to be the favorite. Speaker 1: I guess so. I've never been there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: I've never been to that island. Speaker 2: It's a good island. It's got the French side, the Dutch side, so you can get some good food and also, you know, relax. Speaker 1: One of these days I'll do that one, too, I'm sure. Speaker 2: Yeah you should. Speaker 1: Last warm up question. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying something philosophical that you use from time to time with family or friends or at work? Speaker 2: It's one I use at work a lot. It's, don't let perfect get in the way of good. Story_ID: 289712 Speaker 1: As I said a minute ago, we're going to start by looking at your family background, and not just because your mother's here, but it's appropriate I think to start with your mother. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, no that's-- Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother. Would you give me her, her full name-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --when she was born and where? Speaker 2: Her name is Mildred Leverne Boutin Prothrow and she was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], April 7, 1918, or 1917 dependent on which record you use, but we go with 1918. She was adopted at a very, well not a very young age she was four or five so she remembers being adopted into a family who lived in Jackson, Mississippi, and it is that family that we called you know grandma, grandpa that's who she called her family and-- Speaker 1: And the name of this family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) though I didn't know her mother [Ruby Boutin] well. Speaker 1: The name of the family? Speaker 2: Henry Hamilton Boutin-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you spell Boutin? Speaker 2: B-O-U-T-I-N, and that's my middle name as well. Speaker 1: Well your mother grew up where, where did she grow up? Speaker 2: She grew up in Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 1: In Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Jackson, Mississippi and she went to Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], which is where she met my father [Percy Prothrow, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. What has she shared with you about her growing up years in Jackson as a child, as a teenager, what do you know about her early life? Speaker 2: Well, I know that my grandmother was a stay at home house maker, and her sister also stayed at home so that my mom, being the only child in this adopted family, was quite spoiled. Her father, my grandfather, was a plasterer. He did the sort of ornate plasterings, medallions and moldings for buildings. And she was raised as a Catholic went to Catholic school and pretty sheltered, doesn't remember wanting for anything. Remembers a level of generosity on the part of her family relative to the whole neighborhood, and I guess my grandfather had pretty consistent work so that even through the [Great] Depression she was, you know, able to get things that she wanted. She talks about getting silk stockings, you know, when they weren't available and things like that so she lived well. Story_ID: 289713 Speaker 1: How do you describe her [Prothrow-Stith's mother, Mildred Boutin Prothrow] today? What she's like today? Speaker 2: My mother is a very strong and loving person, have lots of friends who call my mother their adopted mother and one of her real traits or skills is cooking. So she gets almost to everybody's heart through feeding them (laughter), and gumbo is her specialty so she is a retired schoolteacher so she spent a lot of my life while I was growing up teaching. She also owned and operated a daycare center at, at one point so she has a bit of an entrepreneurial streak. Speaker 1: Where did she teach? Speaker 2: She taught in elementary schools in Houston [Texas] when we moved there. I grew up in Atlanta [Georgia] so a lot of her teaching was in the, the public schools in Atlanta, and she started first as a substitute teacher. I'm trying to remember the name of the, of the school on Pryor Road in Atlanta where she taught for a while. Then she started the daycare. So she--she then she started teaching at preschools and then there was a group of kids who seemed to follow her from school to school and then she decided to start her own daycare center, which she did when I was about ten or eleven. We moved from Atlanta to Houston when I was fourteen and at that point she started teaching fifth grade, not in Houston but in the north, north of Houston. I forgot the name of the school district. And I forgot the name of the school (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's all right. Speaker 2: I'll think of it but-- Speaker 1: We'll read the rest of what she did. The places-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she taught fifth grade. Speaker 1: Did you ever think about being a teacher? I mean you are a teacher. Speaker 2: I did actually well when she owned the daycare center I used to go after school and spend quite a bit of time there. Also in my high school years I taught Sunday school so I had a little bit of the teaching gene and you're right, now I'm teaching, so it must be there. Story_ID: 289714 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. What was his name and when was he born and where? Speaker 2: My father, Percy Wendell Prothrow, Jr., was born in Marshall, Texas, May 13th, I believe 1915 no '13 [1913] I think he's five years older than--was five years older than my mother [Mildred Boutin Prothrow], but the year I have to double check. And he was--his family lived right across the street from Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], which he also attended and which is where he met my mom. But his father was my, my grandfather Percy Wendell Prothrow, Sr., was a chef in the Marshall Hotel [Hotel Marshall, Marshall, Texas] and he fed the students from Wiley College out of the backdoor of the Marshall Hotel for many, many, many years and as a result my father and his sisters grew up with lots of Wiley College students in the house and they again lived right across the street from the, from the campus. So when he finished Wiley he spent a little bit of time in Chicago [Illinois] and also struggled to figure out what he wanted to do. His options were post office, working at the post office and working for the railroad. That's what college educated black men in that area did, and at that time. And neither was of interest to him, so I'm not exactly sure how he was introduced to Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], but he started selling door-to-door life insurance in Marshall and the surrounding area, East Texas, and was a pretty gifted salesman and businessman, and so he just was promoted and promoted and promoted in the company, which is why we moved to Atlanta [Georgia] when I was five. So I was born in Marshall but moved, we moved as a family to Atlanta where he became a district manager and then I don't remember the exact titles. And then we moved back to Texas where he managed the Texas and western district or something when I was in high school [Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: And that was in Houston [Texas]? Speaker 2: That was in Houston. We moved back to Houston not to Marshall. Speaker 1: He is deceased, right? Speaker 2: He died in 1976. Story_ID: 289715 Speaker 1: How do you remember your father [Percy Prothrow, Jr.] in terms of his persona, his personality? What was he like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Very gregarious, loved having people over to our house. I think that's part of his being a very good salesperson. Didn't say anything negative about people. You couldn't get him to say bad things about anybody, and it was interesting because especially around us and he really felt like if you couldn't say anything good about somebody, you should just not say anything and pretty much stuck to that. And was very active, had a huge sense of obligation to church, to the Boy Scouts [of America], to civic duty and responsibility. So I was always at the banquets with him whether it was the church banquet, or the Boy Scout banquet or the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] banquet or the Urban League banquet, and I was constantly in tow as he went from these meetings you know so I think that would be a significant part of, you know, of his impact on my life. Story_ID: 289716 Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you about his growing up years that you remember? Any special things that he liked to tell you about when he was a youngster? Speaker 2: Well, you know, interestingly my, my father [Percy Prothrow, Jr.] was sandwiched between two older sisters and two younger sisters so I actually got more of the stories from his sisters, from my aunts, than from my father. But one of the things that was pretty clear was the, the childhood they had was a, was a happy family you know childhood but times were hard and there were a lot of tensions between the black and white Marshall, Texas, and so my father didn't tell many stories (laughter). My guess is that it was probably because they were about some difficult things that, that he experienced. And a good example I think is that we used to drive from Atlanta [Georgia] to Chicago [Illinois] to visit family over the summer, and my father would drive all the way to Evanston, Indiana. I think it was Evanston, Indiana, which is where the first black hotel was that they knew and obviously it was in the time of--you know intense segregation and we packed these big lunches and you know that's what would sustain us (laughter) through this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember those days. Speaker 2: Yes, this long, long journey. But obviously occasionally we got hungry along the way and passing you know places to eat along the way and being hungry you know is very hard to with a kid in the car and negotiate and my sister [Lady Prothrow] and I say we want to stop. Well my father would drive out of sight of the restaurant and then walk back to get the food because he didn't, and I didn't know this until adulthood, but he did not want us to see him going through the back door of the restaurant to get the food. So it--I think he hoped for a better world and didn't like to dwell in the, the junk of the world (laughter), if I can put it that way. So and that's probably a good example. Speaker 1: That's good. That's good, that's good. Story_ID: 289717 Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up, first in Marshall [Texas] before you went to Atlanta [Georgia]? How far back do you remember? Speaker 2: Well I do remember some of Marshall, though obviously when we left at the age of five, you know, I only had a few memories. I, I remember nursery school in Marshall. I also remember our dog and I remember my grandfather, Papoo [Prothrow-Stith's paternal grandfather, Percy Prothrow, Sr.], who actually died when we moved to Atlanta when I was about seven or eight so that was really the last time I saw him, but I do remember him and he used (laughter), he used to take me onto the college campus at Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas] and I only have a vague memory of the dining area so you know there's just little bits and pieces of, of a memory. What I remember about the nursery school was when we were leaving the teacher put a piece of wax paper on my cheek and then everybody kissed me goodbye (laughter). I thought that was sort of funny then, but now that I think back on it, it's really funny but. Speaker 1: And the dog? Speaker 2: The dog is Taffy [ph.] and I think I remember Taffy more from pictures, but what I'm told is that I don't know if Taffy was a boy or girl. She or he sat with me, you know, on the front porch when I was in the, in the crib but then obviously when I walked around, I guess Taffy and I were buddies throughout my toddler time period. Story_ID: 289718 Speaker 1: How would you describe your family life in Marshall [Texas] and then a little bit older in Atlanta [Georgia]? What was family life like? What were the holidays and the special events that you remember sharing and enjoying with your family? Speaker 2: Both my parents [Mildred Boutin Prothrow and Percy Prothrow, Jr.] were very family centered. My father did a lot of travel even when we moved to Atlanta, managing the district [for Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] and used to go on the, the train to various places. In fact, the first time my father flew was to my graduation at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I think, or maybe once to visit me in Atlanta. But the flying thing was not (laughter), it was not big on his agenda. So he took the, he took the train a lot. But our--both of them were very family centered and because my mother was raised by two women who were at home, she has a real sense of holidays and family and meals so, as a child, you could always walk in my house and know what holiday was coming. So, you know, if you came in February, there would be you know Valentine stuff everywhere. If you came later there'd be Easter stuff everywhere. You know but just it was quite the-- Speaker 1: Halloween? Speaker 2: Halloween-- Speaker 1: Yeah? Speaker 2: --you know, the whole thing. Story_ID: 289719 Speaker 1: Interestingly, my father [Percy Prothrow, Jr.], when we moved to Atlanta [Georgia], we lived in an apartment complex until I was seven or eight, and then we moved on Hermer Circle [Atlanta, Georgia], which was an area developed by Mr. Russell [HistoryMaker Herman Russell], a black-- Speaker 2: Herman Russell? Speaker 1: Yes, Herman Russell, a black development and contractor, and I mean, they owned the land and built the houses and everything. So we lived on a cul de sac of basically middle class black families and, you know, my father was the community treasurer, so he went from door to door collecting the dues for the neighborhood association. And what made me think about it was when you asked about Halloween. Halloween was a big production on Hermer Circle. We not only trick or treated, but we trick or treated at certain times. So, it was divided by age groups, and then each age group had a house that represented the end of trick or treating and the parties. So for instance if you were you know three to five, then you probably trick or treated from three to five, and then at five you went to certain house and had your party and if you were five to eight you trick or treated the next you know and it was just the level of organization the--the neighborhood also had themes to Christmas. So everybody had an angel on their yard or everybody--that was cut out in wood and that you had to paint--or you got somebody to paint or a toy soldier, whatever the theme was. So every house would have that and a spotlight in front of the house. Speaker 2: Where was this neighborhood located in Atlanta in terms of the sections of the city? Speaker 1: It's in northwest Atlanta and it's actually right at the border of northwest and southwest Atlanta. It is, it was called Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia], so it was the Collier Heights area and that was the elementary school [Collier Heights Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] that I attended. It's the divider from northwest and--oh and the new street is Holmes, Hamilton--no the--with [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault and Henry Hamilton Holmes, who desegregated the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Georgia. Speaker 1: --they renamed what was Linkwood Road [Hamilton E. Holmes Dr.] after, after him. He became a cardiologist and died recently. And so the streets were re- the street was renamed, but it's in that area. Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 1: And the major divider north-south used to be Gordon Road and is now MLK [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], so that's sort of the area. Story_ID: 289720 Speaker 1: What role did church play in your life and your family's life first in Marshall [Texas] but probably in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, I remember less about Marshall, but church was a constant. We went every Sunday. There was no reason that you could come up with as a child to get out of going to church and if you were too sick, then you were just too sick to do anything else, probably for the whole week. (Laughter) You probably couldn't do anything I think except go to school until the next time that you that you went to church. My father [Percy Prothrow, Jr.] was always on the trustee board of church and we were always there you know. Speaker 1: What church? Speaker 2: In Atlanta, we were members of Warren United Methodist Church [Warren Memorial United Methodist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] which is on Ashby [Street; Joseph E Lowery Boulevard] and Fair [Street] near Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: I know exactly where that is. Speaker 2: And I remember when we joined Warren, we moved to Atlanta, and I remember as we moved to the new house, we were looking for a church. And we went to one small church on Gordon [Road] now Martin Luther King [Jr. Drive] and they had a children's service so we went--a children's sermon so during this service we went down as children and that's the church I wanted to join. But instead we joined Warren and I think it was more a political decision. Warren was more active (laughter) in the Civil Rights Movement. I think for my father that was a critical part of our choice to--choice of churches. That's where we went until we moved to Texas. Speaker 1: Now you have one sister is that right? Speaker 2: One sister. One older sister by seven years. Speaker 1: Okay. Her name? Speaker 2: Lady Percy Prothrow. Speaker 1: Okay so she was older than you? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So maybe you two didn't spend a lot of time together because of the age difference? Speaker 2: Well she did--we spent quite a bit of time together when I was young and was her doll and she could do with me what she wanted (laughter) and I would go along. And she was so very sweet to me. She used to dress me and, you know, when I took my nap she would go to the store and get something that the sandman would leave, you know, so but then when I started expressing myself too independently, we--I was less the entertainment or the doll for her and I think by the time I was ten or so, there was less you know involvement. She was seventeen with a completely different agenda, so yeah. It wasn't until our adulthood that we really reconnected and shortly after she died so it was really--it's a difficult memory for me to really to wonder what an adult sibling is like, you know. I don't have that so. Story_ID: 289721 Speaker 1: What sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: I would say the sights really are in, and about and around Hermer Circle, and I, to this day when I'm in Atlanta, I drive around Hermer Circle and just you know four or five months ago was there and knocked on Mrs. Harmon's [ph.] door who lived next door to us and she and her older son were there and you know found out about everybody. It was just you know so I'd have to say Hermer Circle probably captures for me the, the period of growing up and playing. I mean just laughter, kickball. We played kickball almost every day you know after school. The street lights came on you had to be in the house. My best friend then and today, Franka Elliot [ph.], lived diagonally through the middle of the circle but across the street from my house and it was probably about four or five houses away. But to get to her house I had to cut across a couple of backyards and go to her house. And my father [Percy Prothrow, Jr.] when I was going over to her house if it were night, would go out, turn on the car lights, shine them toward her house and then I'd have to (laughter) and you could see me go and I'd have to holler when I got there and the same thing when she was going home or I was going home. So just a lot of imagery and, you know, sights and sounds from Hermer Circle. Roller-skating and the skate keys and, you know, those are just all a part of the. Speaker 1: Any smells? Speaker 2: The smells just probably have to do with cooking. It just you know my--as I said my mom [Mildred Boutin Prothrow] was a great cook, and there was always food going on. She was always (laughter) cooking something and it just--and interestingly my best friend Franka her family, her father was a caterer and so there was always cooking going on at her house, too, so there was just food everywhere (laughter). Story_ID: 290433 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the beginning of your formal schooling. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: You said you remember nursery school-- Speaker 2: I do (laughter). Speaker 1: --but let's go to the first elementary school that you attended. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Where was it? What do you remember about starting school? Speaker 2: Well I remember a few things. I remember I had to take a test to start school because I was younger than I should have been. My birthday is in February and at the age of five my parents [Mildred Boutin Prothrow and Percy Prothrow, Jr.] wanted me to start first grade and so I had to take a test and I think that I passed the test because the picture of the man that I drew had a hat on and I say that because I remember the lady just modeling at the fact that the man that I drew had on a hat and I thought well I mean every man has on a hat. My--you know I mean my image of my father was with a hat. He didn't walk out the house ever, ever without a hat on his head. So I just knew that, you know, that was, but I think that's why I got into first grade and it was at the Anderson Park Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] where I think one of our neighbors were teach--I think she was teaching there. Anyway I have very, very good and vivid memories of Anderson Park Elementary School. Speaker 1: And this was in Marshall [Texas]? Speaker 2: No, this was in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Oh, Atlanta okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We moved to Atlanta when I was five. Speaker 1: Five, all right. Speaker 2: Actually when I was four, I think I turned five in Atlanta and then by the next-- Speaker 1: Was it neighborhood--what we call neighborhood school? You could walk to school or? Speaker 2: Well it was far from my neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia] that's why I remember that the, that the--I think I used to ride with a neighbor to school. I'm not a hundred percent sure then I do remember my mom also picking me up. But no, it was closer to the neighborhood in which we moved when we moved to the house, but when we were in the apartments it was quite far actually. So I think it was at the recommendation of this neighbor and teacher that I started there. Story_ID: 290434 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that you still remember who influenced (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure. Speaker 1: --you in any kind of way were special in elementary school? Speaker 2: First, second, third, fourth, seventh grades. All--I had very, very special teachers. First grade was Ms. O'Neill [ph.] who, who helped me learn how to sit still. That was really my problem (laughter). This was the problem I had in school this sitting still thing. So in addition to being a very, very good teacher, she helped me with and I think about that skillset because punishment was not really a part of the strategy you know. It was a superset of skills that she had relative to socializing me into, you know, participation in the classroom. And it often meant that I did go to the office to help. Now, I guess in another setting I might have been sent to the office, you know, to get me out of the class but my sense of why (laughter) I was going along with this therein lies the brilliance, you know, was to help. So I had (laughter)--I had small task in the office, most of it centered around rolling the lunch money, the coins and putting them in the, in the brown paper wrappers. But, you know, my second grade teacher Ms. McDonald [ph.] took me to her farm for a couple of weekends during my second grade years and I remember you know being with her family and we must have been twenty, thirty miles outside of Atlanta [Georgia]. I don't remember where but--and it too was a setting where I was constantly challenged, I was constantly learning. Third grade, I remember the school store. Ms. Brown [ph.] was my teacher and she was just phenomenal and she was really an outstanding teacher. She expected me to sit still, which by third grade I was a little bit more able to do, but the things that we learned and the projects that we did from science to the school store and money and I mean the whole, the whole nine yards. It was just amazing. Story_ID: 290435 Speaker 1: Ms. Brown's [ph.] daughter, Sheila [ph.], was in my fourth grade. And actually I changed schools in fourth grade because that's when we moved to the new house, and that's when I started Collier Heights Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia]. So Shelia Brown's mom was my third grade teacher [at Anderson Park Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] but at Collier Heights, Mrs. Mann [ph.], a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate, was my fourth grade teacher, and she by far is the best teacher (laughter) I've ever had from, you know, K [kindergarten] through medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] just that special gift of inspiring you to do more, you know, encouraging you but not giving you the sense that you had accomplished all that you needed to accomplish. It was just not letting Ms. Mann down was just, you know, the mantra. I pretty much had really good teachers throughout. Seventh grade was an excellent experience as well (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What kind of student were you? Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was a very good student. And interestingly, my rival in school, around grades, I know and am colleagues and friends with today, her name is [HistoryMaker] Evelynn [M.] Hammonds, and she's the senior vice provost now for faculty development at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And she is also a Spelman graduate, an engineer and-- Speaker 2: And she's a HistoryMaker. Speaker 1: --and now, right, and she's, and she's a HistoryMaker and she is--she has a doctorate in the history of science so Evelynn and I in elementary school were starting with fourth grade which is when I met her, were rivals, and I swear she always scored a point higher than I did on every test. Now we had dinner just the other day. She told me that was the opposite, that I scored a point higher. I, I'm not sure about that. But what I do know is that she could draw as well, which I could not really do. So she was--we were friends very definitely friends and had a good, a good healthy rivalry throughout elementary school. Story_ID: 290436 Speaker 1: From elementary school [Collier Heights Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], you went to a middle school or junior high, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went to high school. We finished elementary school at seventh grade and started eighth grade at a time when they were desegregating the Atlanta Public Schools [APS], and the school in my--the high school in my neighborhood, [Charles Lincoln] Harper High School [Atlanta, Georgia] had been my sister's [Lady Prothrow] high school, actually, was going split session. Meaning some--half the kids were going to go in the morning and half the kids were going to go in the afternoon. So my parents [Mildred Boutin Prothrow and Percy Prothrow, Jr.] opted for the desegregation pathway, and I started [Daniel McLaughlin] Therrell High School in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: T-H-E-R-R-E-L [sic.]--I think it's only one L at the end. I should remember because we used to spell it in cheers because I joined the pep club. But anyway, so I was one of about fifteen, maybe twenty, black students who integrated Therrell High School. That was very-- Speaker 1: What year was this now just to get (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --Okay so eighth grade, I must have been 13 or 14, 14, 13, 14. So 54 plus 13, '67 [1967]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Does that work? Sixty-seven [1967]. Sixty-seven [1967] or '68 [1968] my sister went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. She graduated in '68 [1968], and we moved to Houston [Texas] in '68 [1968], so I was only there for eighth and ninth grade. I went to tenth grade in Houston but, so that sounds about right, '67 [1967], '68 [1968]. And, needless to say, that was, that was very different. Story_ID: 290437 Speaker 1: Now I did have some wonderful teachers [at Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. My science teacher who one day asked me a question and I answered by saying, "Yes," and he said, "Yes what?" And I said, "Yes, Mr. Hill [ph.]," I think it's and I can't remember his name. And he said, "Why didn't you say, 'Yes sir'?" And I, I really didn't say anything. And he said, "Well, why don't you step outside the room for a second." So we stepped outside the room, and I obviously knew what, you know, this was about because we were in some ways primed for the integration experience. And he said to me, "Well, why don't you say, 'Yes sir'?" And I said, "I wasn't taught to say, 'Yes sir.' I was taught to say--to call the person by his or her name," and he said, "That's strange." And I said, "That's what my parents [Mildred Boutin Prothrow and Percy Prothrow, Jr.] taught me to do." So we went back in the room and that was the end of that. But--and he is in my mind one of the best teachers I had at Therrell during that period. But we went--you know, we had been--one of my memories at Collier Heights Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] was going to the [Atlanta] Symphony [Hall, Atlanta, Georgia] and my class and our--we ran from the end of the Symphony to down these ramps to the bus we ran. So we got a lecture about not running at the Symphony, and then we were told that white kids didn't run at the--didn't run at the symphony. And obviously I remember that when it came time to integrate the schools, and I expected white kids to be perfect, you know. That was my expectation. And we went with the intent of proving that we were as perfect and as smart. That was the agenda. And so all the time that we were learning that, you know, because some of us went to Southwest High School [Atlanta, Georgia] and some of us went to Therrell, which was even further into southwest Atlanta than Southwest High School. You know, from the point that we knew that's what was happening, you know, forward, our teachers were preparing us, were making us feel as if we did have to prove, you know, that we were as smart. So needless to say when I got to Therrell and learned, you know, that white kids not only ran at the Symphony, they were some of the worse acting kids (laughter) I had ever seen. I mean, they were doing some amazing stuff and, you know, during lunch and all and I mean I was like, whoa. Story_ID: 290438 Speaker 1: But interestingly what, what I think happened more than anything else was, first of all, my confidence went up. I knew that I could perform in the best of the classes there and was able to do that. But also, I didn't come away with any friends, you know, I had some of the black friends in the group that went to [Daniel McLaughlin] Therrell [High School, Atlanta, Georgia], but those weren't my close friends. So I didn't come away with any white friends. And I think that had a lot to do with the time, but also the perspective that we had on, on integrating the schools. But so eight and ninth grade, and I had some wonderful teachers. My French teacher was outstanding and I was in a special French program where you studied for five years and then you go to Paris [France], and so that was very exciting. Another memory that I have was our French class went out to dinner one evening to order in French that was the thing, we went to a French restaurant we're ordering in French and our teacher--there were like six or seven of us. No, we all were in her car so maybe five of us who she was giving a ride home, and she offered to take me home first. And I felt like it's because people wanted to see where I lived. And, you know, at that point I lived not only in a very nice house, the house was you know six, seven years old. And as was the neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia], so we had very, very nice houses but I remember getting out of the car and a kid in the car saying, "Well shoot, her house is nicer than my house," or something like that and I, you know, it was just that, we were just constantly aware that we were being judged, that we were being watched you know--that you know we were being sized up it was just, you know, but that was our perspective to--we went with that, with that understanding. Story_ID: 290439 Speaker 1: --Was there any discussion in class or in the school [Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia] about, not just the local civil rights things that were going on, but the Civil Rights [Movement] throughout the South? Was there any discussion of it in school at all? Speaker 2: Very little but [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was shot when I was in ninth grade (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was going to ask you next how that affected you. Speaker 2: Well I was in ninth grade and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I was in English class when the teacher made the announcement and said we don't have school the next day. And all the kids started cheering and she looked--I was the only black kid in English, and I was crying, and she looked at everybody, she looked at me and she said to everybody, "You need to make it clear that you're cheering because you don't have school tomorrow, not because Martin Luther King was shot." And everybody stopped cheering and, you know, agreed. But there wasn't much discussion. There wasn't much discussion. The-- Speaker 1: How do you remember his death affecting you at that age? Do you recall how you felt at that moment? Speaker 2: Well, the interesting thing is I had lived through Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy (JFK)] assassination as well. I was in elementary school [Anderson Park Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] then and I remember them bringing us all to the auditorium and making that announcement and us all crying and just I think I was not, I was not as shocked, not that I expected it, I mean, I didn't have any prophetic sense that it was going to happen, but I think, at that point, you know, it was just one of the things that seemed to happen--to political leaders and those that you know seem to be for me--important. But certainly it affected my, my attitudes and perspectives we obviously participating in the civic community in Atlanta [Georgia]. I mean you know that, that was in many ways the manifestation the epitome of the Civil Rights Movement--in some ways so, you know, the funeral I remember. In fact at Warren Church [Warren Memorial United Methodist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] we were engaged in passing out coffee to those who came by, and I don't know I just I think it, it became a part of what was already pretty well engrained in me. Which was the civic responsibility, you know, the need for civil rights, the, the challenge that had to be put to America, you know, and that and my responsibility to be part of that challenge. I mean that was already there the foundation was there, so it just fit, and it just encouraged that. Story_ID: 290440 Speaker 1: At that young age, grade nine [at Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia], did you have any notions or thoughts about what you wanted to do as an adult professionally? Do you have any clues to what you wanted to study in college and become when you were young? Speaker 2: If you asked me, I would have said that I wanted to be a doctor. And I had been saying that since first grade [at Anderson Park Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I said that (laughter) in first grade because I went to the doctor, and when we had to write something in first grade, I wrote this thing about wanting to be a doctor, and how the doctor gave me medicine. And I had to spell medicine on, on this writing--and, you know, it was on the paper that had the red line with the blue line in the middle--so, I'm you, know printing this but I remembered how, how impressed my teacher was (laughter), and I think I just started saying I wanted to be a doctor because I liked the way people responded. They--"Oh, that's so cute, oh that's so wonderful," you know--it was just, you know--affirmed every time I said it, so. Speaker 1: Did anything (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I hadn't really given much thought to it. Speaker 1: Did anything happen through elementary school and high school that reaffirmed that earlier thought that you wanted to be a doctor once you got up into high school? Were there other things? Speaker 2: I think my, my doing, my consistently doing well in math and science--and that being sort of the track that led to becoming a physician--but not really health-wise or, I mean, interestingly all of the doctors that I had all of my childhood were black, and so that was kind of interesting. So I had the role models in that sense but no there were no other yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that's good, okay. Story_ID: 290441 Speaker 1: You moved back to Texas-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what grade level now? Tenth? Speaker 2: I moved in tenth grade (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tenth grade. Speaker 2: --and started tenth grade, so I must have been fourteen, fifteen then. Speaker 1: And what school did you go to? Oh you were in Houston [Texas] now. Speaker 2: Went back to Houston--went to Houston, went back to Texas, went to Houston-- Speaker 1: Houston, yeah. Speaker 2: And we--so I went to Jack Yates High School [Houston, Texas], and this was my particular request. I had had enough of integrating and I wanted to go to Yates High School because I had heard from good family friends, the Collins, in Houston who had gone to Yates that that was the best school. That was the place to go. And we moved into a predominately white neighborhood in the southern part of Houston past the [Houston] Astrodome [NRG Astrodome, Houston, Texas] called Brentwood [Houston, Texas]. And my only request of my parents [Mildred Boutin Prothrow and Percy Prothrow, Jr.] was that I not have to go to school in that area. So we drove to Third Ward [Houston, Texas] every morning--for me to go to Yates. And that's what I did. Speaker 1: And tell me about Yates quickly, what was that like those last three years? Speaker 2: Yates was, was great (laughter). The only bad thing I can say about Yates was that I did not get to finish the French program because like most high schools, Yates had three years of French not five years of French--so that special program that I was in [at Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia] was the only negative, the only thing I missed about being at Yates and about moving. But I continued to have excellent teachers and to do well. And now I also had very good friends so I enjoyed high school just a lot-- Story_ID: 290442 Speaker 1: Now, my senior year at Yates [Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] integration hit Houston [Texas], so for about two months I got sent to Madison [James Madison High School, Houston, Texas], which was around the corner from the, from our house. And that was, that was really hard. That was not only my senior year but I didn't want to go to Madison obviously and I think some of my experiences at Therrell [Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, the more loneliness I'd say than anything else, made it really difficult and so when my father [Percy Prothrow, Jr.] took me to enroll in Madison as mandated by the Houston Independent School District, I, I couldn't stop crying, I just couldn't stop crying. And the interesting thing that I remember my father saying to me because he used to call me Miss Debbie [ph.], he said, "Okay, Miss Debbie, I think everybody knows now that you don't want to be here. I think you can stop crying." (Laughter) And so it took two months to get me back to Yates--so I did finish Yates and it was because they flipped. At Yates we took calculus and then advanced algebra, and at Madison they took advanced algebra and then calculus. So I got put in the, you know, wrong math class--and I remember making a B on the first math test, which was like a week after I got there, and the teacher's amazement, which, you know, I just remember. But that was the reason I--that and ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], yes. I was in the ROTC (laughter), thank goodness, because that was the way I got back to, got back to Yates because Madison didn't have ROTC. So those two things you had to have two things, and I had two things that were--not at your new school, and you could go back to your old school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I got back to Yates and finished from Yates. Story_ID: 290443 Speaker 1: Graduation, and what was next? You-- Speaker 2: Graduation, and then Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Now I was at Yates [Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] at the height of the recruitment of our class to particularly Ivy League schools. I was in the top ten percent of the class and we, every Thursday, went to a special session with one of the recruiters. Both my parents [Mildred Boutin Prothrow and Percy Prothrow, Jr.] have been to a historically black college [HBCU], and my father just kept saying to me, "You can go anywhere you want to go, but the friends that your mom and I have are friends that we made at Wiley College [Marshall, Texas]. The people who come from all over the country to visit us, you know, in the summer and on the holidays, that's how we know them. And that's, you know, what you need to remember as well." So, my sister [Lady Prothrow] went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] because we lived in Atlanta [Georgia] then, and she didn't want to go to college with us living in Atlanta. She didn't want to go to Spelman. But thankfully we had moved to Texas--by the time it was time for me to go to college so I could go to Spelman (laughter). And it wasn't even, I don't know that I even applied anywhere else actually. I have to really think back on it. I think I was going--that was when I was going to college, you know, so I did. Speaker 1: And how do you remember those years? Speaker 2: Well Spelman, you know, I guess I just enjoyed my education really throughout. Spelman was really probably one of the best times in my life. I could--I would re-live Spelman if I didn't have to re-live medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] (laughter). If I could re-live that and then I'm back, you know (laughter), I would do that. It was challenging and fun, you know, which I think college should be, so I. Speaker 1: And did you know you were going to medical school? Speaker 2: No I didn't (laughter). I actually was a math major, and I took the requirements for medical school because I attended a United Negro College Fund's [UNCF] summer program at Fisk to encourage students into medicine. And Meharry Medical [College, Nashville, Tennessee] students were our mentors in that program, and so, and [Dr.] Prince Rivers, a chemistry professor at Fisk, was the director of the program, and I went two summers there. Still not deciding that I want--in fact what I, what I really thought I was going to do was a Ph.D. in chemistry, and that was because the chemistry professor at Spelman was, you know, quite--was recruiting me to do that. But I had no vision of what a Ph.D. in chemistry would do. I mean, it just didn't, you know, I just had no clue really. And medicine just seemed more tangible, more concrete. But I really didn't decide until my senior year and I, I don't want it to sound like a default solution--choice because I am--I was enthusiastic about the choice and I been saying it all my life, you know, so in some ways it was, it seemed ordained, but I really didn't decide until very late like time to go to my--time to apply. Story_ID: 290637 Speaker 1: So what was the turning point for the decision to go to medical school to apply, what-- Speaker 2: Well I think the two summers at the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] program [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] really helped set the stage, and so, even though I was a math major [at Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], I took the requirements and kept medical school on the, you know, on the front burner, and my senior year, I think it was just decision time. You know, it was the beginning of your senior year you had to send out applications. I really only knew, you know, doctor and lawyer. Those were sort of the two career tracts, so given my interest in math and science, you know, it was what I'd been saying I wanted to it seemed to fit and so I decided to apply go to medical school. Speaker 1: And how did it become Harvard University Medical School [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts]? How did it? Speaker 2: Well if it had not been for Sandra Graham [ph.], who was the counselor at Spelman and [HistoryMaker Dr.] Alvin Poussaint and their relationship--Alvin Poussaint being at Harvard Medical School, I probably would not have gone to Harvard Medical School. I would not have applied. Interestingly, my family in Houston [Texas] was a magnet, and I planned to go to Baylor [College of Medicine, Houston, Texas]. So I applied to Baylor, and Mrs. Graham kept saying to me--I don't think her name was Sandra Graham, I just know her as Mrs. Graham. I know a Sandra Graham, but Mrs. Graham, Mrs. Graham kept saying to me, "Have you gotten the application from Harvard?" And at that point the Harvard system was such that you had--there was a deadline for receiving the application. If you didn't get the application before that deadline then you couldn't apply. So you know I just kept saying, "No," and Mrs. Graham was responsible for our letters of recommendation and our transcript and all of the school related materials so I had to see her regularly and she regularly asked me about Harvard and I just had no vision of going to Harvard. It just wasn't on the radar screen, but I kept saying, "Well, no, but I'll get it," or, you know, "It's"--so finally the deadline passed to get the application and see, I knew I wasn't going to Harvard, so I didn't put much effort into it and then, you know, she said, you know, "Did you get the application?" And I said, "No," you know, "and it's too late. The deadline is passed." She said, "Well I have the application for you," and she reached in the drawer and gave me the application. And she had gotten it for me. I filled it out because she wouldn't send my things to Baylor until I, you know, did this application. So I did. And you know all this is around October, September, October, November and in February when I got accepted to Harvard Medical School, I couldn't believe it. I really couldn't, I mean, I when I say it wasn't on the radar screen, it just was not on the radar screen and I was, I was proud, you know, and I was happy. I was enthusiastic. I was (laughter) like, wow. Story_ID: 290638 Speaker 1: I had already put like a deposit on an apartment in Houston [Texas]. I was going to Baylor [College of Medicine, Houston, Texas]. I mean I had that, I had been accepted to Baylor. I was going to Baylor (laughter). So this just really, you know, it was what it was. Speaker 2: How did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was--it was an offer I couldn't refuse (laughter). Speaker 2: How did you feel when you arrived here? How do you remember the very first days coming to Boston [Massachusetts] and specifically the Longwood Avenue part? Speaker 1: Well, there's another part of my life that was evolving at that time that has to be mentioned because if it hadn't been for that part of my life, I know I would have left at the end of medical school and that was that I also met Charles [HistoryMaker Reverend Charles Richard Stith] that February. Well I met him that November but that early February-- Speaker 2: You're still at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 1: I'm still at Spelman. This is my senior year at Spelman, it was mid-February that I got the letter of acceptance to Harvard [Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Charles and I started dating in February, early February and we got married in August of that year. By April we had decided to get married. So this is very intense, you know, courtship and, you know, love affair with you know capital P providence all over it. I mean I just, and, and probably the biggest example of that was that he had been accepted to Harvard Divinity School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I'd been accepted to Harvard Medical School, and we didn't even know each other at the time we were making the applications. So it seemed ordained, preordained even in a lot of ways but so when I came to Boston that summer, I came to take some classes over the summer and we went back and got married August 30th and then started medical school September 3rd. Story_ID: 290639 Speaker 1: Boston [Massachusetts] is just very different. I've never seen a city like this before. It--there was, you know, first of all there were no black people here. I never been in a city where there weren't measurable, visible, you know, numbers of black people. I just never had had that experience. And then, I, you know, it's cold (laughter), you know, there was physically it was just so different--so I think being married just helped to anchor me in the city and especially since Charles [HistoryMaker Reverend Charles Richard Stith] finished his program [at Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] before I did and started pastoring a church, then we started getting roots in the city and, you know, after a while even though I still thought we would leave when I finished medical school, it just never became the right time for both of us to leave and thirty years later, we're here. And I enjoy Boston. I really, I really like Boston a lot. I would miss it if we, if we moved. But it took a while to, to grow on me. I, I was used to, to large southern cities--and this was just very different (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cold in more ways than one. Speaker 1: --cold and yeah, yeah no, no--I mean we came in '75 [1975] and there was a height of the busing stuff. I mean, Boston was at its ugliest--you know. Ted [HistoryMaker Theodore C. Landsmark] got beaten up with the flagpole on the [Boston] City Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] steps-- Speaker 2: You came to the city that saw violence-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: --at many levels, psychological as well as physical-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Tell me about medical school, and how those four years went. Speaker 1: Well, medical school was challenging because of the volume of the work, but doing the work wasn't a problem. The problem I had in medical school was really more a social and psychological problem, and it was that I had never been in a situation where I was viewed as suspicious or didn't belong. I mean I was in all of my educational experience, including the time at [Daniel McLaughlin] Therrell High School [Atlanta, Georgia] when I was lonely, I still felt that the teachers cared about me and invested in me. So some of what I experienced was, you know, just the difference between college and graduate school where, you know, you're an adult and people expect you to be an adult and they don't have to encourage you. Some of the difference was, you know, North/South, you know, what I would call you know polite, you know, friendliness. But, but and some of the difference was race, obviously. But at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] I felt like people felt I didn't belong there, you know, that I was constantly having to say I belong here. And that was, that was a real challenge. Fortunately all of the prior experiences had prepared me well and there were women from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], who had successfully completed Harvard Medical School and that for me was the biggest most concrete, you know, inspiration that I needed. Story_ID: 290640 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In your class, medical school class, how many black males and females were there? We're talking about a handful, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were, there were fifteen of us out 140 or so, so about ten percent-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there were probably four--there were four or five us. There were five of us. Speaker 1: Well [HistoryMaker Dr.] Alvin Poussaint was there (unclear)-- Speaker 2: He was there. He was assistant dean for students and-- Speaker 1: So was he a support? Was he somebody you could-- Speaker 2: He was a huge support. It was my second year of medical school that a Harvard medical professor wrote in The New England Journal [of Medicine] Sounding Board, which is an opinion area, a piece saying that Harvard [Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] was graduating unqualified black doctors, who were leaving a trail of--who would leave a trail of dead bodies behind them. So there was, there was, in addition to the more subtle micro insults of, you know, being suspicious and, you know, having to prove you belong there and all that, there were these, you know, more bizarre things like, you know, busing and what was happening in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], but also this kind of assault, you know, just very overt attack. And Alvin was very helpful in channeling our anger and giving us a way to respond. That's when I met [HistoryMaker Fletcher] "Flash" Wiley. We were, you know, doing--preparing to bring a lawsuit against this professor and against the school and because many of us at that point, it may have been my third year, because that, we--some of us were actively thinking about and looking for our residencies you know--so this is, you know, an attack on, you know, who we are and what--we've accomplished and, you know, and all the rest of that. And it was just it was just baseless and unfounded. Because to graduate you had to pass both parts of the boards, you know, there was no other way to graduate--so I mean it was just a horrible assault. So Alvin was very supportive and very much a channel for a lot of the, the anger and the junk that happened. I mean he was somebody who cared about us and who, you know, just, you didn't see him every day (laughter). You know what I mean. He was one person in in a sea of hundreds. Story_ID: 290641 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: When you finished medical school, you're in your senior year--and you think about your residency, what's that system called you use? Speaker 1: The match. Speaker 2: The match (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you apply for the match. Speaker 2: --the match okay. Do you put in the hat the places you like to be or how does that work? Now how did you end up staying in Boston [Massachusetts]--in Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] to do your residency? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: How come you didn't get picked to go someplace else? Speaker 1: Well interestingly, I only ranked Boston programs, so I knew I was staying at Boston. Speaker 2: Oh, I see. Speaker 1: Well, if I had been selected, if, you know, I mean obviously if you don't get selected then you got another problem. But the, the match works where you apply and then interview at the hospitals, and then you rank the hospitals. And the hospitals rank the people they interviewed-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and then the computer matches them. So, you know, you can't be matched at a hospital you don't rank and you at that time you could rank ten hospitals and I ranked all Boston hospitals so that's how I knew I would be in Boston. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: But at that point it was actually very helpful to have, well it was very helpful to have Charles [HistoryMaker Reverend Charles Richard Stith]--to be married, you know, because socially, I had a context for enjoying Boston that I didn't have to create. Which I know people who were single had trouble creating. Secondly, having to stay in Boston required--put a limit, but it was a very helpful limit because people were agonizing at that point, they could be in San Francisco [California], they could go to Chicago [Illinois], they could go to Atlanta [Georgia], they could stay in Boston, they could do internal medicine, they could do pediatrics, they could do surgery. You know so the choices were you know people were just you know they were ranking pediatrics in Chicago but surgery in San Francisco, you know, it was just--so it was helpful to have some limitations on, on my matching and, you know, Boston City Hospital was just an amazing experience. Just absolutely-- Speaker 2: Was that your first choice? Was that at the top of your list? Speaker 1: It was actually not. It was my top three, it was my third. Speaker 2: It was the top? Speaker 1: It was my third. Speaker 2: So you were satisfied then? Speaker 1: Oh, I was very satisfied. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was very satisfied, and but, interestingly, I got called by the, by the woman who helped the Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] deans write the letters for us to say, "Well you, you must be disappointed." And I said, "No, I'm excited," you know, "I'm really am looking forward," she said, "You're going to Boston City Hospital" I said, "Yeah," you know, "that's right where I'd like to be." She said, you know, "I think our students need more help with how they rank the hospitals," (laughter), so the notion that, you know, you would go to a non-Harvard teaching hospital--was just, you know. Speaker 2: At Boston City-- Speaker 1: At Boston City at that-- Speaker 2: --which didn't have a great rep at all at that time, not probably. Speaker 1: It was, you know, it was just an exciting place. Story_ID: 290642 Speaker 1: Tell me about your residency [at Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]--it was four years internal medicine? Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: Three years? Speaker 2: Three years internal medicine, and it was in residency that I understood why I went to medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] and really started enjoying it. I mean, medical school was and, and there was sometimes when I wish, oh wow, that I could do it again, because there's so much that just gets dumped into you, and you start performing these tasks, but I don't think you really internalize it and sort of become a physician until you have that responsibility, you know. And, and then you want to know all that (laughter) you were taught and some and things changed so much and go so fast but residency was, was just amazing--absolutely amazing. Speaker 1: Now where was Charles [HistoryMaker Reverend Charles Richard Stith] during the three years you were doing your residency? He was pastoring where? Speaker 2: He was pastoring Wesley United Methodist Church [Dorchester, Boston, Massachusetts] and then, well, let's see. After the first year of residency, he moved to Union, so he was at Wesley and then Union United Methodist Church [Boston, Massachusetts], so. Speaker 1: Now when did you and Charles start your family (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well I was in medical school (laughter). Percy [Stith III] was born-- Speaker 1: And that's Percy I met today? Speaker 2: Percy right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Percy was born September of my senior year, September of my senior year, yep. So he was just about a year when I started residency the next year. And then Mimi [Mary Stith] was born during my senior residency. And [HistoryMaker] Audrey Manley, is she one of the HistoryMakers? She should be. Speaker 1: I don't know. I don't know her. Speaker 2: Okay. She was assistant surgeon general and a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate and she was president of Spelman, first alumni president of Spelman. Speaker 1: Oh, I know who you're talking about (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. She should be a HistoryMaker. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know of her. Audrey Manley. Speaker 2: Audrey Manley. She was at Spelman when I was there and interestingly, my senior year, because she, you know, often gave me advice. She, she said to me when she found out I was getting married and approved of, you know, the person I was marrying (laughter) because I was like, she was like, what is this? But, that he was graduating from seminary, she thought, oh okay, you can marry. Then she said to me, you know, "I waited so long to have children that I never had them. So have your children." That advice plus my father's [Percy Prothrow, Jr.] death my first year of medical school made me pretty sure that I was going to have children. And then Madalyn Griffin [ph.], who was ahead of me, had a baby--so, you know, it was possible so yeah, that's when they were born. Story_ID: 290643 Speaker 1: You had some experiences in residency [at Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]--what are the experiences that led you to your specialty, to the areas that you been researching and writing about and become an authority on? Speaker 2: Well during my, my medical school days [at Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], I did my surgery rotation at the Brigham [and Women's] Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts], and it was three o'clock in the morning when a young man came in needing some stitches just over his eyebrow, and the senior resident asked me to go put in the stitches. And it was, you know, I was a medical student, so I wasn't that experienced, I was nervous, and I was slow. So I had a long time to talk to him, and he told me what happened. That he had been to a party. That he danced with another young man's girlfriend, they had gotten into an argument, the crowd had sort of egged this whole thing on. They got into a fight, and that's how he was cut. So I (laughter) finished the stitches and he was about to leave. I had talked to him about being a (unclear)--it took--he only needed two stitches but it took me an hour or so, so it was a long conversation--and he knew I was a medical student. He knew, you know, that I was a little on the slow side with the stitches, but anyway when he was ready to go he told me not to go to bed because he was going to go out and get the guy who cut him, send that guy into the emergency room, and that I was going to get all the practice I needed putting in stitches and, you know, he said it with this kind of bravado and, you know, humorously and the senior resident and I laughed with him, you know, as he left but almost immediately I started feeling inadequate because I realized that had he made a suicide attempt, and told me not to go to bed because he was going to go home and take some more pills, I would have responded very differently. And, in fact, I wouldn't have waited on him to volunteer that information. We had a protocol that required me to ask about his intentions. And that protocol focused on prevention, but with violence against others we didn't have a prevention protocol. Story_ID: 290644 Speaker 1: I went to medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] to serve urban adolescents. That was my passion. And I learned that homicide was the leading cause of death for young black men, but not in medical school. I think I learned it from Ebony magazine. And the leading cause of death--second leading cause of death for all teenagers, so the--a leading cause of death for the population I wanted to serve had not even been raised in medical school. Not only that, you know, we were stitching people up and sending them out--without any prevention effort. So my inadequacy and feelings of inadequacy fueled a real passion that made me want to change this. It didn't make any sense to me. I think the system was built around an assumption that violence was just inevitable. That there were some people who were just going to fight and kill each other and that that was the way it was. And I just happened to know too many black men who were not violent at all. And so I knew that wasn't the way it was. So it--in a very personal and professional way, because my son [Percy Stith III] was born--that was in January of '78 [1978] my son was born that September, you know, I just did a very, you know, personal and professional way this became an important issue for me to address, and that was, that's twenty-five years later, now twenty-seven of '78 [1978], how long ago is that, twenty-seven years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-seven [1977], yeah. Speaker 1: You know, I am still working to prevent violence, still looking at it as a public health problem. And obviously during my residency at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] having the, the vast experience with trauma and the emergency room, it just, you know, further, you know, further made me committed to figuring this one out. Story_ID: 290645 Speaker 1: You worked at, and are still working I guess, at four levels in your medical specialty: academic, administrative, clinical and research. So which came first when you finished your residency [at Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]? Did you get into neighborhood clinical work or research or what was the next major activity? So how'd you get started, how did you get started? Speaker 2: Probably clinical and research came just about the same time and I was actually in medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts]. So interestingly after I had that experience in the emergency room [at Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts] and started wanting to prevent violence, I had, as part of my senior year, a three-month primary care rotation where I had to do a special project, and I decided to do education on violence in the schools. So I took what was being done to prevent suicide and created a curriculum [Violence Prevention Curriculum for Adolescents] to prevent homicide and suicide among adolescents. And at the Boston Latin Academy on Townsend Street [Boston, Massachusetts] with Pat McArdle [ph.], who was then at the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts], and I can't remember the teacher's name at Latin Academy. I created and taught this curriculum. We did some pre- and post-test measurements, and that happened at the same time that I started this primary care rotation. So I was doing clinical work sort of nine to five, five days a week, and then this special project. And I did that for three months and both of those, just the synergy between doing that and doing both of those things and my enjoyment of both of them I think just fueled the, you know, the career. Residency was almost all clinical obviously, so that research piece looking at the evaluation of a curriculum sort of got put on hold, but then at the end of my residency, so three years was just clinical. Okay, Sandy Lam [ph.] and Pat McArdle were at the Harvard School of Public Health and Sandy Lam was actually my preceptor for the project. He was then the health commissioner for the City of Boston at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]. So my senior year he was writing a grant to deal with adolescent health issues, remembered that I'd done--this work on violence as a student, called me and as soon as I graduated I start--I was in attending at City, but twenty percent of my time was bought by the grant and that was the--just then it was forty percent, then it was sixty percent, then it was eighty percent and then I became health commissioner so, you know, then the public health piece was a hundred percent. When I came out I did clinical work still for another five years or so but I haven't done it in about ten, fifteen years. Long enough that I can remember exactly how long it's been (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 289742 Speaker 1: You became very distinguished many times during your career, but one of the distinguishing mentions was your appointment as commissioner of public health here in the Commonwealth [of Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When did that happen? And how did that happen? Speaker 2: Well it happened in 1987, and sometimes I feel like, you know, the blue light shown, the ball rolled, the other one hit the circle, the circle flipped over, the green light came on, and I was commissioner (laughter), you know. There's part of it that certainly feels that way. But I would say there was considerable visibility that--and media attention to the work that we were doing for two reasons. One, the work looking at violence as a public health problem was pioneering work. So it attracted media attention. And the superintendent of schools [Laval S. Wilson] here in Boston [Massachusetts] asked me to serve as the chair of a task force [Adolescent Issues Task Force] to look at school base clinics. And, on the surface, it seemed like a pretty, you know, pretty interesting to me, but rather mundane task except for the Catholic community school base clinic was code word for birth control and abortion--so there was just, you know, every meeting we had was a big political thing. Our report was a big political, and its release, a big political event. So there were ways that, you know, because of the work I was doing with adolescent health issues, there was visibility. And then the relationship that my husband [HistoryMaker Reverend Charles Richard Stith], and through him, I had with [Governor Michael] Dukakis, and the political context for that obviously set the stage. I must have--it took about five months for me to get appointed, and I must have gone on, you know, fifty interviews (laughter) because public health in Massachusetts is, is an important area. It has a broad constituency; it has a historic constituency. We've got one of the oldest state health departments in the country, and with a lot of firsts. Just, you know, Massachusetts has been cutting-edge in public health. So I had to meet with everybody, you know, everybody who had any interest in public health. And Dukakis was running for president, at least the speculation was there at that point, but he did during my time as commissioner. So there was just a lot going on. Or maybe he was actually running then. It was clear I think then. So they needed someone who could work with the constituencies, the different groups interested in public health and represent the department [Massachusetts Department of Public Health] and the governor, be visible. I think not surprise anybody (laughter) was the, was the, the way of describing--the job. I did respond by saying that, you know, public health was full of surprises. So I--there was no way I could guarantee that there'd be no surprises. But, you know, if they were surprised it would be because I, too, was surprised (laughter). Story_ID: 289743 Speaker 1: So it was an important time for us and, you know, quite a process to become commissioner [commissioner of public health for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What initiatives--what are the initiatives that you moved on during the first year? What were your major challenges? What did you bring to this position? Speaker 1: Well I, I brought first this issue of violence as a public health problem, which is an important issue for the state but also for the urban areas in the state, and we established the first office of violence prevention at a state health department, so that was an important contribution. I think the, the major plus that I had was both the clinical and public health perspectives and a real focus on prevention and a capacity to kind of blend the, the clinical work with the prevention efforts. So whether we were talking about smoking, oral health, HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], which was just emerging and, you know, hugely important issue at that time, and I, you know, I brought a capacity to work with different constituencies, which I had done at, you know, Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] and on this task force [Adolescent Issues Task Force], and had pretty much been trained to do all my life when I sort of think back on, you know, the models that my parents [Mildred Boutin Prothrow and Percy Prothrow, Jr.] put in front of me. Story_ID: 289744 Speaker 1: Looking back on the two years that you served [as commissioner of public health for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts], how do you assess those two years in hindsight? Would you have done it again? Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I definitely would have done it again. I definitely would have done it again. I might have stayed a little longer, but when [Governor Michael] Dukakis said he wasn't going to run for governor again after losing the presidency, it became very clear that, as an appointed official, I needed to prepare for my next steps. But I might have stayed a little bit longer, especially given where I wound up serving for a short period of time. But I think in terms of our mission, the focus on community agencies on getting money out of the big institutions and into some of the smaller agencies, the focus on substance abuse, and just getting more and more treatment slots, which we were able to do through really through federal funding, but we were able to keep the state funding, which is always a challenge. When you bring in federal funding the state likes to take its money and put it back in the general fund and you lose it. So you had to you know negotiate that. I mean, I think there are things that that we were able to do that were extremely important. So I'm proud of those two years. I find it, even on reflection, probably the most exciting job I've had. It's by far the most powerful job I've had, and the most demanding. So I spent all my time for those two years being commissioner (laughter). That's all I did. Speaker 1: I'm sure. I'm sure. Speaker 2: You know, there was not a place in the state I was or even out of state when I went to the state health meetings that I wasn't commissioner--it was just, you know, its fatiguing responsibility. Speaker 1: I could imagine. Story_ID: 289745 Speaker 1: What was the next step then? Speaker 2: Well, the next step for me was a for-profit hospital management company, and my thinking and selecting the role as senior vice president and medical officer there was that I had witnessed public health and public medicine, a city hospital [Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], and I had certainly seen government health up close because as a state health commissioner, we then managed eight state hospitals. So I'd been in the intricacies of, of publicly funded health care and I thought, I know the limitations and possibilities on the government side and on the non-profit side, but let me learn on the for-profit side. What are the possibilities? What are the limitations? And the company I joined was a privately held hospital ownership and management company, where the, the CEO articulated the vision this way you know our quality of care is our profit. So if we don't have quality health care, we don't have profit, and that I found very intriguing and attractive. And so I joined the company and then, two weeks after I arrived, it went up for sale, bordering on bankruptcy (laughter). And I joined an employee buyout group, and we worked with venture capitalist to put in a bid for the company, which we did, and were blessed to lose (laughter), and I say that only because the person who won the bid spent three or four years, and many thousands of dollars of legal fees, actually trying to buy the company, and I think that it going up for sale was just a management strategy to avoid bankruptcy and, you know, I don't, I didn't keep up with it after that. I learned a lot. I especially learned what due diligence means (laughter). Didn't quite understand that concept before, before joining them, but I understand it now (laughter). Story_ID: 289746 Speaker 1: What came next? Speaker 2: What came next was the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts], and even before I left the state health department [Massachusetts Department of Public Health], Harvey Fineberg, who was the dean at the Harvard School of Public Health, talked to me about coming to the school, and we had a longstanding relationship and it was attractive even before I joined the, the company, but obviously in the thick of, you know, putting in a bid to buy somebody's company and learning then that it's time to go after that (laughter), it was extremely attractive to come to the School of Public Health. And interestingly, the Institute of Medicine [National Academy of Medicine] released a report called the 'Future of Public Health' in, I think it was '87 [sic. 1988], right at the time I was health commissioner--I think right at the time I was health commissioner, '87 [1987] or '88 [1988], and that report caused the schools--because it was, it basically said schools of public health are disconnected from the practice of public health, and that the, the schism is big, and nobody's making an effort to bridge it, and the education is inadequate as a result of that because people are graduating from schools of public health, they have no idea how to be commissioners of public health, or lead major public health agencies and it was--so it was very interesting, rather scathing attack on public health education and the public health infrastructure. And so Harvey talked to me about coming to help the school respond, and so that was the beginning of, you know, my going, and it's kept me there for fifteen years now. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 289747 Speaker 1: In more recent years, right up to the present, what have been your major activities and responsibilities? Speaker 2: Well, my first, I tell you first seven years or so, were spent building the research profile and the efforts programmatically around violence as a public health problem so the--my first book came out just a year after I joined the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts], and then it became an excellent platform for the work in violence prevention. Speaker 1: The title of the book? Speaker 2: 'Deadly Consequences[: How Violence is Destroying Our Teenage Population and a Plan to Begin Solving the Problem,' Deborah Prothrow-Stith]. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the content of that and what the thesis was and-- Speaker 2: Sure, the--book presented or presents the public health approach to violence in a very readable language, and the theme is that, that violence is preventable. Despite the fact that most of our professional practices center around a kind of inevitability of violence so, we stitch people up and send them out, police lock people up. The--getting involved in preventing violence was not anybody's real work. So that's really the, the premise of the book, and it tells a story of my becoming--the emergency room story of the guy saying, "I'm going out and get the guy," really sets the stage and my becoming involved in, in this area and what I learned. So that, that really set the, the career direction for me in a pretty solid way and, you know, I spent the next years doing more work in violence prevention. Story_ID: 289748 Speaker 1: About eight or nine years ago, Harvey [Fineberg] asked me to really start the Division of Public Health Practice [at Harvard School of Public Health; Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts]. And we had been working on public health practice--the bridging, in an academic setting, the bridging of that gap. So that work became more intensely focused on local practice opportunities for students and creating an infrastructure in the school analogous to what you might find in, in a clinical setting in a medical school, but for public health practice, and for the teaching of public health practice. And I did that up until a couple of years ago when I handed off the division, and I'm really kind of focusing on the violence issue again. We've got 'Murder is No Accident[: Understanding and Preventing Youth Violence in America,' Deborah Prothrow-Stith and Howard R. Spivak], which is really the second book that tells the Boston [Massachusetts] story, and our perspective on that, which is no one program did it. It wasn't the police and the clergy, it was, you know, hundreds of people who worked on this, and scores of programs, including the police and the clergy. And, and then lately 'Sugar and Spice And No Longer Nice[: How We Can Stop Girls' Violence,' Deborah Prothrow-Stith and Howard R. Spivak], which is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me say, let me say-- Speaker 1: Sure, sure. Speaker 2: --what I call the Boston model, right-- Speaker 1: Yeah, sure. Speaker 2: That was an effective model because the incidence of violence-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --declined rather rapidly over two or three year period. How did your work affect other communities in other states across the country? I mean, did you--did that model, did your work, have an impact nationally? Speaker 1: Well it did. There's a growing network of people in public health who look at violence as a public health program who have been involved in problematic prevention areas and modeled a lot of what they were doing after things that were done here in Boston. Story_ID: 289749 Speaker 1: The decline in violence actually started in the mid-'90s [1990s], and it paralleled a decline that occurred nationally. It was--parallel's not quite accurate, because it was more dramatic than the national decline, and even this upswing that we're experiencing now in Boston [Massachusetts] is, you know, in concert in some ways with what's happening in major cities across the country and there are a lot of explanations for that but it is our premise that it was the twenty years of work and the scores of programs and hundreds of people that made that mid-'90s [1990s] decline become a much more dramatic experience in Boston. But we were just recently working in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and the irony of that is Boston is now scrambling to respond, and we got a call from Philadelphia--but, but the, the thing that caused me to really work with the group in Philadelphia is that, well, first of all, it was led by a state rep [Dwight Evans] who had some legislative and budgetary access, and they passed in April of 2004 the Blueprint for a Safer Philadelphia [Initiative]. When we got called, which was February of 2005, he was asking for help with implementing the Blueprint, and when we got our chance to sit down and kind of go over it, it was clear that the Blueprint had a lot of emphasis on the policing, and the punishment side of it. And so what we did was work with them to increase the, the prevention side of it. But most importantly to me was that his--he had an interest in a decade of work so it's not the summer of a responsibility, or the two weeks of sweeping the community, or the, you know, I--you know, the quick fix stuff doesn't work--and, you know, we we started working with them and in November they announced the beginning of the decade of work, and their goal is to have no youth homicides in Philadelphia, and they have said that based on the period of time we had in Boston where we had no youth sixteen or younger killed by a gun. So, you know, in theory it's doable. It's a period of time that can be ushered in. Story_ID: 289750 Speaker 1: I just worked on an op-ed piece today where--and I sent it over to Howard [Spivak], I'll see what he says. We do a lot of writing together. Speaker 2: Howard? Speaker 1: Spivak. Howard Spivak-- Speaker 2: Who is Howard Spivak (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who's a--Howard is a pediatrician at New England Medical Center [Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] that I met at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] when I started my work in violence prevention there, just at the end of residency, and we've been colleagues, friends, co-authors since, almost everything I write, I write with, with Howard. And interestingly, I'll see what he says, but I think that it might be an important thing to say to the city that we need to look at, you know, two decades, you know, a decade you know more than, you know press conference, you know, that we can't fix this by a press conference. And unfortunately a lot of the press conferences that occurred around the dramatic decline, you know, just didn't take into account the twenty-five years of what--I mean I think about Bruce Wall and the ministry, the youth ministry that he moved to the Chez Vous Skating Rink [Boston, Massachusetts], you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's a huge part of what happened in Boston [Massachusetts], and the spinoffs from that that just gets completely left out, or [Francis M.] "Mickey" Roache when he was commissioner of police in Boston implemented a lot of things like community policing and, you know, took the D.A.R.E. [Drug Abuse Resistance Education] program and said we're going to include violence prevention in, in the D.A.R.E. program. Those, those are left out of the press conference that says, you know, last year we started this program and now violence has fallen, you know, and that's the, that's the mindset that, that I think we need to challenge. Story_ID: 289751 Speaker 1: Can you comment on how the research and the work of [HistoryMaker] Dr. Felton [James] Earls compares with what you've been-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --your approach? What are the differences? Speaker 2: Sure. Well I, I call him Tony [ph.] (laughter), but Tony Earls really did a major study in Chicago [Illinois] that looked at some of the antecedents to violent behavior and really highlights the role of neighborhoods really. I think one of the things that is in many ways consistent and quite complimentary with the social movement and neighborhood-based work that we've been trying to do, and been doing here in Boston [Massachusetts] and, and nationally is that it says that it's not the individual kid, and it's not even the individual family, that it really is a social context, that you really have to deal with the cultural issues--that the environment, you know, makes a huge difference. And in that sense I think the, the work really sets a great theoretical stage for, you know, the programmatic activities--in many ways much of what we've been--been doing. I think the, the challenges that remain are a few. One is to figure out how to incorporate the more environmental infrastructure design features of a neighborhood into violence prevention and understanding what creates more violence in the way of, you know, a design or a walk to school, or just the school building itself. Some of the studies suggest that it's unclaimed spaces in the schools that are the spaces where kids fight. So if you survey kids and say, where do the fights take place, and then you give them a map of the school and you say, put the name of the teacher who's responsible for this space on the map, the spaces where the kids don't put a teacher's name coincide well with the spaces where there are fights. So, you know, how you design and allocate space, and who's in charge of the space, is--is an important part of that. Story_ID: 289752 Speaker 1: The other thing, and this is work that we're doing actively now, is incorporating the pain and grief and loss of survivors into the prevention effort. And I think that a lot of the conflict resolution work, and work to change the school climate, and all while successful, really has not incorporated well the need that a lot of children have for healing. They have witnessed a lot of violence, been victimized themselves, are afraid, are angry, and that has to be incorporated. So we have a new curriculum called Peace Zone, which is co-authored with the founders of the Louis D. Brown Peace Institute [Dorchester, Boston, Massachusetts], Joseph [Chery] and Tina Chery, whose son was killed, and the Lesson One Foundation [Boston, Massachusetts]--a teacher, former teacher Jon Oliver and his colleagues to bridge those together to not only say, these are the skills to get along, and this is how you resolve conflict, but here's some healing activity you know that bad things do happen, and that sad things do happen, and that figuring out how to feel better is part of the job of growing up, you know, and that a school can help with that. So I'm pretty excited about that. We've done some evaluation data, which actually shows some impact on boys fighting, which is nice, but also, less depression in this--in the kids, which I, which I really think and this is third, fourth and fifth grades, so it's pretty exciting to see and I think that's related to the community service piece of the, of the project. Story_ID: 289753 Speaker 1: What's the status of your curriculum that you started with some years ago? Speaker 2: Yes, well that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the status of that? Speaker 2: Well way back when I was at the, the [Boston] Latin Academy [Boston, Massachusetts] made, made up this curriculum, I--when, so after residency [at Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], when I was picking back up the violence prevention work, was invited to speak at a conference, and it was the 1985 surgeon general's conference on violence [Surgeon General's Workshop on Violence and Public Health], and it was the first public health conference that we had in the country on violence, and I spoke about this curriculum, and in the audience was a man from the [Florence V.] Burden Foundation out of New York [New York], and over lunch he said to me, "So," I didn't know who he was at that point, you know, "So what do you want to do?" I said, well I want to do this, I want to do that and I want to do this, and I want to do that, and, you know, basically I want to make a curriculum that teachers can use and take, you know--I had pieces of paper--so he said, "Do you know the Education Development Center in Newton [sic. Waltham, Massachusetts]?" And I didn't, and he said, "Well I'm going to introduce you to someone there. I think this is a great project, I'm from a foundation; we would fund it," blah, blah. So I connected with Education Development Center, which has a wonderful reputation and a remarkable history in producing education material--educational materials--and we wrote a grant to the Burden Foundation and produced a violence prevention curriculum for adolescents. That's actually the first thing that I ever published--sort of with my non-journal article--but so that gave us a lot of you know boost in terms of our social movement to prevent violence. We had something very concrete. We could give it to teachers. Other people could adapt it, and I'm trying to remember, I think that was 1990 so 'Deadly Consequences[: How Violence Is Destroying Our Teenage Population and a Plan to Begin Solving the Problem,' Deborah Prothrow-Stith] came out in 1991, so it's just before that, any way. It's time to, well, it's past time to update it, and the publishers for research for the piece on curriculum, Research Press, actually did a kind of a double contract with me to update the Violence Prevention Curriculum for Adolescents, but that has not happened (laughter). It's a piece of work that's looming out there, but you can still order it, and I think for background purposes, you know, people order it for--some still use it. It, you know, can be updated by an energetic and industrious teacher, but it needs to be. Story_ID: 289754 Speaker 1: --because I think are very significant, and I just learned about a more recent one dealing with the increase of violence by, by young women by girls-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so you have a book out, tell us about that book. The title and what the thesis there is? Speaker 2: Well, our most recent book is 'Sugar and Spice and No Longer Nice[: How We Can Stop Girls' Violence,' Deborah Prothrow-Stith and Howard R. Spivak], and it is a treatise on girls and violence and an effort at prescribing for parents, for communities and for schools, things that ought be done to prevent violence among girls. The impetus for the book came from two sources. One, we had been hearing from--anecdotally--about girls fighting in schools mostly middle school principals sharing, really for about ten, twelve years but then the arrest data showed that girls are now 25 percent of the teenagers arrested for violent crime and while boys are doing most of the crime and most of the violent crime that represents a tremendous increase in what girls are doing. Now there is some controversy over whether girls have changed their behavior and are just being arrested, you know, whether for that changed behavior or that they really haven't changed their behavior, but we're arresting them for the same old--same behavior that they've had in the past and we fall in the category of saying girls have changed their behavior. And there are a lot of reasons why we think that, not only the anecdotal stories that we got prior to the arrest data, but also, you know, we sort of ask the question, why not? You look at the way we are marketing and advertising violence to girls the way we've done to boys for centuries now, why wouldn't they adopt the behaviors. Girls and women are doing everything else, so what do we think is, you know, so special about this particular thing called violence that girls and women wouldn't engage in doing it. So understanding that it represents a new wave of this problem, we put forth the thesis that our responses and our prevention responses have to be different because girls are different and the socialization forces are different, and when you consider the gender issues in this country and the issues of violence against women, you really have to teach girls to be non-violent and non-victim and that's a special area of work. Story_ID: 289755 Speaker 1: Is the violence by young ladies, is it similar to the behavior of young men in terms of the use of, of lethal weapons, for example, or is their violence carried out a different way? Speaker 2: The, the violence that girls are demonstrating has quite a few similarities with boys and the violence there. One, is that they fight girls. So girls are fighting girls, the way boys are fighting boys, so you've got same-gender violence. A lot of the reasons for fighting arguments over he said, she said, over girlfriend, boyfriend, over spreading rumors, lying about--those are some of the same kinds of things that you hear and, interestingly, girls seem to, and this has only been shown in one ethnographic study in urban Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but again you ask a question why wouldn't it be the case, girls are showing the same attitudes about violence and enjoying it the way boys enjoy it and brag about it the way boys brag about it, and get reputation points the way boys would get reputation points so, you know, there are a lot reasons to think this is not only real, but reflective of a substantial problem (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are the--are the girls forming gangs in the same way that boys do? And if they do, how do they operate differently than boys or? Speaker 2: Girls are forming gangs-- Speaker 1: And is that a new phenomenon or not? Speaker 2: Well it's not, it's not completely new especially when you get to some of the traditional gangs that boys have formed, and you look at what are called partner gangs. It's almost like you have fraternity and sororities in terms of structure so some of that is, is older, but what is new is, you know, girl gangs that have nothing to do with, you know, a partner boy gang, or girl gangs that are involved in violence in a way that, you know, that is not supportive of, you know, someone else's violence, but, you know, on their own initiative. You asked about girls using weapons. At this point girls do not use guns the way boys do. I think that's a matter of time, really. I think the more we market and advertise girls--guns to girls via, you know, movies like the 'Tomb Raider' ['Lara Croft: Tomb Raider'] or, you know, other, you know, I just think it's a matter of time, you know. We really for the last twenty years and the first thing I remember was 'Power Rangers' some twenty, twenty-three years ago, but for the last twenty-plus years, we really been increasingly marketing violence as a problem solving strategy to girls. Story_ID: 289756 Speaker 1: You had another significant, I won't say detour, but event in your life with your husband Charles [HistoryMaker Reverend Charles Richard Stith], and that was his appointment as ambassador to Tanzania (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was a--that was a good time in my life. Speaker 1: --by our former President [William Jefferson] "Bill" Clinton became an important part of your life, I guess is still. Tell us about that family going to Tanzania and-- Speaker 2: Well Tanzania was a wonderful, wonderful time for us. We were there for two and a half years. We moved one month after the embassy was bombed, so certainly there were high security issues, but it was pretty clear that the forces involved in the bombing were external to the country. Tanzania is one of the most peaceful countries, historically as well as culturally, on the face of the earth. And it is a stable democracy, evolving only about, you know, thirty-five, I guess '63 [1963] however long forty, forty years ago, and during our time it was the beginning of the second term of the third elected president [President Benjamin Mkapa]. So there was a lot about the country to enjoy and so even though it was after the bombing, you know, and security was a big issue for us, we were able to really enjoy being there, make some very good friends and we all went. So my mom [Mildred Boutin Prothrow] was there. She had the best time. Percy [Stith III] and Mimi [Mary Prothrow] were there, and both nephews [Trey Edmondson and Tony Franklin] came over twice during that period, and then Charles and I were there. So, I was going back and forth [between Tanzania and Boston, Massachusetts] so that was a little crazy. So if we ever do this again, I won't do that. I won't recommend doing that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you still maintaining your work at the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I was. I, I moved to half-time-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --and then I spent six weeks there and then four to three weeks here, and then five or six weeks there, then four to three weeks here alternating back and forth and we have a period in the school calendar where it's now one month long but then it was one week long and you could do a complete course in that week and so I wound up doing in fact I did two, both my courses I moved to that period and did-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --as a week-long course. Story_ID: 289757 Speaker 1: And a lot of the--rest of the work was email and, you know, computer work, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What medical contributions did you make while you were in Tanzania, what kind of medical things did you do while you were there? Speaker 1: I can't really say I made a contribution. I mean that would be strong. I did affiliate with the Muhimbili [National] Hospital [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania], and did some lecturing and also affiliated with the Tanzania Public Health Association, so I presented at, at the national meeting. One group where I did some more concerted work was a group called WAMATA, and it was organized serving people living with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and they--it was an amazing organization, you know. A hundred plus people would come on Saturday. Some of them traveling for two and a half hours via bus and walking to get there. And a lot of what they did was supporting each other but they had obviously access to medical issues, legal issues, economic issues like micro credit and it with a, with a friend, who's a photojournalist, I started doing some personal histories, getting some biographies of people to go along with the, the pictures he took. It then got me involved with the director of the program who is just finishing her doctorate at University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] now and you know is someone that I'll just have as a colleague for, you know, for life hopefully. We took some books over, I mean, we did a few things but, you know, I don't want to--I'm, I'm sure I got much, much, much more out of being there than we gave. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I certainly had a good time (laughter). Speaker 2: Good. Story_ID: 289758 Speaker 1: Before we leave the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts], you have another position there, associate dean for faculty development (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: How long have you held that position? What does that involve? What is your role there? Speaker 2: I've had the position let's see, Barry [ph.] has been there five years June 2, so right as Harvey [Finberg] left the school was when I--Harvey being a former dean, Harvey Finberg, so it's about six years now, and I'll talk recently because it now involves representing the School of Public Health at a university-wide, committee level in response to issues of gender equity on our faculty. In February of 2005 of this year, our president [Lawrence H. Summers] made remarks about women in science that created not only a huge controversy but a huge opportunity as internal and external pressures mounted to deal with what is a problem in the university [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is that we have fewer women on faculty. Women don't get promoted as often as men and their salary issues, their work life issues. And now we have a new senior vice provost, Dr. Hammonds [HistoryMaker Evelynn M. Hammonds], and each school within the university has a representative on this committee, and I'm serving as that representative. And we're actively looking for strategies and funding strategies to change the, the culture and climate within the university for issues of gender as well as diversity. So that's exciting. I mean the position prior to that had really been defined more by our school and what was going on in the context of our school, but now I think we've got an opportunity at the university level that's a bit different. Story_ID: 289759 Speaker 1: I think we have covered the territory, but you can tell me if we haven't. Are there any things that you'd like to add to this interview that I haven't asked you about? Speaker 2: That's interesting. I guess the only thing I would, would potentially add has to do with some work that I might do. For instance, one issue that is really a part of my thinking now, and I'm struggling a bit with, is forgiveness as a violence prevention strategy. I've learned through a lot of the work with survivors that this is a very big area. Obviously for victims and the families of victims that the healing seems to require a certain amount of forgiveness and this is a very unforgiving culture. Forgiveness is not very popular. And I actually think that our punishment strategies lack for forgiveness of our kids and therefore an investment in what they can be. So I--that's one area I'm thinking about a bit and struggling to work on and then also I been thinking a lot about race. Race is one of those issues not only in public health but especially in public health that we're just beginning to sort of peel back the, the onion on this one. There are a lot of studies that show black-white differences but nobody is really until recently pursued what did that mean. You know were we actually measuring some sort of biological differences? Were we measuring some sort of experiential differences, like discrimination? Was it a cultural phenomenon? You know, what, what are you measuring? And there's some ways that I think my personal experiences, as well as the, the work in violence prevention I think sets the stage for that to be a potential area of, of work. Story_ID: 289760 Speaker 1: Beyond that, and that's very helpful, a nice extension. Are there any other aspects of your career as a physician, as a medical person, that we haven't touched upon? Speaker 2: We didn't talk a lot about the clinical work, which I haven't done in a while, and it's a very special way of knowing, and for the first time and probably about the, the entire time that I've not practiced clinically, I'm beginning to think about it more. I can't say I'm missing it, but it is a very special way of knowing about life, and about people, and so it's on my mind a lot, and it's, it's actually the interface between health--public health and medicine that I think requires some exploration. I had to give a speech at my twenty-fifth reunion for medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], and one of the things that I said was that I looked at health from both sides now, and neither of us is really getting this thing right. You know, medicine isn't able to do the whole, and public health isn't able to do the whole, and somewhere in the middle and in that interface that I think we need to, you know, to struggle and I, I went so far as to propose that we have schools of health (laughter). You know, just to explore that, you know, that interface, but. Story_ID: 289761 Speaker 1: What advice do you have to young people today in high school, and in college, who are thinking about a career in medicine? Speaker 2: Well, I think I would, I would say, don't let perfect get in the way of good. That sometimes you feel because you're not the best, or because you didn't make the highest mark, or because you didn't, you know, because you're not perfect, that you can't do it, you know. And, you know, a lot of the work that it becomes--that it takes to become a physician or a public health practitioner, or anything for that matter, is that you know slow, incremental, everyday stuff and sometimes it's--good is okay. You just do it the best you can do and even if it's not perfect you come back the next day, and you'll do it better. And that's I think a lot--and interestingly, one of the things from the publication perspective we learned is that women when they get an article rejected are more likely to not resubmit and, you know, it takes a lot to not internalize that as a failure and just say, you know, let me respond to the critique and put it back out there. And I think it's just a matter of saying I'm good enough, and I'll just keep working until what it is I produce is good enough, and not letting perfect get in the way of that. A lot of students are writing their dissertation, come in and they want to, they want to write the most perfect thing and they can't get it done because it's never going to be perfect. And you know it's not like a grant. When we have a grant, we have a deadline. If you don't get it in there by September 4th, you're not going to get the money. So perfect or not, by the time you get there, you going to get it in. With the dissertation you know the deadlines are fluid and I really have to you know push people, and say, this is not your life's work, this is not the thing that's going to change the world. This does not have to be perfect, it just has to be good enough for you to get the degree, and then there's lots else that can happen, so. Story_ID: 289762 Speaker 1: Outside of your career, your profession as a medical person, is there anything that you have not yet done that you'd like to do outside of medicine in your life? Speaker 2: Ah, yes. I so want to take voice lessons and sing one song in a choir at church (laughter). I cannot carry a tune in a bucket so I--one day I'm going to take just, just to learn a song. I don't know how I'm going to learn it because I'm sure I don't have the pitch or whatever, but however I have to learn it, I want to, I want to do that. I also said I wanted to be multi-lingual, which, you know, the closest I got was, you know, in Tanzania I took Kiswahili, and I'm very good at the few things I can say, but I'm nowhere near even proficient, so I, I'd like to do that. I wish I had studied history a lot more. There are, there's, there's a lot there that I never had a great history teacher. History was always memorizing dates and it never came alive for me and now I need it so much, and I don't have it, so. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Evelynn [M.] Hammonds is going to help you with that. Speaker 2: Yes, yes (laughter). Story_ID: 289763 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life so far Speaker 2: Oh, I feel so blessed and I, I think I've done well with what I've been given, but I've been given a lot, so it's hard to (laughter), it's hard to make that assessment. I try to do well with it but I have been so blessed that, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --what I've done, you know, it's almost expected in some ways, you know. Story_ID: 289764 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American communities across our country today? Speaker 2: I think we, I, I think we're facing the need for a social change movement similar to the Civil Rights Movement that has some very specific qualities. One, that reinforces family that reinforces the, the blessing of having important work to do and doing it. I think we have been, we're challenged--I think America is challenged and we in some very special ways are challenged to deal with a very individualistic, quick fix, you know, the ends justify the means kind of mentality and that, that's right up there with an eye for an eye leaves us all blind. I mean, you--it's a spiral downward that, you know, I think our value, our equation of money and character, you know, or money and importance that has our kids wanting money. You know, that, that and, and, you know, I mean I want money it's not, but, you know, that money is the thing. That there's very little else that I don't this movie 'Get Rich or Die Tryin' I think just in the title, I haven't seen the movie, I probably won't for a long, long time, if at all, but just the title is so worrisome, it is so worrisome. And I think if we as an African American community can somehow recapture that because in many ways we often set the pace for cultural trends in this society that that it will be very helpful for, for us, but yeah, I'm concerned about that. Story_ID: 289765 Speaker 1: Last question, how do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably as, as somebody who loved people, worked hard and had a lot of fun (laughter). Story_ID: 289766 Speaker 1: My father as a young man probably of twelve or so, so my guess is 1925. Speaker 2: This is my father, Percy Prothrow, Jr. He used to say, with his big fat fine self, and I would guess this is in the early '60s [1960s] when he was at Atlanta Life [Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group] and probably taken in Atlanta [Georgia] in a classroom. Speaker 1: And this is my paternal grandfather, Percy Prothrow, Sr., and my guess is this was taken in his early seventies or late sixties in Marshall, Texas and I'll guess 1920. Speaker 2: This is my maternal grandfather, Henry Hamilton Boutin, and it was probably Jackson, Mississippi, where this picture was taken and he looks like a young man in his thirties. Well my mom [Mildred Boutin Prothrow] was born in 1918, so might have been around that time early '20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: These are my paternal great-grandparents, Harold Prothrow, wait no, no that's wrong. These are my, right, my paternal great-grandparents Dr. Pope Harold and his wife who was they were the parents of my grandmother [Lucy Harold Prothrow]. Sometime in the, God I could see that he looks like Lois [ph.], I'm sorry about '20s [1920s] I would guess maybe earlier. Speaker 2: So that is me in a crib on the front porch of the Prothrow home on University Avenue in Marshall, Texas, and it looks like 1954, I may have been six months old. I'm sitting up so probably seven months old something like that, but my mom said I sat up in two months and talked at three months and walked at four (laughter). Speaker 1: That's my mom in Biloxi, Mississippi, and she looks about twenty or so, so I would say in the '30 [1930], she graduated in 1938, 1940, 1938 from college [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], so probably mid to late '30s [1930s]. Speaker 2: This is my sister [Lady Prothrow] and me. We are in Chicago [Illinois] at a state fair, and it's 19--I look about what five years old, six something like that, so 1960. Speaker 1: This is my husband [HistoryMaker Reverend Charles Richard Stith] and me. This was taken Thanksgiving 2003. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family. Standing you have my nephew Tony [Franklin], my mom, me, my husband. Seated from the left you have my son Percy [Stith III], my older nephew Trey [Edmonson], his wife Melanie [ph.] and our daughter Mimi [Mary Stith], taken Thanksgiving 2003 here at the home...