 Story_ID: 12053 Speaker 1: My name is Howard Peters Rawlings. Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, Peters P-E-T-E-R-S, Rawlings R-A-W-L-I-N-G-S. Speaker 2: This is okay 'cause we're just slating. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: Now I also want-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Can I, can I mention that my, my middle name is my mother's maiden name [Beatrice Peters Rawlings]. And that's why when I was a kid, they called me 'Peety,' after Peters because there was another Howard Rawlings who was about a year older than me who was a relative--who is a relative, in fact. And when I got older, 'Peety' was so child-like and they called me 'Pete'. And I use it as a, a political name. Most people in the general assembly and people who know me call me Pete. Story_ID: 12054 Speaker 1: Birth date, your profession and today's date, and our location? Okay, I'll tell (unclear). Just your birth date. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I was born on March the 17th, 1937 in Baltimore City [Maryland]. And I was the first child of Beatrice and Tuscan Rawlings. And the first of six children. We are filming this interview at my home in Baltimore City in my district, the 40th legislative district. And that address is 3502 Sequoia Avenue, Baltimore, Maryland. And today's date is Sunday, February 25, the birthday of my first daughter and first child by the way. Story_ID: 12055 Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Probably because I was born on St. Patrick's Day. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I--probably spring, 'cause we're ending up the session. And I've been in this business--this is my twenty third year. The spring is the period that we're finishing up our legislative session. I'm getting back to a more normal life. And I, I don't mind the cold weather. And I don't like the hot weather. So spring is just a good period for me. Speaker 1: And your favorite food? Speaker 2: The problem is I eat almost anything. If I have a favorite--God, that's difficult. Probably fried chicken. I like wings and breasts, white, white meat. But that's a hard, hard question. Speaker 1: How about favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: My wife would probably shoot me 'cause we don't do enough vacationing. I took a cruise for the first time in my life about three years ago, and we're still paying for it. I guess the mess--best fun I had is going to New York on the weekend to a play. Speaker 1: And Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I don't take--It's probably one of the, the regrets I have in my life. I don't take many vacations. Speaker 1: And what about--do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think so, no. I, I can't--one doesn't come to Speaker 1: --Mind. Speaker 2: To my mind. Recent--I mean that I--I'm sure there is one. But, I find I'm getting slower as I, as I get older. But I, I do like to remind people that--especially my colleagues--I'm always talking to them about being disciplined and focused if you're gonna achieve. So anything I say it's about being personally disciplined and focused in your agendas. And I try to instill that in my children. But there is no favorite phrase that I use. Story_ID: 12056 Speaker 1: I'd like to start with your mother, Beatrice. And ask you about her. What, what you know of her? She was born in Lithian--Lothian [Maryland]? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's right outside of Annapolis, Maryland. And my understanding is that of--the part that I remember is that her parents died at a relatively early age. And she came to Baltimore [Maryland] to live with one of her brothers. And went to night school and got her degree there. It's not clear to me how she met my father. But they, they, you know, were married. And it was always interesting the kind of relationship that I had with my mother because it was, it was clear to me that, I was conceived before she was married. So, being the kind of proper woman that she is, they would never celebrate their wedding anniversary. And, I, you know, I never had a sense of when their anniversary was. And--because she was married in the winter, and I was born in March. And so to keep that information from me--it was not until I was a grown man that I actually knew. And she probably had a lot of sensitivity about that. And, you know my father was a pretty good-looking man if I must say so. And he had a very--he was a son of a very strong family. And, when I was born, I spent about two or three years living with my grandmother in a house on Harlem Avenue. And at that time, it was a pretty nice neighborhood, a three story row house with a back yard. And, it was, you know, an extraordinary environment for me to grow up in. Speaker 1: Now so--You--This was the grandmother on your father's side? Speaker 2: On my father's side. Yes. Speaker 1: So tell me about your father. you know Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well my, my father--he was a very interesting man. he--he's a person who I grew to love more, the older I got. He, he's a guy who when I was--I cannot remember when he was not working. He he served in the military. And I, I remember one point and moment I had when we had moved up to Evanston Village. So that was after I had graduated from Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland]. And there was this show, this movie that was being shown on television. And some how black soldiers were in it. And they were making fun and joking and, you know, the kind of slapstick like comedy. And he was angry at it. Because he served in the armed service. And he took his role seriously. And it's the first sense of some real pride in an all black unit that he was participating in. Of course, he's not--he was not a political person. I mean he, he went to work. He brought his check home and gave it to our mother on Friday. She gives him enough money so--'cause in our neighborhood there were bars where the men would socialize, you know, to drink beer and so forth. It was more of a social like, atmosphere. I don't remember, , fights and, and disorder around the bars 'cause sometimes I had to go get him. And, it's always been the case. I mean my mother brought the food. took care of everything. He did--he was the person who brought the money home. he, he--he, was not a person who was into a lot of conversation. A very quiet person. And you wanted him to be quiet. Because when he was angry and the anger was directed at us, you know, for misbehaving, it was not a good experience. He was a person who was not demonstrative in his affection. But he always kept us clean. We always on Easter we had new clothes. We did well at thanks--Christmas. We always had a nice Thanksgiving dinner. And he always made sure we listened to our mother. And she was the--kind of the standard there. And when we--and she would punish us. But if the crime was too severe, there was additional punishment that we would get from him. I mean they didn't mind beating us. I mean I remember getting with an iron cord, and getting whelps. You know. I mean nowadays, my daughter, who is a lawyer, when I raise a hand against her, she talks about child abuse. And, you know, reporting me to the authorities. But I, I never thought that the punishment was so severe that I was being abused. And always felt that the punishment was deserved. It was just a matter of running around screaming while, (laughing) they, they were waving the switch or the iron cord, or whatever. But my father was the ultimate disciplinarian. Everything centered around him in a sense, but he didn't force things, you know, to take place. We would go to Druid Hill Park. My mother was always planning things. He wanted us to have the best. He never graduated from high school. He quit at the 11th grade. I could never figure out why. But, he was very strong. He was a very strong person. Story_ID: 12057 Speaker 1: Did either of your parents share any stories of their growing up? You know, or things that really stuck with you? Speaker 2: No. And that's probably one of the things I, I regret. I mean the kind of style that we had in our family, was not this kind of probing. We just took each day, as a, you know, a day that the Lord has brought. And we'd be glad to be blessed. We were Christian Bap--you know, christian, christened as children. We went to Sunday school as youngsters. My father didn't go. And we were raised to have, you know, or relatively strong Christian values. But we were not a religious family, per se. the church was not the center of, of our lives. In fact, if there was a center, it was our community. I mean my father participated with the men in the community. They had a (unclear) club I think. My mother the same way. I lived in the projects. The Edgar Allan Poe Projects. The first public housing projects in Maryland probably. Certainly in Baltimore City [Maryland]. And, it was a porch structure. They were not highrises. We lived in a building where we would walk up. There would be two, two levels in our house. We would walk up. Then there was the kitchen and the living room area. Then we'd go up stairs and there would be the bedrooms. I think there were three bedrooms. And but in our, in our court--I guess this is how they were planned. Most of the people that I saw growing up were married with children. Some as many as 10 children. There were--there was, there was a oldest married couple in the community. There was a single elderly woman who lived with her daughter and her husband. So--and everyone I knew worked. And everyone looked after each other. I mean there was a sense that anybody could beat your ass, you know, Miss Basiley (ph.), or Miss Gross or anyone in the community. And then they would tell your mother, and you'd get a beating again. So it, it was an extraordinary, comforting environment to, to grow in. And you had some sense of comfort when you ventured outside of it. Speaker 1: Now that's, that's what I want to ask. So, your mother came here. She met your, you know, she married your father. Speaker 2: And then you lived with your grandmother. You know, you said for a couple of years? Speaker 1: Yeah. About two or three years. Speaker 2: Okay. And then is that when the projects was built? Speaker 1: Yeah. The, the-- Speaker 2: Where you moved in. Speaker 1: Yeah. It was like a new housing development. Speaker 2: Yes. A brand new housing development. I guess I was around three years old when that took place. And I had a brother. He must have been about less than one years old. Speaker 1: Can you give your siblings names and just the, you know, after you, and just the order? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, my brother Richard Aaron Rawlings then, Gilbert Bruce Rawlings, he's the one that just walked in that you met. then Rebecca Scott--well, actually Rebecca Rawlings. Scott is her last name now. Then Guy Clark Rawlings, he lives in Atlanta [Georgia]. And the youngest, LaVerne Rawlings. That's the six of us. Story_ID: 12058 Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: Well, I went to [public school] 128--it's no longer there 'cause they tore down this whole series of blocks to make way for traffic. But I went to from kindergarten to the third grade 128 on Stroter Street. A very good school. The most that I remember about the third grade was that, you know, you have milk and graham crackers, then you take a nap. Well I must have been a very figidty kid. And I'll never forget it. And I must not have been still. And the teacher probably told me to be still and put my head down and, you know, and take a nap. And I remember her bringing a ruler over, holding my hand out and getting it cracked, you know. And then being in compliance. But, I mean I always felt that I had good experiences in elementary school. I went to Phillis Wheatley Elementary [Baltimore, Maryland] from the third grade to the sixth grade. That was much closer in my community. It was like the projects were here and Phillis Wheatley was almost across the street. That was the third to the sixth grade. I had very good teachers. One teacher, who was a relation of mine and my family, and who supports my political life, and comes to almost all of my events, Mrs. Flint, Vera Flint. I think there were two of 'em. They were sisters. But I'm sure it was Vera. I mean I knew she was a relative. So probably I thought that she would not hold me to the same standards that she would hold every one else. But, she wanted me to shot up, stop talking. And I must didn't take it seriously. And she actually taped my mouth, and, you know, while I was in class. And it's, and it's kind of surprising, that this event took place. 'Cause I'm not now a very gregarious or talkative person. And, I--and even when I was in--, Speaker 1: [Off camera discussion] Speaker 2: Yeah. Was. And our swimming-- At that time, you know, the schools in Baltimore were segregated. We had the black school superintendent and, and the white superintendent who presided over everything. Because the black superintendent was reporting to the white superintendent. So I knew who Phillis Wheatley--and that was the school I went from the third to the sixth grade. And probably the, the school I remember the most. Because it was my more formative years. Excuse me. Speaker 1: And your mouth had got (unclear). And you were--. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I was talking about the taping of my mouth by my cousin. I thought I could probably get away with being a little out of line 'cause she wouldn't dare do anything mean to a relative. And she actually taped my mouth. But it's surprising that I had this kind of behavior. Because number one, I was in a speech pathology program at the school, because I stuttered. And number two, in my earlier adolescence, teenage and adult life, I've not been a very outgoing person. And a person who was prone to be giving--doing a lot of talking and, and engaging conversation. So I was surprised at that. That might have been a pattern of mine. I don't know what. Maybe--You know, I always attribute that event to the creation of my introverted nature. Plus I was always good in mathematics. And later on, I excelled in math. And people--a lot of people who are mathematicians are more introverted. So, that--that was an experience. And in the sixth grade, I had this teacher Miss Edna Henderson, who I remember, first of all in the sixth grade, in her class in particular, this is where you learned to sing in harmony, instead of everyone just singing. So we were always looking forward to being in the choir in the sixth grade and singing in harmony instead of just everyone singing the same tone or note. And, and people, you know--one section would be singing something, and another section would be quiet. And then they would join in. You know, that kind of singing before the sixth grade didn't take place. So--and she had a good reputation of directing the choir in school. So we looked forward to that. But the other--two other experiences. A relative of hers lived--and it might have been a sister, lived in the court that I lived in. So she would always come over to visit. The--her, her sister. So my mother [Beatrice Peters Rawlings] got to know her even more. So I had additional pressure to behave 'cause I always would get reported on. But she, she gave me a choice that I will never forget, that changed my life. I was always good in mathematics. And you--you know, we were taking these standardized tests back then. And I took the test, did well in mathematics, did not do so well in the verbal English part. And if I'd done a little better, I would have Ben placed in an honors program in junior high school that would have accelerated. So she kept me after school one day to talk to me. And provided me with this opportunity to take the English test over again. And, and she would, you know, use that grade, and told me what the opportunity was. And she might have wanted me to take it right then and there. Because the conflict was--and it might have been the next day. I was--I knew I was going to the movies. Movies were a big thing. And back there, the movies would have chapters. You had to follow the movie. Because every week there was a different chapter to the story. And you didn't want to miss the chapter. You know, it's like a series on television. And, and we'd all planned to go to the movie the next, the next day. Probably the next day I was gonna take the test. And I said, "I didn't want to miss this, you know, this movie." And she didn't say anything. She said, "The choice was yours. You can take the test with the possibility of going into an acceleration program, accelerated program for so-called gifted intelligent students. Or you go to the movie." So, I think I went back and told her the next day that I was gonna take the test. My grade--grades improved. I went to the accelerated class. Met a whole different kind of students and these were more a middle class in our community, black students, than myself from the projects. And, and I, you know. That certainly changed the course of my life. The school I went to was Booker T. Washington Junior High School, verses a much smaller more limited school, not so far from where I lived. And going to this program, exposed me to much, much more. And also was much more of a challenge. Story_ID: 12059 Speaker 1: What do you think motivated you to make that decision? Did you go home and discuss it or? Speaker 2: I can't remember. I just knew that education was valued in my immediate family, and in the family around me. my relatives were--some of them had gone to college. some were teachers and professional. I mean my, my father [Howard T. Rawlings] was--his brother had gone to college. Another brother had gone to Howard [University]. He never made good on the advantages he had. But--so and we knew that we were like the--in this Rawlings constellation, or family grouping, we were like at the bottom. We were the only ones living in the projects. Most of them had--living in homes. and the--and my mother always stressed the importance of education. And we always were reminded, as many black children were told, that they can't take education away from you. You might lose a lot, but know one can take your brainpower, knowledge or the education that you, that you've acquired. And so it was important for us to achieve, in terms of education. So I mean I knew this. I just knew that I was gonna do this. And, and the teacher expected me to do it. But she didn't pressure me. She left the decision up to me, which was very important to me. I always--If there's one thing I thanked her for, was letting me make that decision. So whatever the outcome was, I was the responsible party. I couldn't blame it on anyone else but myself. And I was appreciative that that I, I mean could--could have made that decision, that decision. Speaker 1: Now you--you're in--. Now you're in Booker T. [Washington Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland], and this is a new experience. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just would like you to describe that a little bit. Speaker 2: Well, the Booker T. experience in middle school didn't have many highlights for me. Except that I was in a class of kids who were better off economically, as black kids were. I mean they were from more middle class like families. They had different, you know experiences. I was a guy from the projects and I was kind of competitive with them, in mathematics, but not in the other subjects. I mean I did well in school. I mean I had Latin, for example. and I was just a normal school experience. I don't remember any one teacher there. Or I remember that the the people who ran the school ran it very strict. Story_ID: 12060 Speaker 1: How did you first know that you had a facility for mathematics? When did that first come about? Speaker 2: Well I--actually in elementary school, I mean I always did well. I always got E's. Mrs. Henderson in the sixth grade-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You mean E for excellent. Speaker 2: "E" for--no, not E for effort. No. No, no, no. I'm sorry, you're right. Yeah, E for excellence. Yeah. I probably got A's in math. Because there was an E for effort that you got also. but, I did very well. And even on that standardized test, the teacher told me, "You did very well in the mathematics. But you did poorly in the verbal part." And I just had this facility. I mean I did well in junior high school in mathematics. I was always, you know, a very thoughtful, logical thinker. I could always follow directions very easily. And I didn't not like mathematics. One of the problems I guess is how I was brought up. There wasn't much reading in my household, except for the newspaper. If there was a disadvantage I had it was that. I mean I wouldn't even read comic books. We would collect comic books; I'd look at the pictures. I don't read the stories. As one of the things that I kind of regret in growing up, I, I--that I wasn't surrounded by more reading opportunities. I mean I went to the--I had a library card, and things like that. But as long as I stayed out of trouble, went to school, and did my work, and caused, you know. there was no bad reports coming back. I was doing okay. But I could have gotten more reading. That's something that I kind of regretted. Speaker 1: Now, so--what--but mathematics, what did it--did you just have a natural facility or what appealed to you about it? Was it just that you liked numbers? Speaker 2: Well I, I like--I mean I could just--I felt comfortable with mathematics. The kind of order and certainty of the results. And, the the things that I really liked was when I got into the first geometry class. That's when I knew I had a skill. Because a geometry required a kind of reasoning that just adding numbers and so forth, and remembering your multiplications tables and things like that. you couldn't apply here. And I was good in geometry. I could--and I liked the challenge and the reasoning. And I could see things. The relationships between the various parts that would make up a theorem and a solution. I was good at it, and did, did well, and enjoyed it. I mean it was something I was successful in. and I was struggling in English. I mean I was not a good English student. In fact, I almost didn't graduate. Because in the 12th grade, when I went to Frederick Douglass High School, I had to do a term paper in the 12th grade, That I never got in 'cause I was just--I mean I have a writing block. Later on I, I think--because my son had the same problem, when he was about to graduate from Polytechnic High School in Baltimore [Maryland]. I found out that he had some form of dyslexia, that I probably had. And , just worked through in my life. I remember the teacher telling me "You better get this paper to my house over the Christmas holidays." This was a period where we had February graduations. I started school and would have graduated in February. Now they have no February graduations, but I remember going way out to her house on the bus taking a paper to her that I'm sure my mother helped me with. But, I think so fast, I don't code well and write. My son who's brilliant quantitatively has the same. And my spelling is atrocious. So, but I did enough to survive. And when I went to Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland], I finished freshman English at the end of my sophomore year. Story_ID: 12061 Speaker 1: One other question about that [Frederick Douglass] high school period. What--what was--what one--what was the young Howard Peters Rawlings like? You know, what was sort of forming you? Speaker 2: Now that's a good question. Speaker 1: What was your--? Speaker 2: I, I don't know. I mean I didn't--I played a lot of sports in my neighborhood, basketball, football, volunteer football team. I was a--We had a very--a lot of men in my life. I mean I was a scout. I was even a sea explorer. We had uniforms. We'd go to meetings. we'd learn skills, we'd take trips. So I mean I had--I remember one of the saddest moments in my life was when my Cub Scout leader died. A Mr. Washington. I still remember his name. he lived in the projects. and we, we always were doing things. I mean I--I was bad enough to steal stuff like some of my colleagues. You know we would steal little things. You know part of the challenge was stealing candy or something in a store. We had a big bakery close by, a group of us would go, climb the roof, send one of the men. They'd go get boxes of doughnuts and we'd, you know. I remember doing it. But I was--I would never take the high-risk type of exploits that would get you in trouble. I was a--I would do, the kind of clear certainty escapades that wouldn't get me into to much trouble. I do remember as a kid--It was the dumbest damn thing I could have done. We would also try to sneak into the movies. And before the movies opened, they would clean it out. And they would air it out. So at the back, they would leave the door open. and the, the front of the movie, which was the back of the theater--they'd leave the door open. And light would be coming in. So we decided we were gonna go around to the back and stand up against the hallway in what we felt was the dark, until the movie opened. And not being aware, or not being smart enough to know that we were a nice beautiful silhouette there because the light was behind us. And someone up in the front of the theater saw these kids. And they came around the back, got us, walked us through the theater, called the police. Scared the, you know. Scared the stew beans out of us. and they told us, you know, if we ever catch you again, police--we're gonna have you, you know, put away. I, I'd never done anything like that again. So I mean the guys, you know, the police actually let me, let me go. And these were White police. I mean the police in my community were all white at that time. Speaker 1: Now what, what--what were li--I mean did you have any dreams or aspirations? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did you think of yourself as doing (unclear)? Speaker 2: No. I, I mean I was just such a plain ordinary person. Seriously, I, I didn't belong to any clubs. When I was in high school, I didn't join any groups. I went to school and went home. When I went to college couldn't get into Johns Hopkins [Univeristy] 'cause I wasn't smart enough. Couldn't get into Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--Drexler. Wanted to go to [Baltimore] Polytechnic Institute [Baltimore, Maryland], 'cause I was interested in being a mechanical engineer. By the way, my son is a mechanical engineer. He graduated from North Carolina A&T [University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. But--and by the way, the president of Renssalaer [Polytechnic Institute, troy, New York] is a black woman [Dr. Shirley Ann Jackson]. The first black woman. A very extraordinary woman who I met recently at the black engineers award of the year. And she got the award. The first woman to also get that award in this program. This award ceremony has been around for ten years. But , I mean I was ordinary. At Morgan, the only clubs I belonged to were the Honor Society Clubs. Speaker 1: But, but see--. Okay. You're, you're conflicting yourself about it. Speaker 2: No. I didn't belong to anything. Speaker 1: No, I'm not talking about belonging to any thing. But-- Speaker 2: I was just going along, you know. Speaker 1: You desired to be--you said you desired to be a mechanical engineer. I mean where did that Speaker 2: Well, what happened was--I mean I knew I was good at mathematics. And so I'd think of being a mathematician, and I wanted to make money. So I figured a mechanical engineer. So I went to Morgan. with the idea of becoming a mechanical engineer. Story_ID: 12062 Speaker 1: At Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland], I ran upon probably the most singular person who influenced my life. Dr. Clarence Stephens. In fact, my daughter Stephanie [Rawlings Blake] who is the vice president of the [Baltimore, Maryland] city council, Stephanie is named after him. Stephen---Stephanie. when she was--she was born on my birthday. And--I mean his influence--I mean he took a person who graduated from [Frederick] Douglass High School, lived in the projects, and made me aware that I was extraordinarily talented as a mathematician, and could do things. And--see I thought I was gonna go to Morgan for two years and then go to [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] in their engineering program because they had that kind of relationship. And it's always amusing 'cause a lot of black and white schools have this kind of relationship. The white schools promote it. But there had only been one student who had actually done it. during my period there. But--so I you know. I went to Morgan. I tested well, because of my math skills. They put us in a group of students in the C track, but today would be called an honors program. And they put us all together. And we took mathematics, mathematical analysis. And as freshmen, Dr. Stephens was gonna introduce us to calculus skills which was unheard of in a black school. That freshmen would come in and be doing calculus type work. So I had done so well in my first semester, that he convinced me to audit. Not to get a grade, but to audit a real calculus class. Which would have been--And, and at Morgan, calculus students were mainly juniors and seniors. And--'cause he wanted to change the culture and the environment. So that also meant that I had to give up chemistry. Which I was taking and doing well in 'cause to order this math--this calculus class in my second semester as a freshmen--and so I took the class. And I was doing great. I mean it was an experience. I mean I could se things. Things made sense. And I would answer questions that the others seniors and juniors weren't. I'm trying to figure out, "Why can't they see this?" and I started going to the board to do the hard problems. And that's where I later on met my wife. and we always argued 'cause I took the regular calculus in my sophomore year, after this experience at auditing. And I aced the class. I mean I set the curve so high. She got an A and I was always criticizing her A. It's not the same A because I had set the standard so high. But she was, you know--she'd go to the board. I mean she was much thinner. And I used to like watching her from the back. And you know, she was kind of cute. and we became friends. And I'd, you know, after my sophomore year, during the summer, I, you know, asked her to go out and play tennis. She played tennis. And I was much smaller than I am now. But, this, this person made me believe that I had extraordinary skills. And he exposed me to a program that he had created, that was at a level that very few historically black colleges had in the mathematics. and he had a vision. Because he--the fact that I was taking calculus as a freshmen was the talk of the campus. "There's a freshman who came from, you know, [Frederick] Douglass High School who's taking calculus with the juniors and the seniors, 'cause people would wait that long before. They, they'd take college algebra, college trigonometry, analytical geometry. And by the time they were seniors or juniors they'd be ready to take calculus one. And most schools, you know--kids would leave high school having had calculus, or having had all the prerequisites so that they could go. And he was trying to build his program up to that level. And when I was a senior and I was not good at language skills. We were reading a French book on set theory, and Landau, a German book on numerical analysis. We were actually reading and doing problems and work. We had a--called a conference course. So here I was a senior at Morgan in the Honors Program, a department of Honors Scholar, reading from a French textbook. I did take French in high school. had very--I had taken one semester of , German and that's all. But we--I was learning from a German textbook and doing problems. Because to get a PhD, you have to pass I think one or two language--foreign languages tests at that time. So it was part of his training to get us ready for it. And, when, when I finished the program, and had taken the graduate record exam, I was offered admission at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin]. Again it was another point where I had to make a decision. But he was a little more helpful. At MIT, I had a research assistantship. So I had to work. And MIT said, "You brought a background that was deficient, despite all the things I had taken." I had advanced calculus, Patagonian statistics, differential equations abstract algebra, all these. And , they said I had to take their upper level under graduate courses before I could earn graduate credit! Well, Clarence Stephens, Dr. Stephens had this vision and this goal that one of his students would graduate from Morgan and go right into graduate school, and finish their Master's degree in one year. And Wisconsin offered me a teaching assistanceship. But I could go right into their graduate program. And I could finish their graduate program in nine months and take an oral examination for a masters. In fact, shortly after I did that, they changed the plan, by the way. And I got a master's degree in nine months, which is unheard of. And began work on my PhD. Story_ID: 12063 Speaker 1: How was that experience at [Univeristy of] Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin]? (Unclear) right? Speaker 2: It was the first time I went really away from home. Yeah. Speaker 1: Away from home. Speaker 2: I mean 'cause I didn't have a car. I mean to me a trip to Washington D.C. was, you know, the most exciting experience of my life 'cause all of my upbringing was in Baltimore [Maryland] and focused around the projects where I lived. And, it was just, you know, a very good experience for me. Wisconsin had a reputation of being a very liberal environment. I met some black people out there. Plus there was a student from Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland] who's still my friend today who was there. Who when I was a student at Morgan, Sylvester Reese. So I had someone I could, could relate to. It was the first time, you know, I had to live by myself. And arrange, you know, for my own money and eating and living conditions and everything. It was a good experience. Speaker 1: And then you headed back. You were still on track though right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on track. I'd got my master's, won a Whitney Opportunity Fello--John--Hmm. It was a Whitney fellowship to study for my PhD at Wisconsin. And I had done pretty, pretty well. Story_ID: 12064 Speaker 1: After I got my master's degree, or when I was moving towards it--See my relationship with Nina, my wife--I mean she--I was a shy person. I was not very manly aggressive. And I was, I would take her out. But, you know, never kissed her or--I was just in awe. I mean I tell it now. I mean I remember going--she lived on the East side. And there's this division in Baltimore [Maryland]. The East side are the ruffians, the West side is a more cultured aspect of the black community. And I always teased her about that. And I always remembered when I'd catch the bus to go over there and I'd walk up to the block and then I'd make a right turn on to her street. And her house was probably about ten or 15 feet away from where--I remember always turning the corner and my heart would be bouncing just at the thought of seeing--I mean I was just crazy about that woman. And--but usually women didn't like men who put 'em up on pedestals. And , that's where I had her. And she was so far up, I wouldn't dare touch her. I just looked at her. And, but she knew I was crazy about her. And she wrote me a letter while I was finishing up my master's. I mean I was moving along. And I was just surprised. I mean we did date. We'd go out, we'd go to the movies some times and play tennis, and to the park. I would stop by to visit her. And, so--I mean I'd liked her and she knew, knew that. But it was not a committed relationship. She had gone on to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] 'cause she wanted to be a physician. And she wrote me this letter 'cause she was essentially out of my life. I said, "Oh! Why is she writing me?" It was kind of curious 'cause she was asking for information. But she didn't really need me for this information. And I remembered 'cause I wasn't a good writer. And I would-- I, I had to respond. I had to strategically respond. It was a letter that took me two or three days to write. Probably a one-page letter took me two or three days. Even had my friend Sylvester Reese look at it and critique it for me. And so when I graduated and came back home, we did hook up. And, I remember a group of us from Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland] at some party at someone's house, you know, just socializing. And I saw this man giving her too much attention. And, I remember getting a little jealous and angry about that. You know how women do. You know, they take all that and be grinning and smiling, getting all this attention. And I'm up here. I said, "Oh God! I might lose her." And I remember to take her back home we di--we had a cab. And I remember kissing her for the first time. Actually grabbing her and being manly. Grabbing her and kissing her in the mouth. That was wonderful. And I wind up-- And so we dated. Our relationship changed afterward. and--And I was teasing her because I'd just gotten my master's degree, and--which was an important accomplishment for me. And I was much more marketable as a single black male to women in my community. And I was taking advantage of that marketability. But, you know, she kind of cramped my style. Because my feelings were for her. And we really got very serious. So I went back to Wisconsin to start work on my PhD, which I never finished. I mean I'm an ABD, all but dissertation. That's another long story. But, I went back to Wisconsin. Began to work on my PhD, and was doing very well. I mean I remember in one class, a large class in very advanced mathematics, the teacher gave a major test. Of about 30-something people in the class, I got the second highest mark. I mean I was, I was good. And I mean he was impressed. Story_ID: 12065 Speaker 1: I mean I had done very well. And I was back in the first semester after I had gotten my master's degree at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin]. And at that time, you know I was really in love with this woman [Nina]. And I think it was reciprocated. And , had she come--I mean she--She was from a--I mean I'm a very family focused person. And one of my main ambitions as a black man , and as a human being, was I'm gonna leave my community better off than I, I had it myself. So I wanted--I wanted to raise her family--I wanted to raise children and I want those children to be gifts tothe African American Community and the general publicper say. And she was from a large family, about ten brothers and sisters, father and mother. Mother a very bright smart woman didn't finish Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland] but went to Morgan, father a hard working man who, you know was fun loving. And there was clearly a strong family structure. Their church was right up the street from them. And she was a very decent person in terms of her value system. And so here this summer that I told you I first kissed her I guess I was about 22, I'm you know I'm a late bloomer, and I was , you know--we were having a great summer. We would go out a lot. We'd do a lot of petting and necking in her house on the sof, it was just fun. I mean I decided to have this woman. So I went back to the University of Wisconsin andI was gonna surprise her by coming home on Thanksgiving. Because some of my colleagues had, had gotten a Hurst and they were gonna drive from Wisconsin to New York or New Jersey. So I was gonna go to New Jersey, catch a train or bus and come down to Baltimore and go to her house and knock, knock on the door and surprise her. Now this you know this is a naïve thing that men have. They just think the woman is sitting there and waiting for them. They're just there at home, you know just waiting you know. She didn't know I was coming home but they were just doing their normal life. I think she was working, over at NIH, National Institutes of Health, because she was interested in that, that area and also interested in becoming a , going to medical school becoming a physician. So I just mosey in--you know to their house and I see her best girlfriend. They're all dressed up. And I said, "What's going on?" Well, they were going to a dance and my--and her best girlfriend who I know because there's a relationship in our family was gonna take her there and introduce her to some, some man. I was pissed. And I, I don't know how we resolved it because she's supposed to be my woman? And, and she's going out you know to a dance and there was a, you know there's another person, another man there? I'm glad I didn't walk in the house and he was there. But , I think, I can't remember whether she decided not to go or not, but I know I proposed over that weekend to marry her. I didn't want to be having this kind of experience again. And we got married a year later on the Thanksgiving weekend. Story_ID: 12066 Speaker 1: Also I transferred from [University of] Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] to [Univeristy of] Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. That's where I began my second semester of my doctoral pursuits at the University of Maryland. Got a--got all A's in every math class I took except one B. And I think I got that B the semester I got married. And I attributed that to--but did very well. In fact one of my teachers was a young mathematician who later on we became good friends. And he was Brent Kerwin who was the president of College Park after John Slaughter who is African American, first African American I can ever remember running a major predominantly white university. Brent Kerwin had been my math teacher. So while I'm in politics, you know, and then becoming, chairman of the Appropriations Committee--we had a very good relationship. He, he later left and went to Ohio State where he's president there. But I had a very good year. I mean took my oral examination, my written examination, took my French exam. Never got around to the German. But, I was working on my dissertation because I had done everything , had done all the course work, the orals and written. And, and my advisor was a retiree who came from Harvard [University] back to Maryland where he lived. And you know. And he was, he was like the grandfather of interpolation and approximation in, in the world. I mean the lot of the best scholars in that field were taught by him. So I was his--he was my advisor. And he, he, he gave me a problem and conceptually I had solved the problem. And I remember being in his office writing the solution on the board. So it was my thing to write it up, to make it a long dissertation. But you know once you have an idea and, and you--its just a matter of filling in the blanks. At the same time, I took a job at the University of Maryland-Baltimore County and I took the job there because Stephens had left Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland]. I wanted to go back to Morgan. He had left Morgan in some kind of dispute with the president there who was disturbed that we had so many math majors. I mean math became the most popular subject at Morgan because people were doing well. It was a high quality program. People were getting jobs. And they hired a new person and that person didn't have the same values of, of high expectation of black students. Because he had come from and environment , where the level of expectation-- expectations were here we had been operating up at this level. And we couldn't get him up there. And I was frustrated so I left and I went to UMBC and at UMBC, I was in the thesis-writing period. But I went there and here was this big university outside of Baltimore City and no black students. Because I got hired during the summer. So I assumed that they had a lot of black students so I could at least fill my need of educating a significant minority presence and playing a roll in their lives. I ended up organizing with another colleague who was hired as a counselor a UMBC black faculty--black caucus with faculty and staff. Because the, the injustices were so clear we to give you an example the bus from Baltimore City went about a mile away from the campus (chuckle) so no black students were--unless you had a car were ever gonna get to the campus. We changed that. It was just unbelievable. (2) They weren't even recruiting in Baltimore City Public Schools. They were all--they were doing it in the county. We changed that. And we only changed all these things when we organized the caucus to , bring about these changes. I became so effective as a leader because I mean my thought process was different than most folks in terms of accomplishing things. And at the same time I went--they hired this black woman Dr. Delores Hunt and extraordinary woman. She had retired from the Baltimore City Public Schools. She was an activist, a professional , she worked hard to get black teachers and black principals equal treatment in the segregated school system. She had worked hard for resources. And she kind of mentored me during this process. Always making me aware that you, know you make steps, you make progress and steps that are a half a loaf sometimes is important if you can't get the whole loaf. And it was such a good mentoring experience for me. A person that never led anything but was, who was so outraged about the conditions. We organized the UMBC black caucus, black faculty and staff, we, we had so many achievements in terms of minority recruitmentthe African American Studies program. We created the division of Full Independent Program. We went and organized every campus of the university system. And I was the co-chairman, later the chairman. And we changed fundamentally higher education in Maryland. And that's how come, Jean Fairfax of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund came to know me and my work. And, and that's how come I started doing consulting workhelping to organize and working with black groups throughout the south, Mississippi, Arkansas, Oklahoma and North Carolina. Speaker 2: What period are we in right now? Speaker 1: We're in the 7--early 70's [1970s]. Speaker 2: Early 70's [1970s]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 12067 Speaker 1: Baltimore [Maryland] had changed in some respects too, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you talk about those changes that have occurred? Speaker 2: Well in, in Baltimore--let me give you some sense where I mean. At that time I was not an involved political person. My, my--the day that--a day or so after [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated, my wife and I had tickets. We were subscribers to the plays and the musicals at the Morris [A.] Mechanic theater in Baltimore which is the prime location for such events. And some cities actually burning and looting was taking place, I told my wife Baltimore is just so Southern and conservative. They don't have the rage to respond to this event. And I remember about halfway through the musical, the--they put their lights on and management came on the stage and said that we were advising everyone to, to go home and to leave because there were problems in the city. So to some extent I was happy that there were problems. That you know blacks showed some rage aboutwhat had taken place. And, we were also , electing organizing more politically in terms of citywide elections like judges. Parren Mitchell had lost the first time he ran for Congress and was running again. So there was a lot of intense political and community activity during that late '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 12068 Speaker 1: I didn't get involved [in Baltimore, Maryland politics] until the early 70's [1970s] because of my work as the chairman of the black coalition of the University of Maryland campuses. Speaker 2: And so that position you got hired into and that caused maybe you becoming more active. Was it especially-- Speaker 1: Well I didn't get hired into becoming--I got hired to teach Mathematics at UMBC [Univeristy of Maryland-Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland] Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: See I was hired to teach Mathematics. Yeah. I was working on my dissertation. UMBC was newly created--it had been in existence about three years or more. And -- Speaker 2: And you're thinking you were hired to teach--you thought you were gonna be hired to teach black s--or there-- Speaker 1: That's--yeah, black students on, on the campus. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So I would feel comfortable in, leaving Morgan where I had these, philosophical diff--differences with the chairman. And his very--his lowered expectations of black achievement in Mathematics. I mean I worked for a ma--I remember I was giving this teaching--I think in advanced calculus class. And I was giving assignments to the students that I expected them to do. I mean we had talked about them. We had given examples. We had debated about it in the classroom. Some students would go down to the chairman's office, show them the pro--show him the problems. He'd be embarrassed because he can't work them. And the--so he started racheting down the honors program that we had created because we, we had this success, we had these expectations but--so he started questioning them. I couldn't stay in that environment. So I left and went to U.M.B.C. thinking--went back to do you know, work on my dissertation becauseI wanted to finish. I, I got N.S.F. Grants down there and, senior graduate subsidies and was working on my dissertation when U.M.B.C. offered me a job in both their Mathematics and Education Departments. They wanted to have a--you know black presence and so I came out there. And then when I got there and saw that the school was essentially the (unclear). The, the--it was just against everything that I believe in. I mean as I pointed out, they weren't recruiting in Baltimore City Public Schools. The mass transit administration, the but never went up to the campus from Baltimore City. This clearly an effort to limit the presence of city school students and particularly black students from the campus. There was no , expression of the African American culture in history present on the campus. So--and there was no focus admission or recruitment practices. And that's when while I was teaching, we also organized the U.M.B.C. Black Caucus or faculty and staff which I organized with a friend of mine and we were both co-chairman. He was a staff person and I was a faculty person. Speaker 2: And so were you successful at recruiting people or was the university-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. We, we--at one point because--I mean we had proposals--I mean I was the kind of person who was very methodical. Who would try to understand the lay of the land, understandthe values of the people I'm dealing with, what their--you know what things frighten them and what things didn't. And we were very successful. We created a full-blown African American Studies division. We created an office of minority recruitment,we were so good at one time the campus had over 20 percent of their students were African American. They cut--they--and they literally cut the program to pieces. I mean they stoppedrecruiting. It went down into the teens. But still they, they have a high presence there. Speaker 2: So how, how many years were you there? And your-- Speaker 1: I came there in '69 [1969] , got fired in '73 [1973]. Speaker 2: Fired? Speaker 1: Yeah. I was fired in '73 [1973] and-- Speaker 2: What was it for? Speaker 1: Well they say I had never gotten my dissertation. And my, my--my response was, well you were in such bad shape, I couldn't never in good conscience focus on my dissertation. Because of all these problems, plus (2) you had faculty members with much less training and credentialing than I did, do. And they're still teaching. I mean why are you getting rid of me? So, they extended my contract for a year as a result of pressure from the firing and, and that was it. I took them--I sued them and lost, I mean, I mean--I think we made a very good case against you know the university. Speaker 2: Was that a down point for you? Speaker 1: Well it was kind of down because there were a lot of things that took, took place. A lot of blacks , that I had helped on the campus turned against me. The president was gonna offer me a position in his administration as an affirmative action officer helping to, to the things that I, I had already done outside of my role. And a group of the blacks went to the president and spoke against that appointment. I don't know how that was orchestrated but I mean its, it's the kind of crab barrel mentality that I've experienced often. When you are black of higher achievement and success, I mean most of these guys and some of the women--I had gotten them. I had help create jobs for them. And that--and it was only because a black judge stepped in very aggressively, letting them know that , they just can't do this that they extended my contract for a year. And because I was such a known person in the community, I tried to get work at the black colleges. We have two, Morgan and Coppin [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. None of them would hire me. We also have Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] I mean my, my reputation in this state was at a level of being a very aggressive black man who did not fear people and who advocated for black interests. And I couldn't even get a job at black colleges. Story_ID: 12069 Speaker 1: What do you do at this point? Speaker 2: Well at this point, we had our first black superintendent in the Baltimore City Public Schools Roland Patterson, he knew of my leadership. He knew of my work and he offered me a job, but he could only offer me a job for two weeks in September when the schools opened again. Otherwise he would have to go bring the consulting work contract to the board. So I had a job for two weeks and then one of the schools, Wallbrook High School which is on a trimester system. They needed a math teacher so I taught high school for two years. During that same period after I left the university, because of my work in higher education, addressing black issues, opportunity access, retention, graduation, minority business activities, a group of community leaders asked me to chair , the Maryland Community Health Council. It was a group--it was during a period when [Gerald] Ford was [US] President and health planning was becoming very big in the country. Where you're supposed to involve the community and the public in the planning process. And that would help reduce the cost of,of health care. And there were these systems created in states called, I forgot what they're called. Oh boy I can't remember the name. But these health care systems were created these planning groups, with boards and meetings, and, agenda, and staff. And they asked me to take over the leadership which I did. And we were--we were pretty effective. ,We one of our targets was Jo--Johns Hopkins Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland] that we had a fundamental impact on the president at Hopkins at that time Heissel,every time I see him, he jokes that he made me, a delegate. He said, "Because of the work I was doing there and the advocacy helped raised my profile and created a, a, environment for me to pursue politics." I actually pursued politics because I found out that a lot of things I wanted to dohad their solutions in (unclear) in state government. Oh these systems were called Health Systems Agencies that they were created during--eve--every jurisdiction had a health system agency and that was a statewide planning group that they were all connected to. And we wanted to make sure that the minority agenda in healthwas aon the front burner when they were dealing with these planning issues. , That was pretty we were pretty effective. Speaker 1: And who hired you to do that? Speaker 2: Now I wasn't hired. This all-- Speaker 1: You were--that was volunteer? Speaker 2: All this was volunteer. all these, all these activities-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That you're hearing about--the only time I was hired was by the Labor defense Fund. And that was mainly a--I mean , relative--it was not you know real pay with some consulting. Very limited consulting fee. Speaker 1: But you were teaching high school though? Speaker 2: I was teaching high school when I was dealing with the health issues. Speaker 1: Okay. That's right. Speaker 2: On, on the higher education, I was teaching, I was a faculty member at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. But no I was--these were all volunteer--I was spending my money for stampswhen we had to mail stuff, reproducing s--you know. And I said, "Hell I ought to run foryou know for the House of Delegates. They'll pay you for this. And they will pay for your stamps. And, and you could have impact on the system that could solve some of these problems." And I also knew that the people who representing me weren't doing a good job. I was not pleased with how they responded to these issues. I was not pleased at their aggressive--you know their lack of advocacy for these issues. And so I decided to run. I had a reputation by then also. Story_ID: 12070 Speaker 1: You decided to run. Now what year was this? Speaker 2: 1978. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) 1978. Speaker 2: I decided to run. Speaker 1: So that's like--is that--how many years after you know, you've been fired from your University of Maryland? Speaker 2: I was fired from the university in '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Sevety-four '74 [1974]. So that's what I thought (unclear) Speaker 2: But see I spent some period of time advocacy in the health arena. Speaker 1: Right. During that time period? Speaker 2: Yeah. During that time period. Speaker 1: And so how did the--so is this the decision that you came up with or is it a decision thatyou know people approached you about? Speaker 2: I, I, I think its safe to say that I came up with it. I mean it was, it was very clear. I mean a lot of my involvement were with state legislators, , appearing before state legislative committees. writing the governor or writing doing--I mean I--because of my advocacy in the, higher education arena, where we were challenging the state's desegregation plan that the office of civil rights required compliance with. I mean I got to participate in, in, in this issue when Parren Mitchell formed this community group, I chaired the higher education component of that , group that had forums on a regular basis to talk about these issues. So I, I was very visible, very active. And what was important to me, I achi--I had achieved successes. I mean one of the most important success was a major policy development at the University of Maryland Professional School's campus. ,Where nowadays we're number one in the country in terms of first professionals the number of blacks who graduate from the law school, the dental school, the medical school, school of social work and the school of nursing. That was in last year's July Issue of the, 'Black Issues in Higher Education'. Story_ID: 12071 Speaker 1: I ran with senator Verda Welcome, the first black woman to be elected to a state senate in the country I believe. And she brought me in on her ticket and she even did something special for me because we had--there were three delegates run--three people running for delegates, one of them an incumbent. And she did a special mailing for me near the end of the primary election. She told me--I had started late. The other one was a reverend who had been campaigning months before I even started. And to give me some kind of advantage. she did a special mailing. Which they resented but I guess it was a statement on her part that she knew that we needed you know the kind of, of presence I would have brought to the general assembly. And I won by, maybe about 115, 120 votes. And the person who was a part of our ticket did a recount and I, and maybe it had gone up to about 150 votes but I, I won. I came in third. Speaker 2: So how did you feel at that time? Because this is a whole--this is a different role now. It's about-- Speaker 1: Well I mean I saw this as a vehicle to continue a agenda that I was on--I mean I was pleased. We had worked hard, we were involved--we had involved in my campaign a lot of people, you know, hadn't been involved in politics before. so I, I--you know I was very, very plea--in fact my first fundraiser was a dinner and Jean Fairfax was the keynote speaker, for me. And I have a picture somewhere that my daughter Stephanie--after the program was over, she had gone to the podium and she was up at the podium like this was her, day of be, you know showing off. And she would go out campaigning with me. She must have been around eight or nine years old then and she enjoyed it. when I would have events and she wouldn't shy away. She became immersed in them. She would engage adults in conversation I mean at a young age. She knew how to do the chitter chatter stuff the light conversation which I was not good at. and she would walk up to people shake their hands and introduced herself. By the time she was a young teenager, she was so good at it, I would have her introduce me on stage, and then I would, you know, speak after she would introduce me. It was very clear that she, she liked this environment and she was good at it. And she would work hard during the campaigns. And when she went to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], she majored in governmental politics and economics. And ran for the state central committee which is the Democratic Party. You know, the parties have these state central committees, and she came in second and got so many votes, it was amazing. Then she ran again and got more votes than anybody. And her name--there were about fifteen or sixteen people running. Her name was stuck in the pile somewhere and you had to go find her. And you select the top five candidate and she did--I think she did so extraordinarily well both times, that she felt that she could run. so after she finished law school she passed up the bar in July and decided to take it in February which she passed on the first go round. But she ran for office and won big time. Speaker 2: So you have its, it--you almost have a dynasty here. Speaker 1: Well I wouldn't call it a dynasty. Speaker 2: (laughing) Speaker 1: She, she's good. Speaker 2: She's good. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I want to go back. So you're here you are, you've, you've been elected this--and it was very much a family affair in many ways. Speaker 1: Well yeah a lot of my family and, and some friends who, and people I had worked with in doing my advocacy. Speaker 2: And so what was that whole experience like? You, you went on--your background was strong in the human--I mean I'm sorry in the health arena. Speaker 1: Well, health and higher education. Speaker 2: Education. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And and so what is--so that was the platform you really sort of campaigned on. Speaker 1: Well you-- Speaker 2: Sort of? Speaker 1: You, you really would have liked to believe that there were a lot of issues, that people discussed. the important thing for us is that we knocked on every--almost every door in our district. And they needed to know that I was an advocate, that I provided leadership in these areas for our community. They needed to know that I was a Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland] graduate, that I was well educated. And they needed to know that I was part of their community. There, there weren't issues per se. I mean the system doesn't work in our, for our advantage. And they knew that I was a person who would stand up for their interest. They've seen me do it as an advocate, and they've seen retaliation against me and it didn't keep me down so, I just made sure they knew who I was. And my wife, is a pediatrician and she worked in a clinic that served a lot of families in part of my, my district. And the Rawlings family name had been around the, the city for some time. So all of that accumulative may help. Because, I made a decision to run at a period that most people would think is late. I had my first fundraiser in June I think, near June. The deadline for filing is July. Most people out there, you know, engage in, in political activities. And I'm not a speaker. I mean I'm not a person who likes, I'm very you know just I don't give speeches well. I mean I'm I just talk about things that I have to talk about. And you almost like mathematical theorems. You know start off here and you know with the hypotheses. Then you site all these related theorems or truths and you go, you know you go down this path to a conclusion. And that's how I deal, I, I don't--I'm not an emotional, politician. I, I speak very clearly about you know, you know problems that we have. And I think people know that committed to changing, the, the relationships that exist. Speaker 2: Now you what is interesting about this is that typically you come from a whole different background that a lot of, you know, politicians. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean you definitely came from an advocacy standpoint but even your whole discussion right now about how you approach and all that a lot of people-- Speaker 1: Oh, it is different. I mean I--it, it, its an asset and it's a, a problem. It's a weakness for many--I mean I've met with, watch and observe, interacted with a lot of black politicians, all over the country. And we, we have such extraordinary power that, that we don't use it. I don't, and, and--I don't know. I, I'd like to solve problems. I like to focus on them. I, I like to strategize and deal them. I'm, I'm not gonna spend a lot of time preaching on a problem, whipping you up emotionally about it and having you leave feeling good and then the problem is still there when you wake up in the morning. I just believe--I, I just like a certain level of honesty that I don't think exists. and I think a lot of our leaders take advantage of, of that behavior and mislead our, community. Speaker 2: Now so this is this, this is interesting. You start out really as a rookie though you've got a, you know a some one who is (unclear) this, this person. The wa-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Well she, she, Verda Welcome is a clubwoman. She--husband is a doctor. Very, very middle class. She came out of a group of women, you know. These clubs, you know they meet in their basements, they have prepared nice food and, you now they contribute to the hosp--the black hospital, Providence, you know they give scholarship balls. she's a--and she was a woman who I knew had integrity. she was committed to do these things, to improve our community, but she, she was always right on the issues. But she was in an environment where she was the only woman. She was disrespected by a lot of white men, because she was a woman, first. And the system in, in this state which much--was much cruder. And, and she kind of--and, and the blacks before me I will acknowledge created an environment which a guy like me could work better. in, in terms of opportunity, in terms of sitting at the table when decisions are made. And when I sit at the table, I, I am mindful of the sacrifices--And I am also mindful of the kind of character. I mean, she was a person with a great deal of integrity. a person who, was always impeccably dressed. she, she treated people with respect. and she would plead her case, to, to folks. probably, I mean I don't take insults from anybody. I mean I don't allow people to disrespect me. I, when, when you, you know. When there's any evidence that you are not treating me as a, a person, in the authority that I worked hard to get, I let you know in a minute. I mean I'll never forget. I also have a light sense of humor or wit when I run my committee as chairman of the house appropriations committee. Kind of irreverent sometimes. And I had this white guy from Montgomery County, who I kind of put in his place, you know kind of lightly put him in his place. He probably didn't like, the fact that I had done that. And, and so he wanted to meet with me. And he comes into my office, we sit down and he told me he, he just didn't like the way, that I ran the committee. And I asked him why. And--you know he talked around the point. So I looked him in his eye, I said, "Look. Why don't you just tell me you just can't stand this big, big black man running the Appropriations Committee. And then we can move on from there. And that you gonna have to get you know." I said I, I even promised I'll try to be more sensitive to your feeling but you're gonna have to get adjusted to the fact that I'm gonna run this committee." And we've been kind of friends. We've gotten along better since then. In fact about two or three weeks ago, he wanted to give a cocktail reception in his Montgomery County [Maryland] District with a lot of high rollers, you know. They, they were one of the wealthiest counties in the United States of America. You know so I can introdu--he can introduce me to some of his friends and colleagues in Montgomery County. But you know I tolerate no disrespect. Story_ID: 12072 Speaker 1: How did you get to that point where you were actually chairing [the Maryland House of Delegates Appropriations Committee] the, the because that's not something that just sort of happens. Speaker 2: Well it, it evolved, I, I worked hard as a, member of the committee. I knew the issues. I read the bills. I asked questions, and by that time, because blacks are a large portion of the state population, one--the speaker at that time wanted to be popular in our community. Because he wanted to be governor. And I got appointed to chair a subcommittee at the end of my first year which is a big achievement. the, the other problem is I was ready to ch--I had worked hard. I, and that's something a lot of my colleagues black and white aren't really to sacrifice and work hard and, make the--you know, put in the time. And also I understand the game in, in the Committee Room, and in the rooms, and in the venues that we discuss and, and debate, I'm fierce about what I, what my positions are. I say to make a decision, I don't stand up on the floor and blast the chairman or, or castrate, try to castrate this delegate, because of something he said in the meeting. You know I just bide my time. You know I make it clear I--you know I also kind of put them in a position of where they have to deal with my issues. Like I sponsored successfully the third divestiture bill in the country, the first from any Southern state and we had a bill, that only passed because of the Sullivan Principal, which I hated. We wanted them to divest of all companies but we, we had a very, comprehensive bill tied to the Sullivan Principal of having our pension system divest funds from companies that were doing business in South Africa. And that bill stayed on the books for about five, five years or more. I mean I put those kinds of issues, racial profiling last year, we had probably the most comprehensive, bill in the country. Only two other states had passed it. It was passed overwhelmingly out of the, House of Delegates with a few votes. Maybe about twelve votes against it. and the blacks over--the black senators over the senate killed the bill. Because they were mad at me because I believe in holding black institutions accountable for performance. They said, "Well since you're the sponsor of this bill, we're gonna kill it." And I was just outrageous. this year the governor is the, is, its his bill. It's the administration bill because the governor's a safe bill. The governor is kind of clever. The weekend we had the national NAACP meeting here in Baltimore City. That weekend before they--while they were coming in, he announced way before the session starts that one of his priorities was gonna be passing the racial profiling bill. Which was the same bill that I passed overwhelmingly out of the house and got killed by my brothers and sisters over in the senate. That was just a travesty and people were just outraged about it. I mean here this is a major national problem. We would have helped to set a national, model and, and, and give impetus to the national effort, and other people since then several states have copied our bill, and have passed their, their legislature I believe since then. But I mean I, you know I pushed my agenda I mean on business, minority business development. I mean they, they couldn't build the [Baltimore] Ravens stadium or the stadium at Camden Yards without strong African American participation. We told them you're not gonna get our votes. And I, you know, they needed every vote they could get to build the stadium. That we were gonna lock up around 18 or 20 votes. And they all stick together--stuck together with me and, and we, we did, you know, pre--pretty well. We did the same thing when the governor wanted to do a tobacco tax increase and we tried to get increased money for, drug treatment. We were successful in negotiating that with the governor because I got about 26 black legislators to sign a letter to the governor saying we're not gonna support it unless we get drug treatment. And that kind of advocacy and process that I used in my work as a political leader. Story_ID: 12073 Speaker 1: In terms of, of, your leadership and what you, you've had what you, you've had 20--23 years? Speaker 2: I'm into my 23rd year. Speaker 1: Yeah. And you have a career that you would say--that you feel very proud about. Speaker 2: I do. I do. Speaker 1: And I would say then the things--talk some about--you've talked already some but are there other things that you're particularly proud of? I know education has been a big-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well one of the things that I'm particularly proud about is that I have been nominated for a John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award for--I haven't gotten--they've, they've never--they always check me off their list. But the reform of the Baltimore City [Maryland] Public Schools. Took a lot of personal heat for that our schools are clearly failing our children. And people are just sitting back accepting it. And once I became chairman of the budget committee, the appropriations committee, I started raising very serious questions about their performance. I, I was able to coach--before I became chairman, I was able to raise money because the school system said they wouldn't use the money to have a very comprehensive management audit done. The management audit was so revealing. And then, we tried to get the school system to implement the recommendations. And they were resistant. the outcome of all of this is Senate Bill 795 and a co--court, a state and federal court consent decree that reform in the most comprehensive way in the country the, school system. And we're making progress. We're in our fourth year. Our statewide we have a statewide stand as an assessment and accountability program which I've pushed, including reconstitution of schools that are failing. And we have three schools that have been taken over by, a private firm. Taken over by the state and the state contracts with a private firm. And they seem to be doing pretty, pretty good. Although we've only had half a year, to look at, you know what, what they have done. But the reform of the public schools is a real highpoint in, in my career, career. Speaker 1: Now what do you think is necessary for the school system and you know and, and the you know the black community? I mean you come out of this black community. You came out of the school system. Speaker 2: The thing that is surprising is how black people accept a system that they virtually control. I mean they, they're the superintendents, they're, they're the social superintendent, they're the directors and supervisors. They're the majority of the board, the teachers. I mean most of them live a substantial number of them live outside of the city, they were comfortable with the status quo. And I started withholding money, started raising various, you know, serious questions, about accountability and performance. And, I had people against me. I mean I got letters from relatives, letters from people saying, "Why are you doing this to black leadership?" I thought they were crazy. The question for me is why is black leadership doing this to our children? Because I believe fundamentally that our children can learn at a very high level. And it's so many examples. And there are so many examples of schools that are doing a good job. And we just don't hold them accountable. We don't, you know a lot of the the school--the teachers are taken over by the unions. The mentality of the unions are different from the mentality of the teachers that I was exposed to. I mean teachers who would stay after school. I mean nowadays the bell rings, the parking lots are clear in about fifteen minutes. And kids are gone. I mean libraries used to be open so that if you had homework to do after school, you'd go to the libraries it, it is just unbelievable what we accept. And we, we've tried to change that, to to get parents more involved. I mean you'd be surprised at the number of African Americans who do not let or do not allow or expect or tolerate or look forward to black parents being involved in the education of their children and being involved in the schools. The Addison Schools, the three schools that have been taken over by a private vendor, they've one of the schools I know because its close to my district. They had no functioning parent-teachers organization. The first day they had a pparent-teacher's meeting, the place was packed with almost 200 parents there from the school. And every PTA meeting after that, there has been a large turn out. And parents are excited about what is taking place. Now why was this happening? In, in the public schools, why wasn't the principal and the teachers providing the kind of leadership that, that parents felt empowered to participate in the education of their children? I think its outrageous and, and people complain about my views. but I complain about what the reality is. And don't want to accept that reality. I don't know what's gonna come. What's gonna ultimately take place at the schools. But I had an experience of a friend of mine who was a legislator who was in the area of that school not so long ago. And, and it was in the evening. And it was dark out and the light was on in the classroom. And you see teachers in the, in the classroom still working. they also have telephones at their desk so they call parents. and telephones are not available at the desk of of teachers in our public schools. Speaker 1: So this is the charter school movement? Speaker 2: No this is not charter school. Speaker 1: Priva-- Speaker 2: This is privatization. Speaker 1: This is a hot button issue around the country. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, yes. The, the reality is that the schools that we had we left them in the public domain. We had identified them as reconstitution eligible. Their achievements were so poor that we're saying these schools are low performance schools. The state is gonna monitor them. You gonna have to develop a school improvement plan. We're gonna provide you some extra resources and we're gonna give you time to turn around. After three to four years, they're still in a downward spiral. I mean you can't do this to our children! The people are comfortable. They accept this! So what do you do? You continue this behavior? Or you find an alternative. An alternative that will work. we have a very strong performance contract with the company and the, and the, state of Maryland, the s--the state board of education. and we don't have union contracts at any of these schools and, and things seem to be turning around. I mean if you're a teacher and you want to teach and you want to be assured that you're gonna have the resources you're likely to have it. At one of the schools in my community that, that was reconstituted, the one I was talking about earlier. We took a tour of a, of an area called 'the cage'. And in that cage were supplies of computers, brand new computers in boxes, stacks of paper unused, turning colors. And then when you're out in the public, you hear teachers and critics saying, "Well we don't have enough money, we don't have enough paper for our children to write on." In this school, in the basement all this equipment, scanners, computers, paper, books just lying there. Some of it rotten. I mean, I mean people--I mean that is so shameless. You should be able to put people in jail for that kind of, damage that they're doing to our children. Story_ID: 12074 Speaker 1: You've been actually called some one you know some one who was sort of the anti-black community or anti-public education or-- Speaker 2: Well I've been called an Uncle Tom by-- Speaker 1: Uncle Tom. Speaker 2: I was called an Uncle Tom by Wally Hall. He was a columnist for a--'The Evening Sun' which is defunct. I mean I was furious. And I called the newspaper for allowing him to use--I told them you would have not allowed him any columnist to make that reference to a white person. And he retracted it. And, and since then after he seen you know the full, you know, the, the full range of what has taken place, he realizes he makes, you know, he's made a mistake. And one of the things I told friends of mine that if you're a leader, you have to have a vision. You have to be focused on--and you have to be able to take risks. I knew where I was going. I knew what the expectation--and, and my value system was grounded in the fact that education was important to my community. And that black youngsters can learn at a high level, every one of them. And the system kind of repudiates that by its, its existence. And I, I just couldn't take it. Story_ID: 12075 Speaker 1: At this point, you're very--I mean you're twenty-three years in your career. Speaker 2: But you still have a lot you want to accomplish basically. Speaker 1: Yes. I mean this reform in our schools is still ongoing. And , we've done well on the statewide assessment where the state average is around 40-somethig percent success among the schools. We're-- we have just moved beyond 20 percent for the first time but we're moving in the right direction. We're moving at a stronger pace than we ever had in the past. Essentially we've been stagnant for years. Over the last few years the pace has moved , in a much steeper slope in terms of achievement. , so you know, I'm, I'm you know, I'm pleased about that we've been working on improving access to still in higher education. I chair a subcommittee on , financial aid, trying to remove the dee that we got. I, I'm, I'm on the board of the National Center for Public Policy and Higher Education. We just did a fifty state report card on higher education and Maryland got a D in affordability. We got A's in the other areas and it was an embarrassment. And we got a D because low-income families pay a larger share of their salaries or income to education than others. And we do not have a effective need based financial aid system. And our governor has gotten caught up in this marriage system the Hope Scholarships. That everyone is you know champion, and you know, it, its just undercutting , the ability of a low income families. Therefore a lot of African Americans are not in college because they can't afford it. Story_ID: 12076 Speaker 1: In terms of your political affiliations, how would you define yourself in-- I mean how would you define-- Speaker 2: I don't. I mean people call me conservative, liberal, progressive. I just bring the value system that I've grown up with to these situations. I, I, I'm, I think I'm a pragmatist more than anything else. I'm from Baltimore [Maryland] and I'm an African American. Most of my colleagues think I'm very liberal because of where I've come from until they look at my track record. I'm very fiscally conservative. In fact I, I think if you look at black people, and look at their values, blacks are very conservative people. Blacks support the death penalty. It was one of the things that surprised me years ago before I entered politics. And did a survey for a political leader in my community who I, I admire. And the returns from the survey, and these are the people who returned the survey, for the-- supporting the death penalty is extraordinarily high. I mean blacks are very conservative on most issues. Even the abortion issue. people who, who because blacks are connected so strongly with the church they are probably more pro live in their in their value system but believe that poor women ought to have the same options as other women. That's why you see a lot more blacks who are pro-choice like myself. But, blacks are very conservative people. And that's the thing that surprised me about Republicans. The Republicans had a very good civil rights record. Most blacks would be Republicans. Not Democrats. Because when, when you value the limited resources that you have, and you worry about squandering them, you're much more conservative. Story_ID: 12077 Speaker 1: You know I often think , when you were describing this thing, I-- you know the experience you had at Morgan [state College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland] and it sort of had a light bulb go off in your head. Because here were people who, you know, you, you had always up to that point had black teachers encourage you and set the tone and then here-- you know here's a new president. He's--you know he's bringing some one--he kicks out your mentor and he's bringing some one to sort of lower the standard. And now--right now you're waging a war--not a war but-- Speaker 2: (Laughing) Wipe that off. Speaker 1: You know, you're on a, you're on a path that where a lot of people are saying its fine the way it is you now--and these are black people saying it. And yet its black kids at stake. And so-- Speaker 2: Well I mean this is--I mean people accuse me of wa--raging a war at Morgan. Because I tried I raised questions about accountability and performance at that campus. I've also had some experiences that were not very positive. I mean I believe that we can do a better job. I believe people ought to be held accountable. And, and I will raise questions about it. I do not believe because you are historically a black college that you are beyond scrutiny. That you're beyond accountability. And you have folks who say that once you provide the, the glare or spotlight to these campuses, you gonna kill them. You gonna destroy them. Well if they're that weak, they need help. They need to-- you need to find out what the problems are. I, I just think its part of the mentality that black have. And that mentality grows out of our condition from slavery, from segregation, from benign neglect from you know e--e--even despite the progress we've made people are still in power that , discourage black people and black institutions. But, I, I don't think we help ourselves if we're, if we cannot demand our performance and accountability. We certainly don't help our community. And given the reality of what is happening, our in the marketplace, where the level of education is, is for a decent job, has grown exponentially we need to have more of our youngsters in college , competitive so that they can be in the market where they're involved in the high tech jobs that are flourishing. Story_ID: 12078 Speaker 1: I know you see education as the key. I'm wondering in terms of the, the black community in general-- Speaker 2: Oh, I, I believe the key now-- I'm sorry about not letting you ask the ques-- I believe the key is, is economic justice. And I'm spending more and more of my time-- but you can't have economic justice (chuckle) , without an educated population and that's why I, I began , a lot of focus on, on that issue. In fact we're holding meetings now under my leadership about the digital harbor in Baltimore City [Maryland]. About a major development in the west side of Baltimore City that we want to be sure that all these wealth creation opportunities that they don't pass us by again. I mean in Baltimore City we have no major black owning a hotel. We don't have a major, night club or dining facility in the, in the states (bell going off) Speaker 1: Now , did you , was--let's look at politics. You know pol--politics and politicians have been taking a beating in the, you know in the , sixth-- you know when people were looking at , in (unclear) before you know black people-- they were looking at the labor movement was critical. And then, you know, pol--politics was critical. And politicians-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Politics is still critical. Speaker 1: Right. So I wanted to have your thoughts about that. Because you know people are now saying its now economic empowerment that is-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. But to--I mean I believe its economic empowerment. I mean blacks have gotten more comfortable in the political arena. I mean across the country you see blacks with some power within their legislature. There have been black speakers for example. I was surprised to learn several years ago the speaker in New Jersey was black. I know in North Carolina the speaker recently was a, a black person.You can't have--we will not achieve economic justice without political strength and power. A lot of things that take place economically depend on government. I mean you need permits zoning, government provides some financing of projects. Government can intervene to prevent projects from taking place. Government can use its resources to help develop an entrepreneurial class or to enhance like minority and women businesses. So government is a very important player. And government can use , the bully pulpit to argue to advocate with the private sector to be more responsive to African American interests in this arena. Our problem--one of the main problems we don't have in the city of Baltimore a lot of rich people who look like me, people who can influence the politics of the community by their ability to contribute to politicians, their ability to support politicians in their own community, the ability to support institutions like churches and organizations that, you know, serve our interests. You need resources. You need wealth and that's one of the reasons why Greeks, Italians, Catholics, all these groups use there wealth to support their institution and support their interests. And su--and to under gird their politics. So I mean it's important now that we've had some progress in the economic, I mean in the political arena, I think more focus has to be on economic achievement. I mean the thing that I've always criticized my good friend, he lives right down the street, Mayor Shmoke for, he's been in office twelve years. I don't know any wealthy African American that has benefited that he's created millionaires. That's why I love Maynard Jackson. That's why (chuckle) I love Marion Barry. In Washington D.C., black people got rich. In Atlanta, the black people got rich. Wealth was created. I know that in Atlanta and in Washington D.C., black people owned things. They owned restaurants. They owned businesses. And they hire from their community. I don't see that at the level that I'm satisfied in Baltimore City. So economic empowerment is very important. And I, I think it follows political empowerment. Story_ID: 12079 Speaker 1: When your parents who just recently passed away--I mean they didn't pass away that long ago. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They saw your success. What do--what do you think you know that they--because look at this, this child they brought in the world, their eldest you know what, what do you think they, they felt or--? Speaker 2: I mean I--my, my father [Howard T. Rawlings] was a person who I never saw that much and he always treated me like you know his son, you know. And he never made over any of his children. Didn't separate you know. But I knew that he and my mother [Beatrice Peters Rawlings] were, were, were proud. Because I mean I'm their offspring and you know they would talk about me to their friends or when I achieved something but they wouldn't talk about it with, with me for example. I, I know when I became-- I'll never forget when I found out that I was gonna be chairman of the [Maryland State] Appropriations Committee. The current chairman had lost his favor with the speaker. And the speaker was gonna remove him. So he called me over in the Eastern Shore. You know the Eastern Shore is not the most pleasant place in Maryland for African Americans. And he was from the Eastern Shore. And we'd grown to like each other. He's a gentleman, he's conservative. I understand him, I know where he is. And I like dealing with conservatives much better than some of my liberal friends who are very patronizing sometimes. I mean he's very clear. I got to deal what he's clear about. And I got to convince him that he needs to come towards my position on some issues. So we had a very honest, relationship. I was the vice chairman. He called me to have breakfast and told me he was gonna remove the chairman. Was gonna make me the chairman of the Appropriations Committee. I mean I was flabbergasted. I never expected to be chairman first of all. And I expected at some point because I was vice chairman but I expected it several years off. My father was in the hospital gravely ill and I went there right from having breakfast on the Eastern Shore. And went to see him and, he was on a respirator and, not talking, didn't see us and so forth. And I, I went and talked to him in his ear--wasn't whispering. I was talking loud hoping that he would hear me And the only thing that I noticed that he, you know batted his eyes but he died shortly after that. Not that day but shortly maybe a day or so afterwards. My mother was also ill at the same time, same time , you know I, I think at that point they expected high things a high level of achievement from me. And probably more than anything else they expected me to do this. And they still expect me to do do things that are important to America. And I expect my children to do the same thing. Story_ID: 12080 Speaker 1: Now what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: --You know the thing that I am proud to say when I go talk to people that I've been married to the same woman [Nina Rawlings] for 40, 40 years. We've had a very good partnership. It's not been perfect. I don't know any partnerships that are perfect, but its been a good partnership and we've raised three extraordinary children. You know Lisa went to Princeton at sixteen graduated from Princeton, got an M.B.A. from Michigan at 22, went to work for Proctor and Gamble and decided that she wanted to teach and she is working on her doctorate in finance at the School of Business and Banagement at College Park University of Maryland. Stephanie who went to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] and then the University of Maryland law school [Baltimore, Maryland] was the youngest person ever elected to the Baltimore City Council. And her second term she was elected by her peers as a vice chairman. And she's an extraordinary young woman. Very talented, just gotten married recently. And my son Wendell , a person that I really didn't understand early because I didn't know that he had this dyslexia. And I was probably too harsh on him with regard to his English work, his reading and so forth. Though we, we have a wonderful relationship now. He went to A&T. North Carolina A & T State University [Greensboro, North Carolina]. Graduated as a mechanical engineer and works for a black resource management firm as an energy engineer. He's gotten promotions. I know he directs some significant program operation. And they're all young, they, they're very committed. They all live in Baltimore City, they all live in--the non political ones. Wendell lives in Reservoir Hill, which is an area that needs a lot of rejuvenation so does my oldest daughter. They don't live in the most luxurious neighborhood. So I'm, I'm just--I mean they've, they've made an investment in neighborhoods to live where , the presence is another step to rejuvenating , their neighborhood. And you know they've been good. I mean they're contributors. So that's the--I mean the real--the proudest thing. And, and the second would be my work in higher education. A lot of that I achieved as a non-politician. And the third the reform of the Baltimore City Public Schools. And if there's a fifth it's my work as chairman of the Appropriations Committee. I mean its something that very few people thought would take place. Now I might be one of the one and only in the country and it's not a difficult job. I mean I-- the thing that always amazes me when I was raised in the projects, there were a lot of black boys who I was raised with who could be doing his job. It is clear to me who are brighter than I am who have the capacity. I just had a path and met a group of black people who uplifted me, who inspired me. And more than anything else, had high expectations...