 Story_ID: 660625 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Isaac Feldman. Observing is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Alysia Diane Tate [HistoryMaker Alysia Tate]. It's Alysia, A-L-Y-S-I-A, Diane, D-I-A-N-E, and Tate, T-A-T-E. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind your--the spelling of your first name? Speaker 2: No. The only story is that no one can ever spell it right, no one can ever say it right, and I asked my mother [Tamra Wood Tate] why she picked it and she said she found it in a book and she liked it, that's it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 7th, 1972, in Denver, Colorado. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Right now, I'm a policy advisor to Illinois attorney general, Lisa Madigan, and I also serve as her--in that capacity, I serve as her primary speech writer. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October--what is this, the 20th? No. October 21st. Right. Speaker 1: October 21, 2014. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We are at The HistoryMakers in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 660626 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer. First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Besides chocolate? Not really (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think this one, this one I'm wearing, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Teal? I don't know what you call--aqua, something like that. Speaker 1: All right. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I really like fall. I like this time of year a lot. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Some place warm in February. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I was trying to think. I don't think so. Maybe, maybe something--well, one thing I say a lot, it is what it is. Story_ID: 660627 Speaker 1: All right. So, now I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [George Tate] side, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep. Speaker 1: --we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Tamra, T-A-M-R-A, Wood, W-O-O-D [Tamra Wood Tate]. That was her--she did not have a middle name. She kept the name Tate until her death, her married name, even though they were divorced when I was pretty young. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born December 14th, 1940, in Missouri. I'm not sure of the town. May- I think--maybe Kansas City, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she grew up in small towns in Kansas most of her childhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about what you know about your mother's family. How far back can you trace that side and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Yeah, we never traced that side very far back. I mean, I knew my grandparents. They were both farmers. They were both dairy farmers in small towns in Kansas and then had grown up to become school teachers, and that was how they met. They met at teachers college, my grandparents, Ruth [Ruth Jones Wood] and Ernie Wood [Ernest Wood]. And everybody always told me that dairy farming was the hardest kind of farming to have 'cause those cows had to be milked every day year in and year out, month in, month out. So, they had worked very hard and then later--after--my grandma taught in a one room schoolhouse. I have photographs of her when she was, I think, you know, seventeen or eighteen years old. And then later after they married, my grandfather, he was in the [U.S. military] service for a time and he opened his own hardware store at some point in Kansas. And so they grew, grew up in a town--my mom grew up in a town called Garnett [Kansas]. She had one brother, younger brother, six year--six years younger, my uncle Ed [ph.], who is still living; he lives in Oregon. And they just had a, a really, you know, typical small town kind of life. Everybody knew everybody and, you know, the kids played with each other and they were very close to another family. Both men had their own hardware store businesses. And later on, my grandpa got a job with Sherwin-Williams [Sherwin-Williams Company], paint company, and he got transferred around different places and that's how they ended up in Colorado, which is really where my mom went to high school and where my uncle really grew up. Colorado Springs [Colorado] was where they settled. And they did very well. You know, I think--so, this is the white side of my family and so all the conversations we have about policies and the wealth gap and the ways that we see the disparities between, you know, black folks and white folks in this country, I really--I really have experienced that in my own family because the, the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and other policies enabled my grandfather to, you know, open his own business to then work for a company where he was able to receive stocks, you know. And he and my grandmother were able to buy different properties and carry the mortgage on the properties they sold. So, they could give my mom and her brother money to--cash to buy a car, you know, things like that over time and they didn't have any debts and they were able to help their, their children go to school with no debt. But, they, they lived very, very frugally. They squirreled, you know, their savings away, that kind of thing 'cause they wanted it to benefit, you know, their children and grandchildren. And so I remember as a child, it was really in Colorado Springs at their house is where we would gather as a family and that's really primarily the family that I grew up in. Story_ID: 660628 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, you were talking about the way--I mean, the--I guess some of the differences that you noticed--that they were able to have, to take advantage of, some-- Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of the advantages. The implication is that the black side of the family wasn't able to take advantage of the same kind-- Speaker 2: Not the same--no, not the same kind of--so, should I walk you through some of that history a little or? Speaker 1: Sure. I gues- yeah. Well, tell us about your--what's your father's-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --full name? Speaker 2: So, my father, George Arthur Tate [George Tate], G-E-O-R-G-E, A-R-T-H-U-R, Tate, T-A-T-E. So, my mom--my mom [Tamra Wood Tate] died in 2008 just a week after Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected. My dad just died last year. And my father was quite a bit older than my mother. He was born February 26th, 1925. So, he was, you know, eighty-eight years old when he died. But--so, he grew up in Virginia in a town called Staunton, Virginia, not far from Charlottesville [Virginia], beautiful, beautiful country in the Shenandoah Valley, really gorgeous country. And actually, we have traced his family back a little bit farther because his, his wife who survived him, my stepmother [Ann Rader Tate], she just was--is an incredible genealogist, so she was able to look back two or three generations to, you know, to his family. And it was really my--it was my father's grandfather who was born into slavery. He was a child in slavery. And we think at--we think that the reason that my family ended up in Staunton was that it was the, the nearest town from the plantation and we think we know where that was, and I think it was about fourteen miles away, and they just walked to the nearest town. And that's how they--that's how they settled there. So, so it's a--it's the birthplace of Woodrow Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson]. It's a lovely little community, you know, with white population and a black population. And actually, my father's best friend growing up was, was a white boy and one of his favorite stories to tell about his friend, Dickey [ph.], was that he would go to the library for my dad and get him books since my father couldn't go to the library, which as we talk, you'll see was a huge part of who my father became and then his influence on me in terms of education and learning. That relationship really was, was quite foundational in all of that for both of us. But, so, so the--you know, he and his, his friend would play, and actually, this, this little boy, when the other white boys would, would say they didn't--you know, they didn't want to play with my dad or his brothers 'cause, you know--'cause, you know, what they called them. You know, little Dickey would say, "Well then, you can't--you can't play with us. You need to leave." So, my dad had this experience of this, this white boy really treating him like a human being, which I think is a lot of what made my father who he was. But, his father--his father, Godfrey Tate, was a--he worked in a dress shop. He delivered dresses to--there's Mary Baldwin College [Mary Baldwin University] in Staunton, Virginia, a really--a fancy, young women's college, and he delivered dresses to those girls and their families for his day job. But then on the weekends, he was a circuit rider preacher, in the United Methodist Church, and he was one of the people that helped build Augusta Street Methodist Church [Augusta Street United Methodist Church] in Staunton, Virginia, which was--you know, there was First United Methodist [First United Methodist Church (ph.)], which didn't allow black folks, so they built their own, Augusta Street Methodist Church. And so, my grandfather--I never knew my grandfather. He died when my father was in his twenties, but he was a circuit rider, and so my dad had these memories of--he had--he had three brothers and he had these memories of them being packed up in the car. They did have a car and on a, a given Sunday, they might do three churches in one Sunday, you know, going around to all the little towns that couldn't afford, you know, a full time minister, and they'd have to just take sandwiches and eat by the side of the road 'cause there was no place for them to go and eat, but he loved it. My dad remembers those days really fondly. And he also told me stories about, you know, the, the segregation and everything he experienced. You know, it was the whole--the whole nine, colored fountains, not being able to go into restaurants, you know, all of that. And the park in town, the public park in town, they would have colored day one day a year when all the black families could go to the park. Story_ID: 660629 Speaker 1: So, they couldn't go to the park (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They could not go to the park, but there was a swimming pool and they could not go into the swimming pool ever, not even on colored day. And so, my dad [George Tate] would tell me a story about his father [Godfrey Tate], you know, looking--on the hill above the park, looking down at him, you know, telling him, you know, that's, that's my tax money that paid for that park. I mean, that is our park. That is your park. You know, so he made it very clear that he didn't go along, you know, with, with the situation and that it needed to change and I think that helped him form, you know, my dad's consciousness. But, you know, there were folks of many professions in that town, black people doing different things. There were a number of people in my family who were cousins and, and such who were brick masons and there are still--houses still standing in Staunton, Virginia, that they built. But then, you know, two of my, my dad's best friends, one was a--went on to become a dentist and one went on to become a lawyer, and, you know, there was a--there was a black undertaker in town and, you know, all of those things. So, my father wanted to be a chemistry professor. He thought that would be something he would want to pursue. He was--he loved learning. He loved school. He was the valedictorian in his class. You know, albeit, he went to inferior schools, of course. The colored schools were, were always inferior. They got the secondhand books and the secondhand furniture and everything. But, my dad was very committed to education as a path and so he literally--he wanted to go to UVA. He had dreamed of going to University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]. It's a beautiful school, but he--you know, he could not attend for obvious reasons. And so he literally had to take the Chattanooga choo choo and went to Chattanooga, Tennessee, to a junior college where he got a--he got a scholarship and Morristown junior college [Morristown College, Morristown, Tennessee] is where he started. And he asked them about the facilities there. He want--he asked to see the chemistry lab and it was either he, he--they took him to, to some building and they either showed him an empty room with nothing in it or they said, you know, this--, "We don't have a lab." It was something like that. And so that was it. So then he said, "Well, I guess I'll be a preacher," you know. That was the end of that dream for him. So then he pursued ministry. And when his father died, he took over his, his churches, those churches in those little towns. And he went on to--well, while he was in junior college, he--you know, he was the driver for the dean of the school. He, you know, had to do all those things to get his room and board paid. But then he went on to Clark Atlanta [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and he became the chaplain and one of the teachers of that school and was voted most favorite teacher one year, and so he spent time in Atlanta [Georgia]. Around the same time that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], my dad was at Clark, and he actually knew Dr. King's father [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] better than he knew Dr. King, but they were, you know, the same generation. Speaker 1: So, this would be in the late '40s [1940s], I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so my dad was born in '25 [1925], so yeah. So, yeah, mid to late '40s [1940s], right. So, so, he was really--his older brother had--was also a minister, my dad's oldest brother, but they were--they were the first, you know, generation to, to go to college, to get college educations and pursue, you know, those kinds of careers. And they were really the first generation, you know, that had, you know, assets to leave to their children, you know, that had the ability to do that. And, you know, it's--so, so, back to the earlier point, it's just--it's interesting to see--it's interesting to see how much the different government policies and structures and things that were in place, you know, benefited one group so much more than another group. I feel like half of my family got, got so much more of a head start than the other half in a--in a very visceral--in a very visceral way. So, all these discussions about wealth gap and something being wrong with black people, it just--you know, it really--it really cuts me to the core because I know how hard my father worked and I know how hard his father worked and, you know, his parents before him, but they just weren't allowed--they--where they could live was limited, where they could work was limited, where they could go to school was limited, you know, through--not through their own choosing in any way. Story_ID: 660630 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your mother [Tamra Wood Tate]--now, she went on to college-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Both my--both my parents went to college. My mother went to Denver University where she earned both a bachelor's degree and a master's, a master's degree in mass communication. And my father [George Tate]-- Speaker 1: Is that now the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the University of Denver. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, University of Denver. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They call it DU, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And my father earned three or four different degrees. My dad was really a scholar. And, and he, he--his culminating degree was his Ph.D. in theology. He got a Th.D., so he was--he was a doctor of theology. So, my, my parents were really--for both of their families, they were the first generation to kind of move into the middle class. They were supposed to be that generation. So, they-- Speaker 1: Is there a, a story about how and where they met? Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't know much of the story. All I know is that--so, my father, he had moved from the South to Chicago [Illinois]. He was part of the Great Migration and he had worked in Chicago. We can talk about that more, but at, at a certain point, he decided to leave Chicago and go to University of Denver to the Iliff School of Theology [Denver, Colorado] where he wanted to pursue his, his Th.D. And so he was in Denver [Colorado]. He was also working at a mental health center. At one point, he became the director of this mental health center and they were--they were serious. They were gonna do some stuff 'cause it was like--I think it was called the Northeast Denver Mental Health Center and they changed it to the Malcolm X Mental Health Center [Denver, Colorado]. They were--they (laughter), they were pretty radical. But, at some point in there, I think just through similar circles, nonprofit circles--my mother was working at the United Way [Mile High United Way, Denver, Colorado], I think they had some kind of mutual friend or friends that just said, "You need to meet this incredible person." And I know my father always told me that story, that someone told him, "You need to meet this woman who is just brilliant." So, somehow, mutual friends brought them together and they, they met and hit it off and I think married, you know, within a year or two after that and then I came along about a year later. Story_ID: 660631 Speaker 1: Now were either one of them involved in the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Not directly. Again, it's--my father [George Tate] was part of that generation, so I feel like in some way, everyone who was part of that time is a product of that movement and helped shape that movement. You know, it wasn't just, you know, the Rosa Parks and the Dr. Kings [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and, you know, James Lewises [sic. HistoryMaker John Lewis] and such. I think my father's primary work around the movement was when he was a minister in Chicago [Illinois] and he was working on the South Side of Chicago with a church and with a community and was, you know, trying to improve that life of that community. And this was in the time of old Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley]. So, so, dad would tell me these stories about, you know, they'd be working in the churches in the communities and then they would get a call, now, "You know, we, we heard there might be some violations of, of your church, of your building code and we might be sending one of our inspectors over to take a look at that. Now, now, but if you can get your people out for the election, we'll give you chickens for every single one of your church members." I mean, it was literally like that kind of, you know, stuff they were moving through. So, so, this would've been in the '50s [1950s], I think, in the '50s [1950s] because my sist- '50s [1950s] and into the--into the early '60s [1960s] 'cause my sister [Karen Tate Warner], my dad's daughter from his first marriage, she was born in '57 [1957], so, so, yeah, it would've been in, in that time. So, I think that was kind of my dad's primary work was it was around what was going on in Chicago in those years. But, now, he wasn't directly involved in the Civil Rights Movement. And I think, you know, my mother [Tamra Wood Tate], in her way, I--you know, it was--it was a shock to her family when she told them she was gonna marry a black man. I mean, this was not--this was not a liberal family. This was not a progressive family. I mean, my grandparents [Ruth Jones Wood and Ernest Wood] were Republicans, you know, our--the favorite TV show I remember everybody watching all the time was 'M*A*S*H,' you know. My grandfather had been in the [U.S. military] service, my uncle had signed up voluntarily for Vietnam [Vietnam War], so it was a shock. And so in her own way, I think she was trying to break out of, you know, the norms and the stereotype of just, you know, what white people were supposed to do and she was looking for a, a bigger life for herself. And it really wasn't until I was born that my family warmed up to my dad. They didn't know what to do with that. So, so, that's kind of-- Story_ID: 660632 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, I, I was wondering when you said that there friends were urging them to meet, you know, what, what organizations were they in where friends were-- Speaker 2: I mean, it's hard to say-- Speaker 1: --an integrated couple? I mean 'cause it wasn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And in those days especially-- Speaker 2: No, I know. Speaker 1: --people just wouldn't promote that. Speaker 2: No, I, I, I know, and I was thinking about it and, you know, it was just a few years before they met that anti-miscegenation laws were struck down by the [U.S.] Supreme Court. I mean, that was just in I think '67 [Loving v. Virginia, 1967] or six--in mid-'60s [1960s], something like that. I mean, Colorado had struck down its law prior to that, but still. I mean, that was the kind of time we were in. I, I do think there was a--there was definitely a progressive element in Denver [Colorado]. Denver was one of those cities that different groups of people were moving to. The neighborhood that I grew up in was really considered one of the most integrated in the country in the time I grew up. People have compared it to Oak Park [Illinois] and Evanston [Illinois] and--you know, these neighborhoods where people intentionally--they came because they, they wanted diversity. They wanted a mix of people. They wanted, you know, something different. And the, the politics of Denver have always--well, it's a little different now, but it's--it--they've always kind of been like that in a way. I mean, Denver has had black mayors, and Latino mayors, and--you know, it's, it's, it's, it's kind of a progressive city where people, they wanna--they wanna try different things and not be bound by, you know, the conservative, you know, values of, of other parts of the country. So, so, I'm, I'm not sure of the story, but I do know growing up, even though--I mean, Denver was a predominantly white city and I was in predominantly white schools growing up, I always--my mother [Tamra Wood Tate], her, her circle of people and my father [George Tate], I mean, their circle of people was always a mix. It was always a mix. My mother always had black friends, Jewish friends, Asian friends. I mean, it was--you know, it's kind of stunning when I actually think back on it now, how intentional she probably had to be to have those different kinds of people in her life and bring them into my life as well. So, so, I can't answer the question about how exactly they met, but--at the same time, though, I don't think they had any idea what they were up against. And they never said it directly, that that was really the reason the marriage ended so soon, but they did tell me stories about some of the hateful things people would say and do to them. I mean, my dad at his--at his job would get these lewd and offensive drawings or cartoons about him or my mother or me, you know, with the implication being like, you know, "Well why, why would a white woman want a black man?" And, "What must you be doing to her, you know, to, to, to keep her, to keep this white woman?" And, you know, pictures of us as a family that they would put--he would--on his desk, that they--somebody would put face down, you know, so that he couldn't see--he would come in and his pictures--so he couldn't see them when he walked into his office the next morning. And, you know, sisters being upset that he didn't, didn't stay with a sister, that he went for a white woman, and it was very upsetting to him. And my mom always said that it seemed to bother him more than it bothered her, but she got comments, too. She would get comments about--she'd be out with me and people would, you know, ask all these questions about how her baby got so tan, you know (laughter). Did she leave her baby out in the sun? You know, how is she so brown? I--summer camp, I remember going to summer camp as a kid, they'd be like, what's your secret? How do you get so brown? I mean, it just sort of, you know, never occurred to anybody that this, you know, really attractive blue eyed, you know, blonde white woman would be with a black man and that this would be her child, you know. So-- Speaker 1: What, what complexion was your father? Speaker 2: I'll--well, we'll see--I'll show you in the photographs but, you know, what, what I tell people is he's about the complexion of Bill Cosby. I mean, my dad was not fair skinned, you know, not fair skinned at all. So, I can only imagine what kind of looks and stares and things they got when they were out together. So, so, I do think that that played more into the challenges they ended up having than they had realized. You know, how could they have known? I do know this. I do know that they only had two people at their wedding and that was my mother's brother and his wife and the minister. That was it. You know, no other family members, no one else, and that's kind of telling in a way. Speaker 1: Especially for a minister. Speaker 2: Well, by that time, I think my dad had grown pretty disillusioned with organized religion. That was some of the reason he left Chicago. Story_ID: 660633 Speaker 1: Okay. So, he--in Denver [Colorado], he didn't really act as a minister (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No. He--by that point, he was--well, he was doing more of the--he had kind of moved more into pastoral counseling even in his career in ministry, but he was definitely on track to be--well, he was running the mental health center [Northeast Denver Mental Health Center; Malcolm X Mental Health Center, Denver, Colorado] and then he became a college professor. And so for my entire life, I knew my dad [George Tate] as a--as a scholar and as a professor. He never took me to church. I was never taken to any kind of church as a child. I mean, when we went to visit in Virginia, which was really only a handful of times, I would go with the family, but neither one of my parents wanted anything to do with church. And the way my dad told the story was that when he was in Chicago [Illinois], he was--so, he was pastoring this small church, I believe it was St. Luke [St. Luke United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois], he was--well, he was the youth pastor. He was not the pastor in charge. He was the youth pastor and actually, I don't know if one of your HistoryMakers is Spruill Wright [ph.], but Spruill Wright, was formerly of the MacArthur Foundation [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], was in my dad's church as a child. So, our families knew each other. But, there was a job opening in the suburbs, I think somewhere in DuPage County [Illinois] at a larger church, and they were very interested in talking to my dad and he applied and he was very interested and then they found out he was black and that was the end of that, didn't want to talk to him anymore, and that, that to him was really the straw that broke the camel's back. He could not stand the hypocrisy within the church itself. I mean, and the United Methodist is pretty mainline, but he, he was done. He was done. But I also know as much as he appreciated it and loved the people that he got to work with in church, that had never been his dream, you know. That had never been what he wanted to become. It was what he needed to become. It was one of the only avenues open to him at that time. But, but it wasn't really, really what he wanted to do. So, so, he left Chicago, he left his wife and child [Karen Tate Warner] behind. He wanted to go out to Denver. And, of course, his wife, his first wife who is still living, who lives with my sister, you know, they didn't want--she didn't want anything to do with that. She had moved to Chicago from Louisiana. Her whole life was here. Her people were here. She was very active in the church. That was--you know, that was her life and she didn't know anything about Colorado. And I--and I think that there had, you know, been troubling things happening already in the marriage. I mean, my dad was a brilliant man but my dad was a ladies' man, for sure, charming guy, charming guy. So, you know, who knows. I don't know exactly what happened, but I know it wasn't pretty. So, he left my sister and her mom here and went out to Colorado and he wanted to do his own thing. And he never lived in a community with a large number of black people again. He stayed out west. He just wanted to be away, you know, from all of that. Speaker 1: About what year did he move to Denver? Speaker 2: Well, it must've been the late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm guessing-- Speaker 1: So, you, you were born in '72 [1972] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in there 'cause I was born in '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 2: So, my parents were married--probably married in 1970 or so, '70 [1970], '71 [1971], so, yeah, I think he just moved to Denver in the late '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 660634 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, their disposition, their political views, their, you know, their hobbies and talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Wow. That is a tough question (laughter). I mean it's--okay. I, I think--I think I really am a blend of them like in every (laughter), every way, from my appearance to my demeanor, to everything. You know, I was--a coworker was asking me the other day, she's like, "What's that blonde patch in your hair? What's that--did you dye that?" 'Cause I have this blonde streak in my hair that I was born with. "No, that is my mother [Tamra Wood Tate]," (laughter). That's a part of my mother's legacy. But in terms of--let's see. Well, I definitely took after my mother in terms of career. My mother was a journalist. She was, you know, the first woman in the newsroom where she was hired out of school [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. She worked in Grand Rapids, Michigan, at a television station. She was the only woman in the newsroom, so she broke, broke some glass ceilings. And then my whole childhood, she worked at a, a suburban Denver [Colorado] newspaper, Aurora--well, everyone knows Aurora, Colorado, now, but Aurora--the Aurora Sentinel. So, I have memories of being in the--in, you know, the--at the newspaper when they were laying out the paper and doing all that stuff. Speaker 1: Now, is the Aurora Sentinel a black community paper? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. No. It's just a suburban-- Speaker 1: Okay 'cause I-- Speaker 2: --it's a-- Speaker 1: --I know I heard-- Speaker 2: --suburban-- Speaker 1: --the Aurora is a--has got a pretty good size black population. Speaker 2: Well, now it does. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, it--it's definitely gotten much more diverse since I was there because Denver has gotten so expensive-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --is part of it, so people have moved to the--to some of the suburban areas. And Aurora is very diverse now. Speaker 1: It's out by the airport [Denver International Airport, Denver, Colorado] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, the airport now (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. I grew up in the neighborhood with the old airport. Stapleton [Stapleton International Airport] was right near Park Hill [Denver, Colorado] where I grew up. But, yeah, Aurora is kind of out, out south. So--yeah, so I took after her in terms of that aspect for sure and the communications and all of that. And, and definitely as a woman, you know, I think I learned a lot from watching my mom blaze her trail. It was--you know, it wasn't easy watching what she had to go through as a single mother, but it did give me a lot of strength and sense of confidence in myself as a woman that I, you know, could support myself, I could earn my own living, I could have, you know, my own career. I never--I never questioned that. I never had the whole fantasy of like someday a man is going to take care of me. I mean, I just didn't--that was like, huh? So, so I definitely--I definitely take after her that way. Now, my dad [George Tate] I would say, he loved to laugh and he had, you know, a, a wonderful warmth about him and I think I have much more of that from him. You know, my mom's family was not exactly warm (laughter). They were not warm and fuzzy (laughter), good people, good people. But she used to tell me, she said--she said, well--as an adult, I think she said that, that I taught them all how to hug. You know, they were not touchy feely or any of that. So--but, also, my dad, you know, had an incredible love of learning and growing intellectually and I definitely take after him there. And also, I wouldn't call--he wasn't--I wouldn't call him a civil rights activist, but I will call my dad a race man. My dad was always a race man. He was always challenging racism in every institution and every setting where he worked. I mean, his work as a psychologist--psychology professor at University of Northern Colorado, which was in Greeley [Colorado], which was, you know, a--seriously a cow town. I mean, the smell of the meatpacking plant [Swift and Company; JBS USA Holdings, Inc.] is like what you smell everywhere in Greeley. But, a really interesting university and some really interesting folks there. But, my dad really pioneered the work in his field on what was called then counseling minorities, you know, the idea that you cannot be an effective counselor or therapist or supporter of someone unless you understand the kinds of oppression that they have lived through and are experiencing. You, you have to put their life in context. And I had talked to social workers and psychologists since who have told me that my dad was one of the reasons they were in the profession, his, his articles and his, you know--the work that he did really pioneered that. So, I've definitely taken after him in terms of, you know, all--my consciousness about those issues and the importance of making change. Story_ID: 660635 Speaker 1: I'm probably much more so in line with his political views for sure. I mean, my mother [Tamra Wood Tate] had come from such a conservative family and--but, although, she did--she did her part. I mean, my mom, she managed the campaign of the first black woman to be elected to the Aurora City Council, whose name was Edna Mosley, whose husband, John [John W. Mosley], was a Tuskegee Airman. They were themselves, you know, pioneers in Colorado. So, so, she tried hard. But also in terms of just socially, my dad [George Tate] was the social animal. My dad loved having people around and, you know, gathering with folks and hanging out and all of that and I really enjoy that. My mother loved people but it had to be a little--very controlled (laughter). She could only take too much and she didn't--she didn't respond well to people showing up unannounced and things like that. It's just a little different family, so--oh, and the last thing I would say, too, is music. My mother was tone deaf and she used to get so hurt 'cause I used to--I used to tease her as a child about how I didn't want her to sing to me (laughter). Her father had been a, a music teacher. My grandfather [Ernest Wood] went--later in life after he retired, he, he played viola and he taught music. So, she always said it skipped a generation. But, my dad also always loved music, had a wonderful voice. I remember him--he never took me to church, but I remember him always working on his yard pulling weeds, cutting grass, and just singing spirituals all the time, you know, in this really rich--his bass voice. And so we love--we shared a, a love of all kinds of music. And then as I grew older, he introduced me to some of his favorite jazz and it was really wonderful. Story_ID: 660636 Speaker 1: Now, what is your first memory of growing up in the family? Speaker 2: That's an interesting question. Well, honestly, I don't really remember my parents, the three of us together, hardly at all. The marriage was so short and my dad [George Tate] was away working so much of the time that I don't remember us doing things together as an--you know, as an immediate family. I remember, you know--I don't know my first or second birthday parties and things, but I think even by that point, my parents were separated, so I remember my dad being around, but I don't remember him being in the house, I don't remember us having dinner together, you know, none of that. What I remember is me and my mom [Tamra Wood Tate]. For the first three years of my life, my mom was home with me and she was always so grateful to my dad for making that possible. But, he was--he was working, he was out, and I know that was part of the strain that--you know, that happened in the--in the relationship, is, is that we couldn't really be a family like that. It just wasn't working. So, in terms of family, my earliest memories are probably when my mom would take me to the--her parents, to my grandparents' [Ruth Jones Wood and Ernest Wood] house and we'd be with them and my aunt and uncle for Christmas, Thanksgiving, you know, those kinds of things. Those are the--those are the things I remember. So, that was really the family I grew up in I would say. You know, after my parents divorced, my dad went to go teach at University of Northern Colorado [Greeley, Colorado]. He was about an hour away and I would spend weekends with him pretty regularly, but it wasn't the same because his family was in Virginia. You know, he didn't have his family around. So, he took me to see them a couple of times, but it--again, they were not the folks I grew up with. So, those are--those are kind of my earliest memories. Story_ID: 660637 Speaker 1: So, what would happen when you spent the weekend with your father [George Tate]? What kind of things would you do, and? Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting 'cause my father was, was pretty clear. He wasn't gonna be like a--what he called like a circus dad or a zoo dad. He wasn't gonna do these things just for a kid. I was going to get to be part of his life, you know. I, I know my dad loved me to death and I know he loved my sister [Karen Tate Warner] to death, but I don't know how much he loved actually being a parent, you know. So, I have these interesting memories of spending (laughter) weekends with my dad. Well, yeah, him working in the yard. He was always--you know, I alw- I said to him until the day he died, he was always trying to get back to the South in a certain way in his mind 'cause he loved the land. He wanted some grass, he wanted some land to work. He loved that. So, he would always be out in the yard, working on his yard, so I remember that. But, we did have some good times. I mean, there was a lot of John Wayne movies. He loved--(laughter) he loved Westerns and there was always football, you know, football games on or baseball games or whatever, and ice cream, ice cream. I remember once I counted, my dad had seven flavors of ice cream in his freezer. It got him into trouble later because, you know, his diabetes got bad and he--his--he had to take care--and his high blood pressure. He had to take care of that later, but as a kid, it was like I could have ice cream for lunch, ice cream for dinner; he didn't care. So, that was fun. And, but then it--when I was a little older, he would--he would start taking me to classes with him, like, when I was--he would teach summer school or whatever and I would stay with him for extended periods. So, I remember bringing my coloring books and sitting in the back of these college psychology classes. And I think there were times when I was interviewed by his students maybe for some of their projects as a little kid and I know he gave me IQ tests as a little kid. So, it was--it was an interesting experience (laughter) being with my dad as a young child. But, he was always hanging out with students, he was always, you know, socializing. He always had girlfriends. I mean--you know, there was all that. And he had a roommate for a number of years, a, a, a brother who was younger, was about my sister's age, Smitty, Donald Smith [ph.], who has also since passed away, and I used to love that. I loved that, when Smitty was living with him 'cause Smitty would play with me. Smitty would play Frisbee with me and things like that, which was really, really fun, although he was about like 6'2", so the--(laughter) I'd have to jump for the Frisbees and I'd keep throwing them at his knees. So, you know, my dad wasn't into playing or reading me stories or any of that, but we had some good times together. Story_ID: 660638 Speaker 1: Now, what about with your mother [Tamra Wood Tate]? Now, now, what--so, did your father [George Tate] live on the campus [University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, Colorado] like-- Speaker 2: No. No. He had his own--he had a house, but it was--I mean, he, he would--we'd--he would ride his bike often to campus. It was just a few minutes away. He'd actually put me on his bike with him and ride me up there, so he was pretty close. Speaker 1: This was in Greeley [Colorado], right? Speaker 2: In Greeley. Speaker 1: In Greeley. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And your, your mother lived in Denver [Colorado], right? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they--my mother stayed in the house that they bought before I was born because she, she had had to move around so much as a little kid, like after every year of school 'cause her father [Ernest Wood] kept getting transferred to different Sherwin-Williams [Sherwin-Williams Company] branches, so she did not want me to have to go through that. She said she wanted me to be able to stay in one school and keep my friends, so she stayed in that house until I left for college really, so-- Speaker 1: Describe the neighborhood for us. What was it--was it-- Speaker 2: Park Hill [Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In Denver? Speaker 1: Was it a mixed neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I would say so. Definitely--I would describe it as middle class with some, some folks who were pretty well to do. Definitely everybody was pretty middle class, I would say pretty, pretty well educated. I think most of the, you know, parents were college educated and in, you know, different kind of white collar professions. But, a lot of--a lot of younger families on my block, you know. We had these legendary games of kick the can. I had a--our yard had a--had a little hill in front of the house with some, some steps, and so like ours--it was a perfect place to put the can, so we always put the can at the top of my steps. And had the--you know, the whole block would play these games of kick the can and stuff, running around in the neighborhood. I don't remember any kind of fear for my safety or any of that. A little later when I was kind of getting close to middle school, I think they, they started doing some antiviolence training in--for the students to protect yourselves and then I got nervous. But, it was a very safe neighborhood. I walked to school, both elementary [Park Hill Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] and middle school [William H. Smiley Junior High School; McAuliffe International School, Denver, Colorado]. I had a daycare--the daycare centers I had most of my child were all in, in the neighborhood. One was a woman just two or three doors down from our house. I'd just go to her house after school. I was a latchkey kid probably from age--about age nine on. I'd just come home and let myself in and be home. So, so, people looked out for each other and, and, you know, I'm--and then when I was, I don't know twelve, I started babysitting to earn money and I just babysat for families, you know, in the neighborhood. So, so, that's how--that's how I would describe it. I mean, it--you know, Park Hill is, is, is on--is in northeast Denver. It's right on the edge, though. If you just cross Park Hill, then you're in a, a predominantly black neighborhood, just north of Park Hill. So, it wasn't as div- you know, it wasn't as many black folks as that neighborhood, but it was still, you know, kind of a mixture. Story_ID: 660639 Speaker 1: What's your first memory of school? Speaker 2: (Cough) Well, I had--okay, a couple came to mind. One was kindergarten [at Park Hill Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] when for some reason my grandma [Tate's maternal grandmother, Ruth Jones Wood] was staying with me and the kindergarten door let out--this--there was a side door she let us out, the kindergarten class, not the front door. And my mom [Tamra Wood Tate] used to come and pick me up at the side door, but for some reason, my grandma was meeting me and she went to the front door, so I didn't see her. Anyway, everybody thought I was lost. I went and sat by some wall 'cause I didn't know where to go and everybody was looking for me and nobody knew where to find me and I was just sitting there and sitting there and finally, I just went to the office 'cause I didn't know what else to do, and it--you know, everybody had been frantically calling the school. So, that was one memory. I remember that I, I, I knew how to read before I went into kindergarten, I remember that 'cause I had a shirt my mom had made me with--my mom was real crafty and she made me a shirt with all the letters of the alphabet on it, iron on patches, and I was really proud that I knew all the letters and I knew how to make words and all of that kind of stuff. So, I have a lot of memories of, of reading and feeling smart in school from a pretty early age. I--but I remember first grade. First grade was when they started to separate us by ability levels and they didn't--they didn't call you the smarter kids and the, you know, not so smart kids, but they'd put you in the blue group or the red group or the whatever group. That all started in first grade and it was like--it, it was--and then, then you were just tracked like forever. And so I got--you know, I was in the highest reading group and all of that kind of thing and then a few years later I was in gifted and talented class, which--I mean, I, I feel very fortunate and lucky to have been put in those positions, but it was also--I just--it just seemed so weird to be separated from your friends. And then the other kids would start to resent you and all that kind of stuff. So, that's what I remember. It's kind of early into all of that when--you know, that whole gifted, talented movement when, when I was doing it. I also remember, though, second grade was when they started busing in Denver [Colorado]. And my school was apparently too black, you know, for Denver. So, all I really remember is that a bunch of my friends had to go to other schools, and none of us as kids really understood why this was happening or what the point of it was or how it was gonna improve anything. But, we just knew all of a sudden we were gonna get separated out. So, those are some memories of school. And, and so learning about race, getting a consciousness about race and what it meant started, started around that time. And then I remember people teasing me for being mixed-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --and I--that was pretty early. Speaker 1: Denver at that stage was--well, even--I mean, today, too, you'd have a lot of Mexican American students, right, as well as white students and-- Speaker 2: We had several, not as many in Park Hill [Denver, Colorado] as in other parts of Denver, yeah. There were always--it was like there were always a handful of Mexican kids and Asian kids, but most of the mix was either black or white. And that was also true--that was true all of--throughout high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado]. And this was all public schools. That was true all up through, through high school, yeah. Story_ID: 660640 Speaker 1: Well, you were just getting ready to tell us your first memory of race, I guess, in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I mean, the busing thing, that was--that was big. And then, yeah, a couple of things happened early on in there. So, at one point, I was put into a gifted, gifted and talented program, which meant I went to a--I don't know where it was, another school or a community college or something after school, and I was on a--I was on a bus for the first time going back and forth to this program. Speaker 1: How old are you at this point? Speaker 2: I'm guessing I'm eight or nine, somewhere in there. And there were a bunch of black girls on the bus and I didn't know them, and I just remember them being really mean and teasing me and saying, you know, "Well, who do you think you are? You know, who do you think you are, Miss Ann? You think you're better than us? You think just 'cause you look like you do, you're better than us?" And I, I had no idea who they were. I didn't know why they were saying this stuff to me. I didn't even know what it really meant. But, it definitely started to make me feel like, well, what am I then? You know, 'cause I can't say I'm black like them, but I don't feel like I'm just like the white kids either. So, where do I fit? And then other kid--then--okay, then other kids would say things like, you know, call me like I think it was like salt and pepper child. You know, there were--this was when the Jell-O Pudding Pops were popular, so people would call me chocolate vanilla swirl. And then, you know, the show, 'The Jeffersons,' right? We all loved the show 'The Jeffersons.' We all watched the show 'The Jeffersons.' Well, you remember George [George Jefferson] has this daughter-in-law whose--has a white dad and a black mom supposedly on the show, and he calls her zebra on the show, so people would call me that. And I just tried to laugh at it and make light of it and whatever, but I definitely felt different and like something, something was just kind of wrong with me. And I didn't--I didn't know who to talk to about that or where to go with that-- Speaker 1: Did-- Speaker 2: --at all. Speaker 1: --did most of the teasing come from the black students or the white students? Speaker 2: I would say it was a little bit of both. It was a little bit of both. Yeah, and--you know, I didn't--I didn't feel like I could really--whenever I would talk to my mom [Tamra Wood Tate] about stuff like this, she would just kind of--she meant well, but her and her family's general response to any of this was like, "Well, you--you're just Alysia [HistoryMaker Alysia Tate] and that's what's important and we love you," you know, kind of the classic color blind sort of approach, and don't worry about any of this, it doesn't mean anything. Well, they had never experienced these kinds of things, you know. They--again, they, they did the best they could, but it was very confusing. It was very confusing to navigate. And unlike today, you know, I, I didn't turn on TV and see Halle Berry and Lenny Kravitz or Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] or all these other people who had similar, you know, experiences. We didn't have the same kind of consciousness about mixed race people then that we do now. And we cert- they, you know, certainly didn't in Denver [Colorado], although there were a bunch of mixed race families and kids, but we just didn't really know how to talk about it outside of the color blind thing. So-- Speaker 1: How did your father [George Tate] deal with it? Speaker 2: Honestly, I don't know how much I talked to him about it. I mean, I always loved my dad and I knew my dad loved me, but my dad was not in contact with me, you know, during the school week, you know, in the way that my mother was. He wasn't calling me, asking me how it was going or what I was working on or things like that. So, I'm really not sure how much I talked to him about it as a child. When I got older, like when I was in college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and we would talk about these things, it was--that was some of the--those--I mean, those were some of the, the most important conversations I feel like we ever had was where we really both could share so honestly about how--different ways we had experienced racism and what that meant. Because I found out and it--you find out, you know, there's not a black person alive who hasn't been made to feel like they're not black enough or too black or too this or too that or whatever, and the criticisms he had gotten for leaving the South, for, you know, pursuing a career in university, for liking classical music and German philosophy and all the things he liked. So, so, much later, I felt like we could really relate to each other about that. But, as a kid, it was--it was kind of lonely, honestly. Story_ID: 660641 Speaker 1: I take it--I take it you did well in school and-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: --and did you have favorite teachers or mentors in school that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I had some great teachers, some great teachers. Actually, one of my favorite teachers was Ben Gregory. He has since died. He was--he was one of, I think, three black teachers in my school. He went on to become one of the--not the head coach, but one of the coaches for the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado] football team, the Buffalos. Speaker 1: This--is this grade school [Park Hill Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] or? Speaker 2: This is grade school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ben Gregory. And he was--he was my first gym teacher and he was just one of the most encouraging, thoughtful people I had ever met. He was really great. And then Kathy Adams [ph.], a teacher I had--I had her--I got her for first grade and again for fifth grade; I was lucky. And I just remember I wanted to come to school every day to see her. She was just that, that warm and encouraging and, you know, great to be with. So, I had, yeah, a lot of good, good elementary school teachers. And then the teacher who influenced me most in high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado] was a woman named Sheila Feeney, just--you know, this little, tiny woman, this little, tiny, white woman who taught me about Malcolm X (laughter). She was my--she was my AP [advanced placement] American history teacher. So, this was, you know, high level American history. This was for some college credit. And she really--it's ironic, but she was one of the first teachers to teach me really about, you know, some black history, the Black Power movement, you know--I mean, all this stu- it was just like this whole world opened up to me. It's--it actually reminds me of how my dad [George Tate] used to talk about a teacher he had when he was at the junior college [Morristown College, Morristown, Tennessee] he went to, a wh- a white woman who was--who worked in the library, and she encouraged him around reading and reading a whole variety of things and said, and read these books and let's talk about them. And he always kept a picture of her in his house until he died because he felt like she was one of the most influential people in his life. So, it's, it's just interesting, the people who broaden your, your horizons. Story_ID: 660642 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, by the time you get to high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado], what kind of activities are you involved in? Speaker 2: Well, I did a little bit of swim team. That was my first athletic anything. I had--I had been a dance and piano lesson kind of girl, although I did Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] as a kid, which was some of the most fun I've ever had and I still have a very dear friend from that whole experience. I'm--I real--I still miss mountains. I mean, Lake Michigan is beautiful. I finally decided a lake is nice, but it took me forever to figure out, what's the big deal with a lake when, you know, growing up with those mountains there every day. So, I miss--I miss mountains and I miss sunshine. You know, Colorado is three hundred days of sunshine a year. But, but, anyway, swim team was the first sort of organized sport I had tried to do. I, I wanted to play soccer as a little girl, but I just didn't--I was too scared and my mom [Tamra Wood Tate] hadn't done anything like that and didn't know how to encourage me. This was when girls were starting to actually do team sports in an organized way, you know, in the--in the '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s]. So, anyway, I didn't end up doing that. But, I did swim team for a while. But, my big, big activity in high school was drama. I was a drama queen in high school. And, and singing, just all kinds of music. I had always loved music and done, you know, every kind of school choir I could possibly do all through elementary school [Park Hill Elementary School, Denver, Colorado]. But, in high school, it was like, oh, you can--you can perform, you can act, you can do this, and it--I had never really thought about, you know, doing that. And then I, I, I took a class and the teacher was like, you should--you know, you should audition for the show. So, I had the lead in the school play both junior and senior year. Speaker 1: Which, which plays? Speaker 2: 'Bye Bye Birdie' [Michael Stewart] and 'How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying' so--and 'Bye Bye Birdie' I actually did twice because I did it for the Denver Public Schools summer stock that all the schools come together in the summer, and we did that show. So, I got--I, I really have memorized that show (laughter) like for--forever. But, it was so much fun. It was so much fun. You just lived your life with these people and you were rehearsing all the time and singing all the time and practicing all the time. And I still have really, really good friends from that whole experience and-- Speaker 1: In, in 'How to Succeed,' did you play like the-- Speaker 2: Rosemary [Rosemary Pilkington]. Speaker 1: Okay, Rosemary (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Rosemary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 660643 Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're the--you're the drama queen of-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) East High School. Speaker 1: --East High School in Denver (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) East High, East High in Denver [Colorado]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. It was a lot of fun. Well, and one of the things about it was that it really helped bring me out of my shell in a lot of ways. It was--it was the beginning, I think, of my public life, you know, learning how to get up in front of people and be visible and show yourself in that way. There, there were some great skills. Speaker 1: Were you shy before? Were you withdrawn before, you think? Or-- Speaker 2: I would call myself shy exactly, but there was a certain confidence I feel like I didn't have quite. Yeah. I always liked people. I was--I've never been quiet. I have never been quiet (laughter). I used--I got in trouble in second grade [at Park Hill Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] for talking too much and there was a whole big thing of trying to, you know, figure out how to be in school without--and have any friends without talking all the time. But, but, doing theater and performing in all those, you know, concert choirs and different things, it gave me confidence. It also--it also was the first time I had really done something that public with like a group, with a--with, you know--with buddies, with--you know, with folks. I had--I had done dance recitals my whole life as a little girl but, you know, we were really bonded as a team. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's an interactive dynamic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. I mean, one of the--one of the choirs I was in was like an a capella vocal jazz group, so like you really have to be in tune with each other and know how to blend and how to think about, you know, your dynamic and their dynamic and all of that. And it was--it was a great--it was a great experience. I loved--I loved every minute of all of it. Speaker 1: So, this is a--you graduated in 1990. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, were you involved with the school paper at all? Speaker 2: I--to some degree. I was involved with the school paper--I was photo editor of the school paper. I wasn't--this was before I was really writing a lot. I always enjoyed writing but, yeah, I wasn't--I did--I did a few articles for the school paper, but my main involvement was that I became photo editor. I took some photography classes and really loved it. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you--were--did you receive any honors during graduation? Speaker 2: No. I was--I mean, I was fairly high up in my class, but I wasn't--and I didn't get any kind of special honors. I think I was in the top twenty or something out of a class of--I don't know how many we had, three or four hundred. You know, it was a pretty big class. But, no, I can't think of any special honors I got. Story_ID: 660644 Speaker 1: What was--well, you know, what kind of counseling did you get and what, what did you see as your future when you were in high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: College, college, college. I think as long as I can remember, it was just assumed I would go to college, I would go to a four year college, it would be a good college, I would get good grades (laughter), you know what I mean? That was just like a non-question. Now, more specific than that, I, I don't know. Honestly, the way I chose Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], there's not really a lot of science involved. One of my--our--the school counselor who--he didn't actu- he didn't really spend that much time with us. It's sort of shocking when you think back on your life. It's like, how did I get here and, you know--but (laughter) he, he didn't really give us very helpful advice, but he proposed Northwestern as one possibility. He was just sort of giving me liberal arts colleges, you know, that--with good reputations around the country. Because I--you know, I was--I had very good grades, I had scored, you know, pretty well on the standardized tests, I was taking college level classes, you know, all of that. And one of my friends from the theater crew, he had applied to Northwestern, so I thought okay, well let me apply. I didn't know anything about Northwestern. But then the kicker was, they flew me out. This was back when Northwestern was spending beaucoup bucks [dollars] to recruit black students and they flew me out for their like day at Northwestern thing to have me meet some of the, you know, black students and go to some events and check out the campus and all of that, and I fell in love with the campus. It was just like I imagined a college campus looking, you know. I had visited Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], which was just in the city. It just sort of--there--it has no campus feel to it. I mean, in hindsight, it prob- it might've been a better choice 'cause it, it--what--anyway, I'll get to that in a minute. But, but--yeah, I'd only really applied to Northwestern, Boston University, and then two schools in Colorado, which were really just fallbacks in case I didn't get into, you know, one of these. So, I fell in love with the campus. I didn't know anything about the politics of the school, the, the quarter system, which was unbelievable how intense the quarter system is. I knew it was a very good school. And the main thing I was looking for was a school that had communications and theater kind of in the same--under the same umbrella, so that's why I picked BU and Northwestern 'cause they did. You know, Northwestern is the school of speech. I wasn't even planning to major in journalism, so it's totally--I don't know if it's irony or fate or whatever it is that I end up at the Medill School of Journalism [Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], getting my degree at, you know--depending on whether you went to Missouri [Missouri School of Journalism, Columbia, Missouri] or Medill, the number one journalism school in the country and having that be my, my career. Story_ID: 660645 Speaker 1: Now, before we leave high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado]--let's see. I had another question about high school and I--oh, what were you reading? Were you reading news, hard news in high school? Speaker 2: What was I reading in high--well, my dad [George Tate] had given me a subscription to The Nation when I was twelve years old. You need to understand, this is--this is part of, of an example of my relationship (laughter) with my father. Speaker 1: Now, this is big. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Now, I wasn't really reading that publication at age twelve. I was a lot more interested in, I don't know what, teen magazines or whatever I--you know, the things that like you read when you're a teenager. But, but by the--but, so, no, high school--I wasn't political in high school. I wasn't really--I mean, a little bit, but not like I got in college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], nothing like I--like I got in college. There was a--there was a little bit of that in high school. I think I did write an article in high school for the school paper about why did the--why there were so few black students in the AP [advanced placement] classes 'cause, you know, back to my point in tracking. You know, there were--it started so early and then there were just this handful of us that were in the highest level classes while all the other black students were in the regular classes, and it just stayed that way throughout our school careers, you know. Speaker 1: Did you--did you ever witness a student that started off on a lower track that actually migrated up to a higher track? Speaker 2: Not really, not with the kids I--that I grew up going to school with. I--you hardly ever saw that. And definitely, you didn't see that by high school. I mean, the cliques were like really set. And, I mean, back on, you know, race for a moment. You know, so I was one of like the two or three, you know, black students in the school play, doing newspaper, doing that kind of stuff. Most of the black students were like cheerleaders, playing football, you know, doing that kind of stuff. And those world--I think by junior high [William H. Smiley Junior High School; McAuliffe International School, Denver, Colorado], it was pretty clear, those worlds don't meet. You know, you, you just pick your clique. You're, you're one of the black kids that can be part of the white kid world or you're not, and that was kind of how it was. And I look back on it now and it's--it makes me sad to think about how early we got so separated and divided along those lines and that none of the adults around us could help us, you know, bridge any of those divides, really, but that's just how it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, yeah. So, no, in high school, I wasn't--I wasn't reading hard news. I mean, when I--I was--you know, I was doing the school play and I was partying a lot, I mean, in high school. I mean, you know, we did a lot of drinking in high school. That was--those were my drinking years. I don't--I, I don't drink anymore, but those were--that was how we socialized. That was what we did. I would say, though, I mean, I always studied and then when I did start taking that American history class, I did start reading a lot more stuff. Somewhere around the end of high school and beginning of college is when I read 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley] and that totally changed my life, reading that book. And then it was really college when I got into like the serious kind of reading (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did-- Story_ID: 660646 Speaker 1: How did the autobiography ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley] change your life? Speaker 2: Well, it was--it was the auto- it was that book and it was the footage of watching him give his speeches like, you know, on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard, New York, New York] and just seeing, seeing a black man so unapologetically describe the ways--the ways that racism needed to be challenged and holding out this picture of how powerful black people were. I had never seen anything like that. And--you know, and I'm, I'm part of that generation that--you know, we didn't see any of that growing up. I mean, I was eight years old when Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was elected president, you know, to put it in perspective. So, I didn't--I didn't get any of these images as a child and just didn't know--just didn't know that there were these, these examples. And, and, of course, you know, they had taught us about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in the way that they teach you about Dr. King, which was just that he was this peace loving--you know, wanted all the children of all colors to be able to sit down together, wanted everybody to be able to go to church together, you know, all of that. They didn't teach me anything about what Dr. King tried to challenge here in Chicago [Illinois]. They didn't teach me anything about how he tried to challenge the Vietnam War, about how he spoke out against classism and, you know, capitalism, none of that. And so, to see this--you know, these fiery speeches by Malcolm X and to read his words about how--you know, how clearly he saw right versus wrong and how intentional he was about challenging this power structure. This was the first time I was really seeing this. I mean, I knew my father [George Tate] had done a lot to challenge racism in his own life and the institutions he worked in, but he was working in a predominantly white institution [University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, Colorado], he had predominantly white friends and community around him. You know, he, he, he was--he had to be in that world. So, so, to see this, this guy not apologizing for being black and not apologizing for being angry about what had been happening to him and black people was pretty transformative. Story_ID: 660647 Speaker 1: Okay. So, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], I, I was reading about the tour that they gave you, like a--sort of a history of the African American students and what they--what they accomplished, you know, back in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] I guess. And, but did you see--I mean, once you got to the campus, did you see any evidence of that--I mean, was it--was there still a strong African American student presence? Speaker 2: Yes. There--I mean, there definitely was a, a strong African American student presence. Was it large? No. I mean, I still think the college--the university today, it's 6 or 7 percent. I don't think they've cracked 10 percent in terms of black student population forever. But, yeah, there was a group called--that was formed--the black student alliance is--was called For Members Only, which was controversial in and of itself, having that title. And, you know--and it was an interesting time because as, as I was graduating from high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado] or right around my senior year was when Spike Lee's 'Do the Right Thing' came out, you know, a Public Enemy song, 'Fight the Power.' There was this kind of renewed consciousness happening among, you know, young black adults about race and racism. And so that's kind of the, the culture I came into in college. But, you had to be very intentional about being part of that community because, again, it's just 6 or 7 percent of the campus, so you need to go to the African American student affairs building, which we called the Black House, you needed to go to certain dining halls to hang out and see people. And there were forever and probably still are those articles about why did they always have to sit with each other in the dining hall? Why--you know, which I've always thought was just the most ridiculous thing. I mean, if we were trying to segregate ourselves, why would we come to Northwestern University? I mean, that's--(laughter) you know, like, we wouldn't be doing that. But anyway, so-- Speaker 1: No one ever asks why all the white students are sitting together? Speaker 2: No. Why are all the white students sitting together? Why aren't any white students coming to sit with any black students, you know? And--I mean, it--so, it was ridiculous. So, it was all of that. So, I really had to make like a conscious choice in college. Was I gonna be black or not? Because growing up, I had always kind of just, you know, mixed around in different groups and sort of blended and whatever. And some people knew I was mixed and some people didn't and I never felt like I could call myself black growing up because I felt like--well, and my mother [Tamra Wood Tate] felt--my mother never called me black. That was part of the problem, you know, because she didn't feel like I could be something that she was not, which, you know, we can talk about the racism inherent in all of that at some point. But--you know, and I came out looking like this. I came out with this fair skin and this straight hair, and so she didn't have to, you know, put that label on me. I--it wasn't a self-identifiable label, you know? So, I never felt like I was black enough to be black. Now, you know, since I've--since coming here [Chicago, Illinois], since growing up, whatever, you learn that, you know, any number of black people of any different complexion and hair texture and whatever have had this same kind of struggle in their minds. But, at the time at college, I really had to decide. Was I gonna be part of this community or not? And I decided that I would and it was--it was really difficult. I really struggled with it internally. I really wondered if it was okay for me to really be there, if I was legit, if I was--if I could be down. You know, all of these things I wrestled with. And what I found, of course, was that, you know, by and large, people were extremely welcoming, just totally welcoming, didn't question me, didn't ask, you know, me why I was there or not but, you know, made space for me and that was a real--that was a real gift. But at Northwestern, you really had to decide if you were gonna do that because the politics of the school and the layout of the school and the dynamics of the school didn't make it easy, you know, for, for groups to intermingle and mix, which I didn't--I didn't realize, you know, until I got there just what a conservative environment it was. Story_ID: 660648 Speaker 1: But, I did--I did a concentration in African American studies and I would say those were some of the most influential teachers I've had in my life. Leon Forrest who has since passed away was just an incredible inspiration and gift. Speaker 2: Yeah, the author of 'The Bloodworth Orphans' and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and getting--you know, I got to take his Toni Morrison class, which is one of the things I'm--feel most fortunate to being able to do is, is to study Toni Morrison with him. And Charles Payne who is, is back in Chicago [Illinois], is at University of Chicago, he was just one of my favorite, favorite professors. His urban education class was just tremendous. So, that, that also helped me, you know, get a better sense of my identity. My place in black culture, my place in the black community were those experiences. So, if I hadn't had that, that concentration, I think that would've been difficult. And--well, and actually my advisor at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] at--from Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], is a professor named Charles Whitaker who is an incredible guy. He was I think at the time the only black professor in Medill. Now, there are at least two others I know who have been there a long time who also were, were very good friends and very supportive. But, Charles Whitaker, he was the reason a lot of us stayed in school, I mean honestly (laughter). He kept us in journalism and in school and he encouraged me to get involved in the black student magazine, which was called BlackBoard [BlackBoard Magazine]. So, so, that, that was some of how I navigated the politics. Story_ID: 660649 Speaker 1: There were a number of challenging things I dealt with as a--as a woman. I mean, you know, you can't separate out these identities in your--in your life, but, but I, I will say a little bit--should I say a little bit about-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --about that? Speaker 2: There's a-- Speaker 1: I mean, 'cause it all kind of blends in. Speaker 2: There was a--well, there's two, two articles that research uncovered where you're quoted. One was in the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] in terms of, of comparison between black students and Asian students. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And then in The New York Times around the women's issue. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, the black students and Asian students, that was a really interesting dynamic, and I still have--I still have friends, Asian friends, who were active in that movement. So, they were really organizing, you know, around some of the things that black students had organized around in previous decades, you know--you know, an Asian American studies department, professor, a place to go, you know, sort of all of these things. And it was--it was challenging because it felt like somehow people were looking at black students as if we had cornered the market on diversity or, you know, raising awareness around racism and, and somehow every group should get exactly what, you know, the black students have and you all have done it and we should be able to do that too, and we've experienced just as much racism as you have. And, and I don't--I don't believe in ranking oppressions. I think that's a fruitless exercise, but, but I do think that something gets lost when we just make everything multicultural because there is a distinct and foundational experience of racism that black people have experienced in this country and in this world that I think has set the stage for what every other group has experienced. And if we water that down, if we turn away from that, if we don't--if we don't--if we're not willing to face that for what it is, then we won't really be able to really undo racism, you know, if we just make it this multicultural thing that we need to undo. So, it was--it was an interesting dynamic on campus because, you know, on the one hand, yes, I agree, there needs to be Asian American studies and there needs to be consciousness about racism that Asian Americans are experiencing. But, Asian Americans are still I think almost 20 percent of the campus at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], you know, around there, have always had high numbers, and it's, it's not the same challenge. It's not the same challenge that black students face in terms of getting to that school or staying at that school. So, that's still an ongoing, you know, discussion, debate, conversation that I like to have with, with my friends. Story_ID: 660650 Speaker 1: Now, I--you know, so in terms of, you know, being a woman and kind of how this all blended in--well, one, one thing, which, I mean, these things are interconnected was--so, I pledged a sorority at school. I pledged a white sorority because that's what my mother [Tamra Wood Tate] had done. And, you know, every little girl wants to be like her mother and I didn't even dare to think that I could be accepted into a black sorority. I had no experience with that world. I, I probably had only seen the Spike Lee movie, 'School Daze.' That was probably all I knew about that world. Although, my dad [George Tate] had been an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] for a period of his life. He said he got tired of getting beat, so he quit. But, anyway, it didn't even occur to me that I could get accepted into a black sorority or what that was, so I just pledged like everyone else pledged. Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], the campus is like half Greek, so there's a lot of pressure to get involved in the fratern- the whole social life of the campus revolves around it. So, anyway, I pledged, I--and then my sophomore year, I move into the sorority house, and after a few months, I realized I am spending all my time with the only other black woman in this building who is the cook. I am hanging out in the kitchen with Essie [ph.] all the time, talking with Essie. So, something is wrong (laughter) with this picture. And then I would hear about racist incidents happening at fraternities. You know, some fraternity put out a flyer for a party with an image of Aunt Jemima in a headscarf. I do not know why, but that was the flyer. And then I found out that my sorority, which was Gamma Phi Beta [Gamma Phi Beta Sorority], had large chapters in the South and that their big event every year was something called antebellum days where they dress up like plantation owners and southern belles, and I just thought, oh, no. I cannot-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure that's all in fun. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I mean, sure, ha, ha, ha. You know (laughter), it's like I, I just can't--I can't continue to financially support this organization. I mean, it just got to that point. You know, and now--and so now, we're in the times--so, '92 [1992] is Rodney King, so this is all around that time as well. So, I'm really--this is where I'm starting to get militant. Story_ID: 660651 Speaker 1: This is what I call my militant phase (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, this is a transition--I know when we first started talking about college, you said that you felt that you had to choose an allegiance-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and you volunteered to choose the black side of the coin because that's the way the political straddle and everything was set up at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and it was a good time to just go and make that transition. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, it seems it's becoming--it's a more gradual change than just--you didn't just change when you got there, right? Speaker 1: No, no. It was definitely--it was a number of factors. I mean, it was also, you know, being in Chicago [Illinois]. Well, I mean, I'm in Evanston [Illinois], but I'm, you know, surrounded by the City of Chicago. For the first time, I'm really getting close to my, my sister [Karen Tate Warner] who grew up on the South Side of Chicago and still lives at 84th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]. Speaker 2: So, had you met her before? Speaker 1: I had met her before. Now, we're fifteen years apart. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, she used to come to Denver [Colorado] to visit our dad when I was little and she was a teenager, but then she had her first child at age twenty. So, you know, I was in kindergarten when she had her first child. But, I, I remember, you know, visits with her from time to time, but we had never really been able to get close. So, now we're getting close, I'm taking the train, the Purple Line south until it turns into the Red Line south all the way to the South Side, and you know what happens when you see--you know, when you ride the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] from the north to the south of Chicago, it just gets black and black and blacker until it's completely black. So, I'm--so I'm--this is the first time I'm in a city like this. This is the first time I'm in a metropolitan area with this kind of numbers of black people, with this kind of history of black leadership, you know, with Har- you know, the, the legacy of Harold Washington. So, it's--so, it's all of that, too, is happening while I'm at the school. I, I get involved in Re-evaluation Counseling, which is a peer counseling social change organization I'm still very involved with. But, but that organization is so much about challenging oppression and providing spaces and places for us to undo the effects of oppression, so I, I get connected through that through a group called Students Together Against Racial Tension, START, on campus. So, so I'm--you know, it's kind of--all these things build on each other. And, and yet, my family had no idea what to do with me. I mean, my white family had no idea what to do (laughter) with me 'cause I was--suddenly, I was angry and I was--you know, remember X--the X caps, the Malcolm X caps. You know, I had my Malcolm X stuff and like--they're like, "Who is this person? Like, what happened to her?" (Laughter) You know? So, but it was important for me to get to explore all of that and test that out and learn about that. And so I remember--you know, we had a march, the black students on campus after Rodney King. We just all dressed in black and we marched to the bursar's office and I don't know if we raised our fists in the air or if we just turned our back on the administration; I'm not sure what we did, but we were just, you know, showing our, our solidarity with Rodney King. It may have been after all of the unrest in Los Angeles [California] that we did that. I remember participating in anti-apartheid marches, you know, through Evanston and, you know, being someone involved in that--in that movement. So, all of this, this--these were just things I had never been exposed to before. And some of it was I was just at that age where you can start doing these kinds of things, but it was also the place I was in and the time--the time that I was in. Story_ID: 660652 Speaker 1: Did you stay in the sorority [Gamma Phi Beta Sorority]? Speaker 2: No. So, I resigned from the sorority. They would not let me out of my housing contract, so I had to stay in the sorority house for the rest of my-- Speaker 1: But, was there an incident (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) sophomore year. Speaker 1: --or it was just a cumulative effect of-- Speaker 2: It was just--it was the cumulative--it was those things I mentioned. And then at--and so then getting to the female part, you know, some of it--so, sorority houses, you have to pay all this money to keep the house looking pretty. They don't do that in fraternity houses. They just--you know, they just have their parties or whatever, but you have to pay like a parlor tax and cleaning fee, you know, all this stuff, and you have a house mother that lives with you. And I remember, I could never afford to go home to Denver [Colorado] for Thanksgiving and Christmas, so I would always stay in Chicago [Illinois] for Thanksgiving. It was just too expensive. I mean, I had all kinds of scholarships, I was on work study; that's a whole other story about the class issues I encountered at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. But, so, so I had never--I could never afford to go home for Thanksgiving, so I told them in the sorority house, "I'm just gonna stay here," and there might've been one or two other women who wanted to stay there and they said, "Oh, well the house mother will be away, so you'll have--we'll have to hire someone to come stay with you." Right (laughter), right. I said, "I moved one thousand miles away to come to college and you're telling me I need a babysitter for four days? That's ridiculous. I'm not paying. I'm not paying." You know, I will write to the national if I need to. Like, forget it. And finally, they relented and, you know, didn't make me pay. But, but that was also--I was like, this is just crazy. So, I'm, I'm also becoming much more of a feminist sort of in the process of all of this. I'm, you know, learn--there are different women's organizations on campus that I'm, you know, sort of getting involved with, something called the Women's Coalition [College Feminists], I think. Story_ID: 660653 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you a member of the Women's Coalition [College Feminists] at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I was for a while and I participated in some of their meetings and events. I wasn't ever a real active member or part of the leadership or anything but, again, it was this opportunity to, to learn about those issues, explore that side of myself, you know. It was kind of the first time I'd had an opportunity to learn anything about feminism or women's issues, so I took a lot of women's studies classes and, you know, that kind of thing. And definitely more than once, I was quoted in The Daily Northwestern or had written pieces for The Daily Northwestern about women's issues. I didn't mind being interviewed. I didn't mind being honest, you know, about my views. I know one I was quoted in was around--every year, they would bring Phyllis Schlafly and somebody else to do the, the pro-choice, you know, whatever you want to call the other side--anyway--pro and con on abortion rights. And there was--you know, they would always interview women after that and I would be quoted on that, talking about the--you know, the importance of a woman getting to make her own decision. Anyway, so I was pretty out there visibly as, as a feminist, as a woman who wasn't afraid to talk about women's issues. I wrote an op-ed about this--the escort service on campus, the, the--to walk you home late when you were afraid to walk alone at night. ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], you could call up an ROTC guy to walk you, you know, to the other end of campus at night if you were concerned for your safety, and I wrote an article about, "Well, this is kind of silly. I'm supposed to call a man I don't know to walk me home to protect me from men I don't know?" And it was interesting. Since then, they have changed that into a work study job that is--I think they go in pairs. It's men and women that you can request to walk with you. I mean, it's, it's totally different from, from how it was when I was on campus. But, at the time, people, you know, thought it was--I was just being too outspoken, I don't know what. So, so, anyway--and then, yes, there were some other incidents with fraternities putting out really awful stuff about the Take Back the Night march. Universities used to have a lot of those. I don't know if they actually do anymore, but these, these marches at night, you know, with women primarily and some men, you know, where you just sort of refuse to be afraid and we're kind of trying to challenge the culture of sexual assault and all of that. Speaker 1: Were there--well, were there like a number of sexual assaults when you were at Northwestern or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were always sexual assaults. Story_ID: 660654 Speaker 1: And this--I mean, this was--this was before campuses had the structures that they have now. I think during my time at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] was when they hired their first staff person to really--I think she was like sexual assault coordinator. I remember her name, Jamie Jimenez. But, they, they decided they actually needed to create a staff position for someone to deal with the allegations and things coming in 'cause generally how universities handled this was they would, you know, just try to handle it quietly through university channels and separate the two students, maybe move the guy to another dorm across campus so that they wouldn't be living in the same dorm or whatever. Speaker 2: You mean a guy who is guilty of sexual assault? Speaker 1: Well, I mean, keep in mind, universities are not courts of law. They are not judges and juries and often in cases of campus sexual assault, we see that it's his word against hers and there's alcohol involved or other drugs and the credibility of the woman is challenged and, you know, it's, it's a very--as we're--as we still see today, it's an extremely difficult, difficult issue. And the main thing about being at a private university, I, I learned, and I'll tell you this--in this next story you'll understand is that they will do anything they can to not be embarrassed. That is really what a private university wants to avoid, is, is any kind of public embarrassment. So, I, I was getting quoted in articles and writing a few articles about women's issues and this incident happens on campus. They called it a bomb threat, but I learned later what happened was a package was sent to the president of the university at that time, Arnold Weber [Arnold R. Weber], which was a mutilated Barbie doll that had little red things strapped to her to look like little mini sticks of dynamite and maybe some red nail polish painted like to look like blood, something like that with a note that said, "This is what Arnold Weber thinks about women." So, they called this a bomb threat and their brilliant idea for investigating who could've sent this package, the package was sent from the student union building, Norris Center [Norris University Center], so they figured it was a student. Their brilliant idea for investigating this was--this is university police--was to bring in every woman who had been quoted or written anything about women's issues in The Daily Northwestern as if those of us who were comfortable speaking out about these issues, being public about them would send some crazy anonymous package, but whatever. So, this is also my sophomore year when I'm living in the sorority house [Gamma Phi Beta Sorority] that I have tried--you know, that I've resigned from but the--you know, I still have to live in the house, it's ver- you know, I'm going through all this stress, and I get this call from, from the university police that they want to question me or they want to ask me a few questions about some of these women's organizations that I'm part of, and I say okay. You know, and I'm, I'm opinionated, but I've never been in trouble before as a student. I mean, I've always done well in my classes, I've always gotten good grades. This is the first time any kind of discipline issue. I've, I've never been suspended, I've never--you know, I never had any kind of trouble like that, so I was terrified. I'm on all kinds of financial aid, so I'm really scared. So, I go, okay. Let me--I'll go in and talk to them. And then they start asking me questions about, "Well, you're, you're part of some of these radical feminist groups on campus, right?" I said, "Well, I, I go to some Women's Coalition [College Feminists] meetings if that's what you are referring to. I go to some of their events. I participate, but I'm not an organizer or leader of those but, yeah, I participate in that." "Well, you know, we, we think that someone from one of these radical feminist organizations is responsible for this, and if you--if you don't let us fingerprint you and photograph you right now, you could appear--you could be forced to appear before a grand jury." And I didn't know what that meant. I'm like nineteen years old. I had no--I had no attorney. I had no clue what they were talking about. But, here's this federal postal inspector sitting here, you know, making me feel terrified that if I don't go along with this, I'm gonna be in real trouble. So, so, I let them take my picture, I let them take my fingerprints and, you know, I just felt terrible. And my parents [Tamra Wood Tate and George Tate] were not much help. My parents were just concerned about me keeping my financial aid and not getting kicked out of school 'cause I also learned at a private university, you don't have a ton of rights. You--they can kick you out for almost anything they want. It's not like going to a state university; it's not the same at all. Story_ID: 660655 Speaker 1: So, I was talking about it with some of the people I worked with at my work study job. I was in the performance studies building for work study 'cause I actually started college as a theater major. So, anyway, that was the crowd I ran with for the first year or so of college. And they were telling me, "Well, you need to--you, you should call the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union]. The ACLU should get involved with this." I don't think I knew what the ACLU was. I don't think I knew what they did. So, they were giving me that advice. And then one of my sorority sisters who went on to be a reporter for the Chicago-Sun Times, Becky Beaupre [Becky Beaupre Gillespie]. I'm not sure what her married name is now. She works in communications at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] now. She said, "I really want to write an article about this." Because they're, they're calling in all these women. All these women are being questioned. You know, the description they gave was a woman who was like five foot four with short brown hair, white, white, of course, was the description they gave. So, whatever, I guess I look white enough. So, that, that describes like, I don't know, almost half of the student body at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. So, so, all these women were getting called in and questioned and no one was doing anything about it and Becky says, "I need a woman to go on record. You know, we need to tell somebody's story. Will you do it?" And I said, "Okay, why not?" So, the headline for The Daily Northwestern was "Bomb Suspects Questioned" and then my name is right there in the first paragraph. It was the lead story in the The Daily Northwestern. And so once it's out, you know, I figure well, I have nothing to lose. I call the ACLU, send them the article, and I sent the article to different media outlets in town, you know, different--broadcast stations picked it up, newspapers picked it up. I sent a copy to Ms. magazine. Ms. magazine does an item about it. And at this point, the university is getting a lot of bad press, a lot of bad press. So, finally, the ACLU steps in and convinces them they--that this is a violation of our First Amendment rights, that you can't question people and threaten them like this just for exercising their right to free speech, and so they stopped. So, then it was over. And it was a--it was a really hard, hard, stressful year. I mean, I was scared I was gonna get kicked out of school, I wasn't eating well, I wasn't sleeping well. It was really, really difficult, but I feel really proud of myself for being able to stand up and tell my story and just say this is wrong. You know, you can't--you can't target us like this. But, it gives you a picture of the climate of the school and also just kind of being this generation as a woman who wants to talk about women's issues. You know, it--there's a--there's, there's a big backlash, big backlash against us in this generation for wanting to talk about sexism or any of those issues at all. So, it wasn't easy. Speaker 2: Now, did the law school [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] get involved at all or any of the--any offshoot of the law school get involved? Speaker 1: No. No. Honestly, I don't remember anybody else being involved with it. I did get some support from the women's center at Northwestern University [Northwestern University Women's Center]. Njoki Kamau, who is still the associate director there, she just called me out of the blue I think and offered her support. We still work together in Re-evaluation Counseling; she's very involved in that as well. But, yeah, the women's center was great. But, otherwise, no. I don't think any other part of the university got involved at all. I never got an apology. I never got anything from them. I got my fingerprints back and my picture back. Years later, my mom [Tamra Wood Tate] gets this big envelope, like what is--what could this possibly--from federal postal inspector, a big envelope. What could this possibly be? It was my fingerprints and my picture. It said, this investigation has been closed. Speaker 2: And all of this was over a Barbie doll-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --with nonexplosive-- Speaker 1: Right. Right. Speaker 2: --you know, some sort of-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --decorations that looked like it might've been-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --little sticks of dynamite or something-- Speaker 1: Something. I never saw it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I don't know for sure, but that's it. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: That was it. Story_ID: 660656 Speaker 1: So, now you were--you were quoted in The New York Times, too, in an--about an incident called Speak Out on Sexism. Do you remember that, that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I do remember. I do remember. The fraternities were really mocking what we were trying to do with Take Back the Night and saying it was stupid and, you know, it was a good way to pick up chicks if you go to the Take Back the Night march, you know, just stupid stuff like that, really belittling. I mean, it was just--it's just very hard, I mean, at this--in this age that I'm in, this generation I'm in, to really talk about what you deal with as a woman as if like there's anything that could be wrong, you know. It seem--it sort of seems like we're supposed to be above all of that now, it's done. Your mom or your grandma, they broke the glass ceiling; that's all over. But, it's a really--it's a really real fight still. And I think, you know, for a black woman, it's just like a double--a double whammy. You sort of have to navigate both things. You know, you're still in a very, very small minority if you become a black woman leading an organization or in a management role and you get pigeonholed in certain ways, as an angry black woman or, you know, all those different kinds of things that you face. But, you're not supposed to talk about either thing. You're not supposed to talk about there being racism anymore and you're not supposed to talk about there being sexism anymore. It's like we're, we're just done with, with all of that, apparently. So, it's an interesting time, interesting time to come of age. Story_ID: 660657 Speaker 1: So, this is all in the early '90s [1990s]. This is--so, as you said, like, it was Rodney King, the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] riots on television and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. And then O.J. [O.J. Simpson] happened the night before I graduated [from Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], the white Bronco [Ford Bronco] chase was the--I remember watching that with my parents [Tamra Wood Tate and George Tate] the night before my graduation ceremony in '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Now, he actually was apprehended in Chicago [Illinois], I believe? Speaker 2: Oh, was he? See, I don't even remember-- Speaker 1: Finally a couple days later-- Speaker 2: --where he was apprehended. Speaker 1: --where he actually, you know, was picked up in Chicago. Speaker 2: And then the verdict happened while I was in my first job at the Daily Herald newspaper. That's when the verdict came down, was when I was there, and that was also very interesting to see the reactions of like a predominantly white newsroom when, when the verdict came down. Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about the O.J. case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness (laughter). That is a complex question. Well, I don't want to deny all of the racism that black men have experienced and continue to experience at the hands of the criminal justice system and I also don't want to deny the obvious reality of violence and sexism that was part of that relationship that I think now sports writers and journalists realize that they, they have turned away from and failed to pay attention to domestic violence and other incidents that, that have been, you know, pretty much known about for years anecdotally, but it never seemed like a story. And it certainly wasn't a story because O.J. was--he was beloved. He was running through airports for Hertz [The Hertz Corporation] and, you know, all of that and nobody wanted to report on the, the nine-one-one calls from his home. So, so, I think it exposed both of those things, both of those realities in a pretty ugly way. And it was pre- it was pretty ugly to watch how polarizing the whole thing was. You know, you either had to be 100 percent for O.J. or 100 percent against him, you know, which is--that's a tricky dynamic for you to walk as a black woman. That's a very tricky dynamic for you to walk. You either gotta support the man all the way or you're a traitor (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you think he did it? Speaker 2: I don't want to speculate actually on what he did or didn't do, but clearly there was some violence at his hand in that relationship prior to that happening. Speaker 1: Do you think it's framed by the L.A. Police Department [Los Angeles Police Department]? Speaker 2: I think the L.A. Police Department was completely racist and incompetent in many, many, many ways as are most police departments, you know, in this country. Clearly, there's just, you know, a level of incompetence and discrimination that happened there, that continues to happen. It happens in--it's happening in Missouri, that we see in Chicago, you know. I don't think it's a story about one police department as much as it is about the, the whole state of our criminal justice system, honestly. Speaker 1: Such a huge news story. I just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: And you were at the Herald when, when the verdict came down. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah. I think I was in the newsroom when it happened and I remember there were just three of us black reporters in the newsroom and it was like we felt relieved in a certain way but we couldn't show any kind of relief because everyone else was so angry, you know. All the white reporters were so angry and it was like you couldn't--you couldn't be relieved about it. I mean, I think I was mostly just relieved that it was over 'cause the whole thing was just a--such a circus and I think served to really distract our attention from the bigger more important ongoing issues that we need to be dealing with. But, it was--it was a--it was a tense moment. And things had already--they had gotten a little tense at the Daily Herald. Story_ID: 660658 Speaker 1: So, I moved to journalism--I moved from theater to journalism in school because I realized I needed to be able to have a career that would pay me some money and have a job-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --and I got nervous. And I moved--I moved to journalism because I knew I could do journalism (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were you in any plays at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]? Speaker 1: No. I didn't--I didn't do any of that. I, I was pretty intimidated as a theater major. It's a pretty high pressure environment. So, I-- Speaker 2: I know in those days--well, as today--you get--Second City is big in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Well, you know, like-- Speaker 2: Chicago has a big-- Speaker 1: --David Schwimmer-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was a year or two before me. Greg Berlanti, who is a very successful producer. He produced-- Speaker 2: Schwimmer was the star of 'Friends.' Speaker 1: Yeah, star of 'Friends.' Greg Berlanti who was the producer of 'Dawson's Creek.' You know, those guys were there before me. I was actually in theater classes with Billy Crystal's daughter, Jenny Crystal [Jenny Crystal Foley]. The actress, Kimberly Williams [Kimberly Williams Paisley], who's done a few movies--she did like 'Father of the Bride'--she was acr- lived across the hall from me. So, anyway, it was intimidating. And I didn't--I was like, I can't make a living at this. I don't think I can try to dedicate my life to this. I, I just--I just really got intimidated by it. And so I said, journalism is something I can do. I know I enjoy writing. I know I can do that well. My mother [Tamra Wood Tate] did that. Again, it's funny. It wasn't like my dream job, kind of like my dad [George Tate], but, but I ended up being at a very good school. I thought, well, I'm--Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois] is right here. I'm gonna try this and I did. I did really enjoy journalism. Story_ID: 660659 Speaker 1: So--but I was--what I was gonna say about the Daily Herald, so that was my first job out of school. I had done some internships, but-- Speaker 2: Well, I want to go back to the internship-- Speaker 1: Oh, you wanna go back (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at Boston-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Now, I heard you got it through--well, I've read that you got it through the NABJ (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, at The Boston Globe? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was through the NA- National Association of Black Journalists, um-hm. Speaker 2: Did you go to NABJ, the, the local meetings-- Speaker 1: The convention? Speaker 2: --or, or the convention or-- Speaker 1: I went to the convention every year for several years for a number of years. Speaker 2: While in college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]? Speaker 1: Was pretty active. Well, that was my junior year. Yeah. I mean, we went to the convention as NABJ interns, which was a great experience because we produced a paper during the convention and we got to work with these incredible experienced journalists who really mentored us like, you know, [HistoryMaker] Joe Davidson was at The Wall Street Journal. I think--I'm not sure where Joe is now. Maybe he's at The Washington Post. I'm not sure. But, really-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Yeah. Walter Middlebrooks [sic. Walter Middlebrook] from Newsweek, you know really incredible people who, who, who gave us a lot of coaching and education in that--in that very concentrated week. So, that was a great experience. And then, I'm not sure if I went to the convention right after I graduated, but once I started working, I really tried to make it to, to NABJ every year. And I later get involved with the Chicago Association of Black Journalists [National Association of Black Journalist Chicago Chapter] and I was vice president of print for a time. Speaker 2: So, was it Professor Whitaker [Charles Whitaker] that took you to the NABJ? I mean, did he, you know, gather the students up and take them to NABJ? Speaker 1: No, I don't think so. I mean, one of the things, NABJ was an expensive conference, so I don't know that we went as a group of students. I just think when--as I was an NABJ intern, we went. So, I don't think I went really until I was a professional-- Speaker 2: Okay. So, you-- Speaker 1: --later. Speaker 2: --went when you were an intern at The Boston Globe. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then later on in, in--after I was working. Speaker 2: So, were you in a--at The Boston Globe for a summer? Is that what it was? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. This is the summer of '93 [1993]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Let me think. Yeah, that would be summer of '93 [1993] right before senior year. Speaker 2: Okay. What was going on in Boston [Massachusetts] then? Speaker 1: You know, I don't--I don't know that it was--there were big, huge incidents in Boston that summer. I just remember it was--it was an incredibly intimidating experience. That was actually what kind of made me believe--I didn't know if I was--I was cut out to be at a big daily newspaper. It was--it was really competitive and a lot of people wanting to get on page one. But, I got to do some really good stories there, mostly because I just had some, some great journalists who befriended me. Lynda Gorov was one of them and then a black journalist, Derrick Jackson, who may still be there, he befriended me. And, and Greg Moore [Gregory L. Moore] who was deputy metro editor and went on to become editor I think at the--was he at the Cleveland--no, he started at the Cleveland Plain Dealer [The Plain Dealer]. He might've gone to New York Times [The New York Times], I'm not sure. But, Greg Moore was one of the only black executives at that level and Derrick Jackson was one of the few editorial writers. Anyway, they helped me do some stories I really wanted to do on weekends and evenings. I did a piece on single black fathers that I really enjoyed and, and they--you know, they and Lynda, Lynda--not black, Jewish writer, she coached me a lot on that story. The encouraged me to stick with those ideas and pursue that. So, that really was a, a big learning experience for me. But, I did not like the environment of the big newsroom and Boston is a tough--it was at that time anyway, a tough place to be an outsider 'cause the minute you open your mouth, they know you're not from there. Speaker 2: You don't say Boston. Speaker 1: Yeah, you can't say any of the neighborhoods right or the towns right. You don't know where anything is. It's like incredibly hard to navigate. But, but, it was good. It was--it was a good learning experience. Story_ID: 660660 Speaker 1: So--all right. So, that's summer of '93 [1993] and then you, you graduated [from Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] then in '94 [1994]. Did--did you associate with any, any of the other--any papers in the Chicago [Illinois] area before you graduated or did, did you have any interaction with-- Speaker 2: No. Well, I did an internship right after graduation at People magazine at the Chicago bureau, which, yeah, Time Life had a bureau here at that time. I'm not sure if they still do. And that was a whole different world. I had never done like entertainment or celebrity news, but it was fun for a summer. But, no, the Daily Herald was my first--my first shot at that and I just started working for them I think in October right after I graduated. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So--well, how did you find out about the Daily Herald and, and what is the--the Daily Herald is in Arlington Heights [Illinois], right? It's local. Speaker 2: It's in Arlington Heights. It covers the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --northwest suburbs, northwest and western suburbs now. Honestly, they--at that time and maybe still do, they, they really hired a lot of Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois] graduates. They took a lot of people out of school. Their--you couldn't get a job at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] or the Sun-Times [Chicago-Sun Times] out of school like that. You needed several years of professional experience, so the Daily Herald was a good starting point. It was a good midsize paper and a good market. You know, I had been willing to move, but it was right here, so I applied and got a job. I mean, that was the '90s [1990s], you know. It was a really different time to be graduating from college (laughter), you know. It was not hard to find jobs and it was not hard to find jobs in media. So, again, now, I really feel for graduates today. It's just a totally, totally different world. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were hired as a, a general assignment reporter? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, I had a--I, I had a beat. I think I covered Rolling Meadows [Illinois] and Palatine [Illinois] schools. And then we all filled in for each other. So, I ended up covering all different kinds of suburban news, village board meetings, and zoning board meetings, and park board meetings, and human interest stories, and just drove my way around the northwest suburbs, really got to know that part of metropolitan Chicago, and did a lot of writing and reporting. I mean, I think I averaged like three stories a day 'cause the, the Daily Herald, you know, what they were known for is really localized, localized coverage, so they want someone in Palatine to pick up the paper and see news about Palatine and they want someone in Arlington Heights to see news about Arlington Heights. So, they've got reporters doing separate stories on each of those things. Oh, my necklace is falling off. Just a moment. So, they've got reporters doing, doing different stories on each of those things, so they really wanted you to churn out a lot of copy, nothing by today's standards. Today's standards, you have to tweet it, you have to videotape it, you have to take your own pictures, you've gotta put stuff out on Facebook. I mean, it's a whole different story now, but for back then, that was a lot of writing to do. Yeah. So, I--but, I learned a lot. I learned a lot from just getting to report and write a lot of different things. And I moved up to the metro desk after, I don't know, a couple years or so, and one of my--one of the part of my beat was diversity. And at that time, the demographics of the suburbs were really changing. It was--we were beginning to see the wave of Latino immigrants, largely Mexican immigrants, moving into the northwest suburbs, and so I did a lot of stories about that, and really enjoyed that part of my job. But it became pretty clear to me that I wasn't going to be able to grow there in the ways that I wanted to. I got the message somewhat subtly from some of the editors, "Well, these are all really great stories you're doing, but don't forget the majority of our readers." And I thought, okay. I'm gonna hit a ceiling here pretty soon. Again, there's not much diversity in this newsroom. I mean, I think, again, two or three black reporters. I don't know if there are any--maybe one or two other reporters of color, and all white editing staff, and I thought, okay, I'm gonna need to do something different. And somehow, I think I got a scholarship or something to attend the Investigative Reporters and Editors conference. They gave scholarship to--scholarships to journalists of color to go to that, and I managed to go to that, and that's where I met Laura Washington, another person who changed my life. Story_ID: 660661 Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is--yeah, you were talking about the conference, investigative journalist conference [of Investigative Reporters and Editors] where you met Laura Washington of The-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Chicago Reporter. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, I meet Laura there. I'm not sure if she was a presenter or if she was just attending, but I had heard about The Chicago Reporter in college. Charles Whitaker and some other folks at Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], Abe Peck, who was the long time chair of the magazine department at Medill, too, had, had told me that that would be a publication I should look into given my interests, my, you know, background, and the kind of issues I wanted to cover. So, there I--you know, I get to meet Laura, which is a fantastic opportunity and get really excited about the idea of investigative journalism. Speaker 1: Was the Herald [Daily Herald]--I, I, I didn't ask you this, but-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --was the Herald sort of a conservative paper? I mean, just thinking from the, the suburbs around Chicago [Illinois] have a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --tend to be more--much more conservative than-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I would--I would say so. Honestly, I don't know if I think it's as conservative as the Chicago Tribune today, but, but definitely, you know, would--primarily endorsing Republican candidates. Most of those suburbs particularly at that time were largely Republican. That is changing some. I mean, that changed some with the--Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] election and also with the influx of Latinos, so many Mexicans in the suburbs; that has changed the politics a little bit. But, yeah, I would definitely say overall kind of more on the conservative side. So, again, a--but a concern about diversity, an interest in diversity, but, but, I'm realizing I'm not gonna be able to do a lot here for a long time, I mean, unless I want to become an editor and do all of that. But, again, I wasn't--I didn't feel like I was done writing and I didn't feel liked I wanted to stop focusing on these issues. This was what I was really interested in, was these--exploring all these questions about race and class and all these different issues. So, I meet Laura at the conference and, you know, I'm just really impressed and, you know, really kind of start watching The Chicago Reporter a little bit more. And then at some point, I think it's--well, it must be '98 [1998] by that point, I, I--I'm doing really well at the Herald, I, I could, you know, be on track for another promotion. I'm, I'm doing great, but Laura calls and she says she's got a job opening for a politics and government reporter. And I didn't know anything about Chicago politics at all, but I said, okay. Let me talk to you and let's see what happens and, and I took it. And I took a pay cut. I think I took like a 30 percent pay cut. I mean, it's-- Speaker 1: That's what it says here. Speaker 2: --thirty percent out of not a whole lot, but, you know--I don't know, what was the starting salary with The Reporter at that time? It was high twenties or--I don't know even know that it was thirty thousand [dollars] at that time. Because I just thought I gotta--I gotta try this. This is too-- Speaker 1: Where were you-- Speaker 2: --good to pass up. Speaker 1: --living in Chicago in those days? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had been living in Evanston [Illinois] when I started working at the Herald and then I had moved out to Palatine [Illinois] my last year at the Herald because for, for a little while, I thought, okay, well, if I'm really gonna be at this paper, let me live here, let me understand the neighborhood, the communities, let me be part of this, so I was living out there. I wasn't terribly happy living out in the--in the suburbs, but, but, yeah, so for the first few months I was at the Reporter, I had a really horrible commute (laughter) because they were downtown and I was in Palatine, so it took me a while. And then I moved to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] a few months in and I've been there ever since. Story_ID: 660662 Speaker 1: I want to ask about two things before we get you started at The Reporter [The Chicago Reporter]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: One is the conference in Durban, South Africa. Speaker 2: Yeah, 2001? Speaker 1: Yeah, the United Nations World Conference against Racism [World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance], which is a--how did you get involved in that and what happened there? Speaker 2: That was through Re-evaluation Counseling. I mentioned the peer counseling social change organization I got involved with in college, that organization, we set up a project called United to End Racism and actually registered for that conference as an NGO [non-governmental organization] and sent a delegation of, of folks from our organization. So, so, Re-evaluation Counseling, RC, is a--pretty much a volunteer based group that has folks involved in--I think now we're--there are people in eighty some countries in the world, so it's an international, very grassroots kind of organization. But, from time to time, we've used this structure of United to End Racism to bring people together to share these tools and this information we have about how to heal from the effects of racism and other oppressions. So, it was a really amazing delegation of people from all over the world, different ages, different backgrounds, all kinds of things, and we did a whole series of different workshops, again, on, you know, recovering from the damage done by racism, for, for all these different groups. We even had workshops for white people on, you know, recovering from the damage done by racism 'cause we, we really put our thinking forward really around three different ways that racism affects people. I mean, one is the actual, you know--we don't believe in reverse racism and I personally don't believe in this thing called reverse racism, but I believe that, you know, there is an economic and--yeah, an economic exploitation of people, people of color around the world that's justified in the name of racism, that's one thing. Then, I believe, you know, there--that we as people of color internalize all of that and turn it against each other and ourselves, i.e., you know, black men killing each other in Chicago [Illinois]. And lastly, though, I think the humanity of white people is deeply, deeply affected by racism if you're taught to be an oppressor, if you're taught to perpetuate this horrible thing. If you're taught to believe its lies, that's deeply injurious to you as a human being and you have to actually tackle it on all those fronts for it to work. You can't do this like white people are evil thing or, you know, whatever. So, we did workshops--we did a series of workshops on all those different kind of flavors of racism with young people, with women, with, I don't know, Jews, gentiles, you know, how racism intersects with anti-Semitism. Anti-Semitism was a huge issue at that conference, honestly. Anti-Semitism is used as a wedge issue always to, to grab our attention and get us focused on blaming a group of people, usually Jews, rather than working together to deal with issues, and it was very obvious at that conference how that was playing out. Anyway, so that was an amazing experience. It was amazing to be there. It was amazing to be part of it. It was amazing to see so many thousands of people around the world who really believe that not only must we end racism, but we can by working together that we can actually undo this, that it does not have to be a reality of life forever in perpetuity. So, that was--that was really incredible. It was very unfortunate that 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened a week or two after that conference, and so the gains from that conference just got kind of, you know, swept under the rug and then we were into 9/11 and justif- using that to justify all kinds of horrible racist policies, you know, at home and abroad. But, that experience, being in Durban, again, was another thing that sort of shaped me in terms of my commitment to tackling racism and speaking out and being visible around it, you know, using The Reporter as a vehicle to do that and using my personal life as a vehicle to do that. You know, I began to really focus on a lot of efforts on building a local community of folks involved with Re-evaluation Counseling who were committed to that work. We've--and we've done really amazing work in, in building a community of people here in Chicago doing that together, a really multiracial, you know, mixed class, mixed generational group of people doing that. So, that conference really gave me a lot of hope and inspiration I think to really know that it was okay to dedicate a lot of my life to this work. Story_ID: 660663 Speaker 1: In '96 [1996] also, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected state rep [state representative], which I--you know, it wouldn't have been a--in the--in this area, it wasn't like a monumental-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --thing. Speaker 2: He was my state senator. I used to see him in the grocery store because he lived a few blocks away from me. We had breakfast at Mellow Yellow [Chicago, Illinois]. I got to interview him when he was running--he ran for [U.S.] Congress against [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush and lost big, which he deserved to lose 'cause he ran a very--he ran a tough campaign. He did not run a good campaign. It was a lot of rhetoric about the older generation of black leaders being washed up and--you know, he, he learned a lot of things (laughter) after that campaign. We learn a lot from our mistakes. Speaker 1: I think like Donne Trotter was in that race, too, I believe. There was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Donne Trotter-- Speaker 2: It was a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --pretty crowded field. I can't remember who all was in it, but, yeah. Speaker 1: He and Donne Trotter were the top challengers I remember. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, how did you feel about Barack Obama in those days? Speaker 2: I mean, I had a lot of respect for him in, in terms of, you know, representing a, a new generation of black leaders, trying to make change and trying to challenge, you know, the way government pol- the inequities in government policies and programs from--and also from his background. I mean, I--it was--you know, personally, it was really--it was really inspiring and validating for me to see another--you know, another person with a white mom from Kansas (laughter), you know, become this, this leader on black community issues, on, you know, issues of discrimination and inequality, and, and I really respected him. I respected the, the waters he had to navigate, the different worlds he navigated. I remember when he was running for U.S. Senate being at a, a breakfast Jesse Jackson, Sr. [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], hosted for the black press and he, he was teasing him. He was saying, "Oh, what's your name again? O, O what? Obama? We gotta do something about this name. You know, this name of yours is a problem." And it's like, oh, wow. I remember thinking at the time, you know, he's gonna regret saying that (laughter). He's really gonna regret saying that. This guy is going places. And this guy represents a whole new generation of black people that don't fit into the same old box that you fit into, you know, by his name, by his background, by where he--he's lived, his experiences. So, I did not have the privilege of, of getting to work with him when he was a community organizer or when he was in the, the offices of Community Renewal Society [Chicago, Illinois]. But, but, it was nice that our paths were able to cross in the ways that they were. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he, he actually organized out of the offices of Community Renewal Society, which is the home, the parent organization for The Chicago Reporter. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was there before I was but, yeah, that was a base for him. Speaker 1: Okay. There's a lot of people in the organizing community knew him and were talking about him-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when I started working with Chicago Alliance [Chicago Alliance for Neighborhood Safety], same thing. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, that was the thing that was so exciting about his, his success, is he was a guy we knew. He was the first president who was a guy we knew, in my lifetime. He was the first president who was like a guy I knew, you know, that, that we had worked with. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a good way, way to put it, really, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 660664 Speaker 1: So, 1998, Chicag- your dream job was Chicago Reporter, taking a huge pay cut. How did you manage to make ends meet? Speaker 2: I don't know. You know, you just do. You just do somehow. Yeah, I, I mean, again, I--you know, having been raised by parents [Tamra Wood Tate and George Tate] who were not flashy, were not big spenders, were both--you know, were very frugal, that served me very well. And, you know, I, I don't know, you have--you, you have roommates or you cut corners or you cut back on things and you just make it work. I'm not quite sure how I did it, but it's, it's one of the advantages of, of being single, right, is that you can just adapt your lifestyle however you need to, to do what you want to do. And I was loving it. I was loving what I was doing. I was learning a lot, made, you know, just tremendous friends and got exposed to this city in a way that I just didn't even imagine I'd be able to. Speaker 1: Who kind of guided you or mentored you through Chicago [Illinois] politics-- Speaker 2: Laura [Laura Washington]. Speaker 1: --as a--okay. Speaker 2: Laura. Laura was really the, the primary person. Laura and then the, the contributing editor, James Ylisela [James Ylisela, Jr.], who, who is just a--he's also a great journalist. He still does--you'll see his pieces in Crain's [Crain's Chicago Business] and Chicago magazine too. They were a great team with--between the two of them, an incredible body of knowledge about Chicago, politics, and I was very fortunate. I got to meet some of the, the legends, you know, of Chicago politics. I got to meet Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] and [HistoryMaker] Anna Langford. I don't know if Anna was the first--was she the first black female alderman? I'm not-- Speaker 1: Yes, she was. Speaker 2: I, I think so. Speaker 1: She was, yeah. Speaker 2: You know, and Lu Palmer, which is incredible. I, I went and sat down and talked with George Dunne [George W. Dunne], you know, really, the, the father of the Cook County Democratic machine. You know, John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.], I mean, all these--all these folks. I just had this platform-- Speaker 1: So, did you--I know in the-- Speaker 2: --to meet all of them. Speaker 1: In the organizing world, it's common practice to, for the first month or two, to just send you to interviews to interview people. Did you do that with Chicago Reporter? Did you go and-- Speaker 2: To send you to interview? (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, just, sit down and talk to Lu Palmer, to Anna Langford, to, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, to just-- Speaker 1: --and talk-- Speaker 2: --as a--as an introdu-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: As an introdu-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did do--yes, yes. That was a lot of why I did that. I wasn't interviewing them for particular stories. I mean, I wasn't doing one on ones like you do as a community organizing quite the same way. But, yeah, I really was able to use this institution, this, this incredible institution of The Chicago Reporter as a--as a door opener to get access to these, you know, really brilliant, you know, accomplished folks that I would not have any--had any other way to meet as a beginning reporter. And they were so incredibly gracious and respectful of The Chicago Reporter. I didn't even realize the reputation and the history that The Reporter had until I started working there, you know, 'cause I hadn't grown up here and I didn't really, really know, know all of that, so it was--it's just really an honor, tremendous honor. Speaker 1: Was John McDermott still alive when you-- Speaker 2: No. John, John died while I was in college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], I believe. He died in the--in the early '90s [1990s], so no. Laura, Laura was really running it by then. Speaker 1: Because I know he passed I believe in '95 [1995] or '96 [1996]-- Speaker 2: Was it? Speaker 1: --I'm thinking. Yeah, 'cause I, I-- Speaker 2: So, maybe it was just before-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I got there, yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause I was at the funeral and it had to be after I started with Chicago Alliance [Chicago Alliance for Neighborhood Safety], which was '94 [1994]. It had to be shortly after that. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I didn't have the pleasure of meeting-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of meeting John. Speaker 1: All right. Him, him being the founder. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, the, the head of the Community Renewal Society [Chicago, Illinois] when you got there was Dr. Calvin S. Morris [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin Morris], right? Speaker 2: Yep. Yep. Calvin Morris--well, no, actually, when I started, it was Yvonne Delk. She was there for maybe the first year or two and then Dr. Morris came in after her, her, her departure. So, most of the time I was there I was, was, it was led by Dr. Morris. Story_ID: 660665 Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, what stories did you work on for Chicago Reporter [The Chicago Reporter]? What--just give us some of your highlights of your time there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, there were highlights I had both as a reporter and then as an editor. You know, I, I kind of got catapulted into leadership there fairly quickly (laughter). So, it was--it was a fast--it was a frying pan kind of experience. But as a reporter, really enjoyed--there were--there were stor- really enjoyed some stories I did on just the political trail, you know, breaking down city council races, and aldermanic races, and mayoral contests around how black communities were voting, Latino communities were voting, looked at black support for Mayor Richard Daley [Richard M. Daley] and how that had been steadily, steadily increasing over his time in office and what were the implications of that, you know, for, for politics in the city covering the governor's race. I think that was Glen, Glenn Poshard and George Ryan running for governor and how, you know, they were fighting for black votes. Well, not like--not quite like the candidates are fighting today, but it was still pretty ugly back then. One of the stories I was most proud of, though, was a story I worked on--we worked on a package of stories about the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] community. Alden Loury who is now with the Better Government Association [Chicago, Illinois] worked with me on that and I spent months in the--in Englewood. This was after the murder, several years after the murder of Ryan Harris, a little girl-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and they charged two boys. I think they were seven and eight years old with her murder until they later found out that she was sexually assaulted, so that these boys could not have been her killers. But, it was just this tragic--the murder was tragic enough and then to have these two children, small children charged as her murderers was, was awful. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think they did know that she was sexually assaulted when they--when they charged the boys. Speaker 2: Well, it was--it was-- Speaker 1: But they didn't--part of what judge--oh-- Speaker 2: Judge Pincham [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham]? Speaker 1: Yeah, Pincham's defense was these boys couldn't produce semen. Speaker 2: They couldn't have done it. Right. Speaker 1: They couldn't do it. Speaker 2: They couldn't have done it. So, it was--it was awful. It was just a really awful chapter in the city's history in my opinion. But, what I wanted to do was go back and look several years later at how this had affected the community. And I just--I, I went to a lot of community meetings and spent a lot of time there just to build trust because this community had had so many journalists just parachuting in and parachuting out, people not invested in the neighborhood at all. So, I think that was around the time I got to know [HistoryMaker] Anna Langford because that's her community; that was her community. But, I--then I just started knocking on doors in the--in the blocks surrounding the vacant lot where Ryan's body was, was found, and I asked people what were you--, "What was that day like for you? Tell me about that day." And I talked to old people and young people and men and women. And they all pretty much said the same thing, that it reminded them of some other hugely traumatic thing they had already experienced. "Oh, it made me--it took me back to this time my cousin got shot or I watched this person die or I was, you know, assaulted myself," or, you know, all of these things, and I--it was like to a person, just the trauma that people had been experiencing, and so that became the story. And it coincided with I think the surgeon general at that time came out with a report about mental health trauma and its particular effect in African American communities. Speaker 1: That was David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher]? Speaker 2: That was Satcher. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so the timing was really good and it was just an incredible experience to actually try to capture some of what people had gone through, and, you know, I think was, was part of helping us understand that, you know, vi- this violence is--that we experience in this city, they are not isolated incidents, you know, that these build up and they have--they have a deep effect on the people who are left behind to witness and, you know, see all of this violence around them. So, so, I was pretty proud about that, that story. Story_ID: 660666 Speaker 1: So, what you--just to emphasize what you're saying, you're actually saying that looking at, at Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], you're looking at a--not--you're not looking at a calm community--I mean, a community that--where there are--there is a lot of violent incidents, but there are just isolated incidents, but you're looking at a community that's already wounded with a lot of--I mean, everybody has experienced some kind of trauma. Speaker 2: Everybody has experienced trauma. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Everybody has been exposed to it from, from--many from a young, young age, and that has an effect, you know. That, that has a, a deep effect. I, I mean, I think there's a lot of stigma in certain ways in the black community about talking about mental health issues or emotional issues, you know, because of the ways we've been exploited by the medical institution. We've been labeled as crazy, locked away, you know, so on and so forth. But I really--I really agreed with Alderman Dorothy Tillman [HistoryMaker Dorothy Tillman] when she was holding reparations hearings in the city council [Chicago City Council]. This was all around the same time. And she said at one point, she said, you know, we also need some emotional reparations. We don't just need financial reparations. We need some emotional reparations as well. So, I felt good about being part of that conversation and doing what I could to portray the humanity of the people in this--in this community, that they were not indifferent to this, that this was having a deep effect, and it wasn't easy. It wasn't easy on them. So, so, I was very proud of that. Story_ID: 660667 Speaker 1: You know, as an editor, I really helped work with, with folks and support them to do a lot of really good work. I mean, I think the biggest one happened when, you know, just before I, I left as publisher, Kimbriell Kelly worked with, with Alden [Alden Loury] who was--who was senior editor at that time to produce an incredible investigation on racial disparities in mortgage lending, and I think showed that black home owners who--black buyers who were earning $100,000 were more likely to get subprime loans than whites who were earning thirty-five thousand dollars, that there was a clear racial bias happening. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's pretty dramatic. Speaker 1: It's pretty dramatic. So, the attorney general's office, my current employer, Lisa Madigan, she got, you know--saw that information, was stunned by that information, conducted her own investigation of Wells Fargo [Wells Fargo and Company] and Countrywide [Countrywide Financial Corporation] and successfully sued them for racial discrimination, for racial bias in their lending practices. So, that's been part of the, you know, millions and millions of dollars--well, billions at this point, that she brought back to home buyers because of that crisis. So, we were very proud of our work on that issue. Speaker 2: I know in the--around that same time, I guess, in the late '90s [1990s], early 2000s, there was a tremendous--there was a loan shark--I mean, a housing loan scam going on on the West Side and some parts of the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] where they would loan you--you know, people were experiencing some economic difficulties during those days and they would loan them money for--or, or give them a second mortgage that the terms were so--being such that your house would be gobbled up by the loan company. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's terrible what's out there. Well and--I mean, and this is not a new phenomenon. I mean, The Atlantic monthly article, Ta-Nehisi Coates' article this June in 'The Case for Reparations' goes into all of this history about Chicago [Illinois] and contract housing and, you know, it's just been sort of in one form or another, you know, all of these policies and practices that have prevented the creation of black wealth, you know, over and over and over again in this city in particular, but, but nationally. So, I was--I was really proud to be part of a--you know, an institution that could help uncover some of that, shed some light, you know, on some of that. I also think--I was not the primary reporter doing that work, but I was at The Chicago Reporter when we were doing what I think was the best coverage of public housing in the city. It was during what was called the Plan for Transformation, which, you know, was the plan to tear down the high rise public housing, you know, projects and put mixed income, low rise developments in place, and I don't--I don't think any other journal- journalistic organization was digging into that and really telling that story the way we were. Brian Rogal was the primary reporter on that and he deserves, you know, tremendous kudos for his doggedness and his investigation of that over, over time because he really, really tried to hold the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] accountable during a very, very difficult era. So-- Speaker 2: And I think, was it Matthew McDermott, the son of John McDermott, the founder of The Chicago Reporter, was head of the Chicago housing coalition [Chicago Coalition for the Homeless, Chicago, Illinois] I think or, or a primary person involved in Chicago housing coalition-- Speaker 1: He may have been. I mean, Matt-- Speaker 2: --caught in those-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --bringing to light some of that--some of the problems with the tearing down of projects. Correct me if I'm wrong, the CHA residents after the--say they tear down Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois], which they did during this period of time, residents of--got vouchers, Section 8 vouchers, but there was not enough housing, Section 8 housing available in the city to accommodate the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --(unclear), so-- Speaker 1: There were all kinds of problems with the restrictions on who could move into Section 8 housing, all kinds of issues around how residents even were communicated with about how to get vouchers and where they could move, all kinds of concerns and challenges among residents about, you know, being uprooted from the only community they had known in many cases. I mean, it's just been--it's, it's been messy to put it kindly. And, and then we ran into, you know, the economic crisis and the housing market crash, and that really stalled the development of the new units and, you know, the whole idea of them being mixed income, you know, people weren't buying the, the mixed income part of the mixed inc- so, it's--I don't know actually, you know, how to think about that whole process and how to assess it except that I know for a fact that we just--we just do not know what to do with poor people. We do not know how to think about--in holistic ways about their health and wellbeing and, and how to provide them with decent housing in any kind of holistic, comprehensive way. Speaker 2: Now, now, you became the editor and publisher of The Chicago Reporter in 2001, right? Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: At age twenty-nine. Speaker 1: Like I said, it was kind of a frying pan sort of experience...