 Story_ID: 168230 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes, it's Byron, B-Y-R-O-N last name is Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: No middle name? Speaker 2: C. Just go with C. Speaker 1: Okay, just C? Speaker 2: Just go with the C. Speaker 1: All right, all right. That doesn't stand for anything like--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: It stands for my parents [Faith Prather and Bruce Williams] were not thinking when they did it; that's what it stands for (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Okay and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 22, 1959. I was born in Berkeley, California. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well I guess for me it should be occupations. I am the pastor at the Resurrection Community Church [Berkeley, California], I am a syndicated columnist and I'm an author. Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November 4, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the McGee Avenue Baptist Church in Berkeley, California. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Want the address? Speaker 1: No we don't have to have the address but thank you. Story_ID: 168231 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we ask. It's kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I do, it's beef bourguignon. I can't spell it, it's a--more specifically it's beef bourguignon at Bistro Cafe in Berkeley [California] (laughter). That is unquestionably my favorite food. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: All right. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Paris [France]. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, it comes from Dante's 'Inferno,' "the hottest places in hell are reserved for those who, in a period of moral crisis, maintain their neutrality." [sic] Story_ID: 168232 Speaker 1: All right, so I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately and then we'll put them together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Faith, Faith Loyce, L-O-Y-C-E Prather, P-R-A-T-H-E-R. Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is May 29, 1942 and she was born in Waco, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. And what can you tell us about her side of the family and how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I, I go back actually knew my great-grandmother and I go back from photos, memories, narratives. I go back to her mother, my great-great-grandmother and she was, she was a slave. She was a slave in Texas. My great-grandmother was born about seven or eight years after the Civil War ended. She, she, she was not, she was not a slave. So I go back to my great-great grandmother and--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Were they both living in the same region of Texas? Speaker 2: Yeah, they both were living in that Waco--I think---no excuse me, specifically the town that my great-grandmother and my great-great-grandmother grew up in was a little town outside of Waco called McGregor [Texas]. Speaker 1: McGregor, Texas. Are there any stories about your ancestors in McGregor? Speaker 2: One of the, one of the stories, in fact I just told this the other day--one of the stories that, that my grandmother [Naomi Brooks] told was--there are a couple. I'll share both of them with you. The first one was she told a story how--who was Governor John Connally who was shot during when President [John F.] Kennedy was killed that when he was a young boy, he grew up in the area one of the things that they were walking--he would like to do for fun was try and run them over. Speaker 1: Yeah that's a--was this pre, say, his political--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah this is-before YouTube, before his politics. But probably the most gripping story that my grandmother told was she was a young girl, you know, working, cleaning up a home for white people and the husband came home and he said to her, "Naomi have you ever seen five dead nigger toes before?" And she kind of jumped back--she is like ten or eleven and he opened up her hand and showed them to her. Now that's a story I remember more than anything else. Speaker 1: Yeah that's a pretty rough story, I mean-(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, you're talking about a ten, eleven, a ten or eleven year old. Speaker 1: So that was a feature of lynching mostly-(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: The taking of these parts. Speaker 2: Yes, yes souvenirs, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: So you hardly ever hear anybody mention this kind of thing. You know they just say things were bad, they don't go into detail. Speaker 2: No, no, I--more so on my mother's side that I grew up around them quite a bit. Story_ID: 168233 Speaker 1: So we got a lot of narratives and then we--sure we got the stories that "I walked 140 miles in the snow with no shoes to get to school." We got those stories like everyone gets those, but we also got some narratives that are tragic and I think one of the things that I take a great deal of pride in is that I was not the first to go to college or to graduate from college. My grandmother [Naomi Brooks], in fact, had secured that honor long before I was even born and my grandmother is a nurse and I think also what was--I look back now that my--I grew up I spent a lot of time with my grandparents and so I was in a home where my grandmother made more money than my grandfather. And so, I mean, and growing up in the '60s [1960s] I mean that was--I didn't even think of it back then but when you look back on it in hindsight yes she always made more than he did. Speaker 2: What's the college there in Waco [Texas]? Speaker 1: She didn't go to Waco, she went to Prairie View [University, later, Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]. Speaker 2: Prairie View. Speaker 1: Is it Prairie View A&M? Speaker 2: It was Prairie View A&M. Speaker 1: Yeah, she went to Prairie View. Speaker 2: Okay. There is one there in Waco, I mean--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: I only--the only one I know was Baylor [University, Waco, Texas] but I don't know if it was a historical--it might be a historical black college, I don't know, I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] or--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, Bishop closed. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah Bishop closed. But she didn't--she went to Prairie View. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So--that's something. And she, she actually made more money than your grandfather? Speaker 1: Yeah and she was very well read. You know very, very well read. My love of and appreciation for [Pablo] Picasso, for Dali, Salvador Dali, I mean, these things I got from my grandmother. She read extensively even after she had retired. Remember the horror soap opera 'Dark Shadows?' Well they had the reruns on and I forgot the name of that TV station but they were playing the reruns and they had a contest for who was the biggest 'Dark Shadows' fan and my grandmother wrote an essay, she won. She had every copy of 'Dark Shadows' on VHS and she flew out to New York [City] and met the cast and everything like that, so (laughter). Speaker 2: That's exciting, okay. Speaker 1: And after she retired she even taught yoga at Cal State Hayward which is now Cal State East Bay [California State University, East Bay, Hayward, California] for a number of years. Speaker 2: She was a renaissance woman. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Was she a painter, how did she get-(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: No I really, I really, I really don't know, I just know that I would go over house--by the time I was in college I would go over to her house and she had a biography that she had just finished on Picasso ['Picasso: Creator and Destroyer'] written by a very young--extremely young Arianna Huffington. It is one of the best biographies I've ever read. When I finished that book I felt like I knew Picasso and I still have that book that I later met Arianna and she signed it for me but that book I got from my grandmother. Speaker 2: That's something. Okay what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 1: Naomi, Naomi Brooks. Speaker 2: Okay, Naomi Brooks. Any other stories on that side? Speaker 1: Well of course I'll think about five or six after this interview is over but nothing right now comes to mind. Speaker 2: What did your grandfather do? Speaker 1: My grandfather, my father [Bruce Williams], my uncle all worked at Naval Air Station Alameda [Alameda, California]. They all worked at Naval Air Station Alameda. Story_ID: 168234 Speaker 1: What were things like for your mother [Faith Prather] growing up that she just talked about what life was like in Waco [Texas]? Speaker 2: No she, you know, she didn't, my mother I think--one of the reasons well my mother left very young and what happened was you know just with the migration and people from Texas came to California and so I had an aunt that moved out here first with her husband and then they shipped my mother out here. So my mother her formative years were all in California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she doesn't have any really especially oppressive narratives like my grandmother [Naomi Brooks] had. My grandmother had some and I would also say if I could go back to my grandmother for a moment, I would say that there were moments when that would come up to the, to the top. Where that oppression just--my grandmother was a very strong woman and you just had to respect her and it was almost if she thought, assumed that you weren't respecting her it was problematic for her subsequently it was problematic for my grandfather, problematic for the rest of us. But I have come to believe that was those formative years of just being silenced and that traumatic story that I shared with you when we first started. I know those things don't go away and we know more now. I think as you said my grandmother was a renaissance woman of sorts. She certainly was but at the same time she--we look at it now looking back she probably spent a lot of time--she was probably clinically depressed and didn't know it. 'Cause she carried a lot of--none of that ever got resolved. She just swallowed it, it never really got resolved. Speaker 1: Was her demeanor kind of melancholy? Speaker 2: Well her, her, her, her,--she was very lively, funny, extremely funny. I mean she would say whatever was on her mind, she didn't hold back but at other times that mood could switch. You know, that, that mood could just switch and you would be dumbfounded okay, like what happened here, you know. But just looking back though--now you look back with hindsight and you see things a little more clearer than you did when you were growing up like wow, mama's crazy, what's going on but yeah. Story_ID: 168235 Speaker 1: Okay so your mother [Faith Prather] grew up--did she grow up here in Berkeley [California]? Speaker 2: She grew up in Berkeley and Oakland [California]. Speaker 1: What did she say about what things were like when she was growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know my mother was an only child and it was harder for her. My relationship--it's interesting because I have one brother, one sister. I probably had the closest relationship with my grandmother [Naomi Brooks]. I think my mother and my grandmother spent so much time together it just--they just clashed. Whenever they got together for whatever reason they just clashed. And even now I will say remember when mommy used to say so and so; my mother had so many little quips. How she would describe things, you know she had these little stories. Like, one of my favorites was if she thought someone was lying about her--about their age she would say no she's older than that because she was student body president when Moses was a freshman (laughter). She would just say things like that (laughter). You know, and one that I use all the time and I've even used this in my columns that I think is so wise that holds true when she would always say, "What they mad about aint what they mad about." She had these little profound quips and I would say these to the other members of my family and they would go when did mama say that? Weren't you guys paying attention but I think they kind of tuned her out and who knows why. Maybe because I'm a writer I'm an observer so I don't miss those things. Speaker 1: Yeah that's the kind of observation "What they mad about aint what they mad about." Speaker 2: That's just a great--I mean you could apply that to politics, to social morals whatever that one fits a lot of scenarios. Speaker 1: Yeah the ability to be able to cut an issue-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --find out what it is really about takes a little work. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: So okay so now your mother went to school--did she go to Oakland--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: She went McClymonds High School [Oakland, California]. Speaker 1: Now that's a famous--we talked about sports when we first came in. Speaker 2: Yeah, right she went to McClymonds High School. It was still--she graduated in the '50s [1950s] it was still noted but she graduated after, she was after Bill Russell and after Frank Robinson and after Vada Pinson. Speaker 1: We could go on and on. Speaker 2: You do know a little bit about baseball. Vada Pinson that's pretty good, I'm impressed. I should interview you (laughter). Speaker 1: No, no, no. Just grew up watching the [Cincinnati] Reds, that's all. Speaker 2: But--Ohio Reds fan; I'm a [San Francisco] Giants fan so we'll see how long this interview lasts (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay anyway so your mother went to McClymonds? What was her--now she had you just as a senior or--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes she, she had me, she--I don't know quite how the math quite happened but she had me right about graduation. My father [Bruce Williams] was a--who was a few years--my father was six years older than my mother. He had come out of the [U.S.] Air Force already working for naval air and so, and they, they got married--when she graduated from high school in June, they got married and I got here in September, it happened just like that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168236 Speaker 1: Okay so well let me go to your dad's side then we'll go to the story on how they got together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What's your dad's name? Speaker 2: Bruce Williams. Speaker 1: Okay and what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was 12/5/33 [December 5, 1933] [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'31 [1931], I'm sorry, '31, '31, '31 I'm sorry about that. Speaker 1: So he's like--he's more than six years older than her [Williams' mother, Faith Prather]. Speaker 2: Yeah he is more than that, he's something like that, but he just died, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah he is eleven years older. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was older. Speaker 1: Where was your father born? Speaker 2: He was born--I don't know, you have--the spelling--the way it sounds is not the way it's spelled. But it was called Mexia, Texas. I'm not sure--it's outside of Fort Worth [Texas] but the spelling is crazy on that. It's no--you can spell it out phonetically but that, that's--it's a weird spelling, it's a very weird spelling. Speaker 1: It's outside of Fort Worth? What can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: Not, not nearly, not as much. What I do know is that originally my, my, my--our family surname was Knight, K-N-I-G-H-T. And the way the stories that were told to me were they lived in Omaha, Nebraska and that my grandfather killed a white man. I don't know the circumstances but that's what happened. He picked the family, left late at night and moved to Texas and changed his name to Williams. I mean you get to Texas, Williams, good luck finding that person. Speaker 1: Okay there is a famous photograph of a lynching in Omaha [Nebraska]. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Burnt to a crisp with everybody standing around--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. Exactly. I know that photo, yes. Speaker 1: I mean it could be--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: But I don't--I don't think due process, fifth amendment, fourteenth amendment or anything that was coming to him he wasn't going to risk that. So that's how on my father's side got the family. I do have a story that, another narrative that was told that the property that my grandfather owned was right next to I mean literally--and I've seen the property so I've been there. Here's the fence right next to the fence is Standard Oil [Co. Inc.]. Speaker 1: This is in Texas? Speaker 2: In Mexia, Texas. His fence and Standard Oil right next to it. And according to the county records they gave him a check for I think $25.00 a year. Speaker 1: To drill? Speaker 2: Well I don't know why--we don't know why--it's not clear why they gave him $25.00 but if Standard Oil is on one side there is probably oil on the other land too. They probably--you drill diagonally so they probably--I mean I don't have that definitively but Standard Oil was probably sucking up his, you know--drilling diagonally, sucking up his oil--and I'm sure that's not the first time you've heard that narrative. But that's one that--and I've been down there and there are oil fields still there. Speaker 1: So you suspect they were taking advantage of him. Speaker 2: Probably so, probably so. Yeah, I suspect that. But my grandfather died very early, in fact, he died very early and so my, my father really was like the breadwinner from the time he was--he had one older brother who had went away so my father was like the breadwinner for like seven or eight kids from the time he was twelve. My father was, I never knew a time growing up when he didn't have at least two jobs, he always worked, he always worked. Speaker 1: Did he have a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes he finished high school. I don't remember what high school. His claim to fame was that he lost a debate contest; he said he came in second. He probably came in third or fourth, he embellished the story. Point is Barbara Jordan won the contest, Representative Barbara Jordan won the contest which that's the only part that makes it believable because if he told me he won and Barbara Jordan was in the debate contest; I wouldn't have believed him, so (laughter). Speaker 1: Lost the debate to Barbara Jordan now that's something to say. Okay. Speaker 2: Then he got in he went to the [U.S.] Air Force, was in the Korean War and came back and ended up out here. In fact, started working Naval Air [Station Alameda, Alameda, California], he met my grandfather at Naval Air Station and my grandfather brought him home and that's how he met my mom. Story_ID: 168237 Speaker 1: Now is there a story they [Williams' parents, Faith Prather and Bruce Williams] tell about how they fell in love or any of that? Speaker 2: No, you know that, it's interesting we don't have--at least I don't get a lot of stories like that. But, but my father was a very unique man in that they divorced. Speaker 1: How long in? Speaker 2: They divorced in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay so when they were married almost ten years? Speaker 2: About ten years. They divorced in '69 [1969]. My mother didn't remarry but she was living with a guy for a while and had another child and that guy--he subseq--he died later but from the time that child was born my sister, my father treated her no different than my brother and me, no different. I mean he, I mean to the point that if she was in a jam or she lives in Los Angeles [California] now, she needed some money or she needed something, she would call my dad and he right you know what I mean. And when he died, he died two years ago I mean he left a couple of dollars for her in the will. So one of the things about my father that I probably respected more than anything else was how he treated my sister. I mean there was no, no difference at all, very, very magnanimous that way. Story_ID: 168238 Speaker 1: So did he [Williams' father, Bruce Williams], he exemplify like a fairness in most of the things he would do? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he just--I mean he wasn't a perfect dad but he was a really good guy. I mean he--it was just about fair--I mean, he was all about fairness and what probably--the story that really jumps out and--about my father was right after 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened, I was at his house, we were watching and Peter Jennings said this is the worst case of domestic terrorism in American history. My father never swore, it just wasn't part of his DNA, never swore and words came out of his mouth that I didn't know was in his vocabulary. He just became incensed because it was like--for him it was like [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] didn't happened. How can you say this is the worst case of domestic terrorism and I never saw my father that upset before. I mean, again, as I was saying earlier about my grandmother [Naomi Brooks] of how those things of racism sort of bubbled up; I think when Peter Jennings made that statement that, that racism growing up in Jim Crow Texas bubbled up in my father. It really, it, it really--that's part of the story more than anything else that I remember about him. That really, it shocked me, it's like who are you? Speaker 1: That's something that didn't come up normally? Speaker 2: No, no all I really got from my father was how hard he worked, growing up and I knew that. He would say things though, I remember the first I went to Memphis [Tennessee] and I was talking and I said I went to this place and there was this place downtown and I said oh it's been there for years, been there since like 1920, he said, my father said it's downtown, it was white owned and he goes you are probably in a place that I couldn't have walked in as a kid. He would say things like, he would say things like that, you know. Just, just making me aware, just, you know, but really, you know, didn't talk about--was always almost obsessive about, about saving money and saving things. You know, if he looked in the paper and Safeway had meat on sale, he would go buy it and I, and I attribute that to that sort of growing up in the [Great] Depression in the throes of depression you never know what's going to happen so, you know. And he had not a freezer but remember a deep freezer, that's what he had until he died. I don't know how much his utility bill was each month but that-- Speaker 1: Okay. So he stockpiled? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168239 Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' [Faith Prather and Bruce Williams] personalities--their sense of humor, the way they walk, talk, what they look like--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I look just like my mom; I look just like my mom. My mom is tall, my dad is short. I have my mom's eyes, my mom's nose; the only thing I have is my dad's head. I have his head, his little round head but other than that I look just like my mom. I couldn't deny that if I wanted to. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now tell me about your brothers and sisters. Who's--you're the oldest, right? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest then I have a brother that's three years my junior and then a sister that's, what twelve years, eleven years my junior. Speaker 1: So what are their names? Speaker 2: Bruce and Robin. Speaker 1: Okay and what do they do now? Speaker 2: My brother makes independent films, does local stuff and my sister is as they say in Los Angeles [California], she's in the business which means in the film industry but she does makeup and I don't know if she--if this is still her client but oh God, Kirstie Alley was somebody she worked for for years. So, you know, she'll tell me that she, she is in the 'business' as they say. But we're all different, you know, we're all different. They think I'm weird and I think they're weird. Not in a negative sense but well we are all just very different but to your, but to your point though about the other piece though, my dad was much more gregarious than my mother, much more. And when I was talking about he was a very nice guy that just reminded me every year I had the pleasure--my home where I live is five doors from my father--where my father lived. Every year because we had the same postal worker for years, Christmas time two block radius my father would give five dollars from every house, put it in a card and give it to the postal worker. He did that every year. That was just the kind of guy he was; you know, he just--we used to call him the mayor of 53rd Street, we just, you know. Story_ID: 168240 Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Grew, grew up in the same, same neighborhood pretty much in Berkeley [California] over on Parker Street. Grew up there-- Speaker 1: So what were the demographics of Berkeley in terms of black people? Speaker 2: Well the, the neighborhood that I grew up in was predominantly African American, working class. I'd say that people--the, the fathers, I mean--first of all there were a lot of household where both mother and father were working. So but I would say that the fathers that I knew from basically the kids I hung out with either worked at naval air station in Alameda [California], General Motors in Freemont [California] or the post office or, or, or, or Del Monte [FoodsBerkeley, California] who was out here. So these blue collar jobs were in an area that they could buy a home. Most, I mean, the friends that I had when I was, when I was six or seven were the same friends I had in that neighborhood until graduation. I mean, nobody moved we just--everybody--pretty stable. So that, that was the area that--I guess so called South Berkeley, I guess. Not too far from here, not too far from here. And that was pretty much a working class, working class neighborhood. And went to Berkeley schools, I went to Berkeley schools up until what would be called junior high to eighth grade and then I went to Albany High [School] in Albany [California]. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 168241 Speaker 1: I want to go back even further. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory, yes I have--the earliest would have to be when I was two and my mother [Faith Prather] and father [Bruce Williams] got into a fight and I remember because my mother was saying, "Byron pick up the phone," because the operators on the line and the only word in my vocabulary was hello. I remember that, all I could say was hello. The operator was trying to talk to me and I would just go hello. What I, what I really remember the most about that is that my mother was visibly swinging at my father and my father would not hit her back, he was just trying to stop her. That's probably my earliest childhood memory. Speaker 1: Okay, okay and they were together maybe about five or six years later before they split (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that was the earliest. That was before my brother [Bruce Williams, Jr.] was born, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now, so you grew up--was it in the same house, same neighborhood? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 168242 Speaker 1: Well just tell us a little bit about the neighborhood, what was that neighborhood like? I mean in terms of memories growing of up. Speaker 2: It was just a typical neighborhood, typical. We knew everybody, like you knew the Roundtrees [ph.], you knew the Millers [ph.], you knew the Jacksons [ph.]; everybody knew everybody. We would play in the street; we played depending what the season was. Football season we would play football in the street, if it was baseball season, we would play baseball in the street, and, you know. There was a park close, you know. I grew up at a time where there were no bicycle helmets and we rode our bikes all the time and no one, no one was worried and everybody had the street light curfew. Street light comes on in the summer you're playing; street light comes on in the house. Street light curfew was across the board, everybody had it. So, yeah. But like I said nothing special but it was fun, I mean it was certainly--it wasn't a rough neighborhood, it wasn't one, you know, where--everybody knew everybody and we were all just working class kids just trying to have a good time. Story_ID: 168243 Speaker 1: Okay now where'd you start school? Speaker 2: I started at Longfellow [School, later Longfellow Middle School, Berkeley, California] which is like about two blocks from here, Longfellow Elementary. I was there for kindergarten and part of first grade and the reason I was there for part of first grade was that Berkeley [California] had this grand master plan to have city wide integration but before they implemented the plan they had a token integration plan, a precursor and what they did was to take the black students that tested the highest and bus them to an all white school. They didn't do that in reverse; they didn't test white kids and bus them. They took a number of black students and I happened to be one of those kids that was bused to John Muir High School [sic] near the Claremont Hotel [Claremont Club & Spa, Berkeley, California]. So we were like the guinea pigs, the lab rats. Speaker 1: This is in high school? Speaker 2: No this is in first grade, John Muir Elementary [School, Berkeley, California]. Speaker 1: Oh elementary, okay. Speaker 2: So we were the lab rats. If it works here; we can do it citywide. So by the time fourth grade is when they had the citywide integration and then I went from John Muir from first grade to third and then from John Muir I went to what's called Columbus [School, Berkeley, California] at the time; it's now called Rosa Parks [Environmental Science Magnet School, Berkeley, California]. It was called Columbus and I was there from fourth to sixth and then from sixth--no, seventh to eighth I was at Martin Luther King, Jr. High [sic, Martin Luther King, Jr. Middle School] in Berkeley [California]. Speaker 1: Martin Luther King. Speaker 2: Mmm-hmm Speaker 1: Okay. Now there was supposed to be (unclear) in '68 [1968], right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. In fact, it was after [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated because it was prior to that it was named Garfield [Junior High School, Berkeley, California] and after King was assassinated they changed it to Martin Luther King. I mean Berkeley, Berkeley-- Speaker 1: Is this when they named Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive [sic, Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, Berkeley, California] out here, too? Speaker 2: That took a little longer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because that was Grove. That took a little longer. Berkeley is an interesting place because when we were driving over here the school passed, remember passing an elementary school? Well that, that school is called Malcolm X [Elementary School, Berkeley, California]. Before it was Malcolm X it was Lincoln [Elementary School, Berkeley, California]. Only in Berkeley would you take away Lincoln and put in Malcolm X, I mean Berkeley is an interesting place that way. And so after eighth grade I went to Albany High [School, Albany, California]; I graduated from Albany High. Speaker 1: Now is this--in grade school--you're right Berkeley is different and well I've heard some [HM] D'Army Bailey, [Berkeley] City Council--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: I remember when he ran for city council. He's in Memphis [Tennessee] now, right? Speaker 1: Yes, he's in Memphis he helped develop the [National] Civil Rights Museum [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: I was just there a couple of weeks ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, he initiated I think the move to do it. Speaker 2: Okay, I remember when he ran, I remember it was three and two others that ran they were on a radical ticket; I can't remember now. Speaker 1: Yeah the Black Panthers around here, you know there is a lot of political thinking here in Berkeley. Free Speech Movement was around. Speaker 2: I remember-I think I must have been about fifth grade when--when D'Army Bailey ran for city council. I was already in fifth grade, I know this stuff and it's kind of scary. I know this stuff even if it's vague. There's another brother that ran with him on the city council, I can't remember his name but I also remember a brother by the name of Warren Wagner [sic, Widener] who ran for mayor and they all won, they all came in at the same time. So Warren Wagner became Berkeley's first black mayor, I was like in fifth grade when that happened. I remember him, yeah. Speaker 1: So it would take a broad coalition, I guess to elect-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes that was the same year [HM Ronald] Dellums went to [U.S.] Congress that same year. Story_ID: 168244 Speaker 1: Okay. So were your parents [Faith Prather and Bruce Williams], either one of them involved in political life? Speaker 2: My dad was in the union so there was sort of some union stuff. He would talk about it; I think that's sort of where my interests sort of, sort of got perked. I do remember, although I was very young I do remember John [F.] Kennedy being president. I remember although I was four, I remember like it was yesterday when Kennedy was killed. I remember exactly what I was doing when Kennedy was killed. In fact, I even put it in my book ['1963: The Year of Hope & Hostility'], book of '63 [1963]. I put that little note at the end of the Kennedy assassination chapter. Speaker 1: What were you doing, tell us? Speaker 2: Well I was playing in the living room; remember the game show 'Concentration?' The game show 'Concentration' was on and they cut away and I was with my aunt, back then we didn't have daycare so I was at my aunt's house and she was talking to one of her church friends and she screamed. The operator came on the line and asked her, "Could you clear the line"--shows you what difference fifty years makes--"Would you clear the line because the president has just been shot?" And so she screamed and it came on the television and I remember, you know when you're a little kid based on what you're watching I couldn't tell time then but based on what you're watching on television I knew what time my dad got there to pick me up, I knew what time that would be and he was there early. I remember that and I remember more than anything else first time I saw my father cry and then I got scared. Whoa this is, this is big, you know, this is big. But yeah I remember that; I remember that like it was yesterday. Speaker 1: This is in 1963, November 22 I believe. Speaker 2: Twenty-second. Speaker 1: But this is a year that's--you've written a book about this, we'll talk about that a little bit later. This is a pivotal year in the United States. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. But I--that's another early childhood memory. Speaker 1: Do any other events from that year resonate with you; I mean that you actually remember? Speaker 2: No I don't remember the March on Washington; I don't remember--remember hearing [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s name--Martin Luther King's name in the house but about up until oh I don't know I think he is a medical doctor (laughter). When they said Dr. King, you know, I thought he was a medical doctor. At four I was afraid of doctors so you know that--he wasn't, he wasn't high on my list (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but those are probably-nothing, nothing else from year I really remember. But I do remember Kennedy being president, I do remember that. Story_ID: 168245 Speaker 1: Okay, so you start school at Longfellow [School, later Longfellow Middle School, Berkeley, California]. Did you like school? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject or activity? Speaker 2: I think my favorite subject in those first one through three was spelling because it offered immediate gratification. Study for the spelling test, you get a, you get them all right, you don't have to take the test again, there was no retake and you get a little star, it was immediate gratification about getting the spelling test. Speaker 1: So you were a good speller? Speaker 2: Yeah, but you wouldn't know it now though. You wouldn't know that now but as a young child I was a very good speller. Speaker 1: Okay, did you learn how to read and write early? Speaker 2: I was reading before--I was reading before I went to kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay so did your aunt play a role in that? Speaker 2: My grandmother [Naomi Brooks] played, my grandmother played, she definitely played a role in that. I was reading you know very, very you know, very early. But she would do things, we'd read books and I would--she would read these nursery rhymes. My mom [Faith Prather] would read the nursery rhymes and I could immediately--you could read it to me and I could recite it back. You know, it just sort of--my memory--I had great recall and so my grandmother said, "Well if you can recall that quick, you can probably read it too," and so that's, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So as you--now did you have a favorite teacher at Longfellow? Speaker 2: Well I remember both teachers. I remember they are not favorites but I remember Ms. Carey (ph.) because she was my kindergarten teacher and I--she would do this--she would grab us and give us little whacks on the behind. It was probably more scary than anything else but I remember Willie Hardwick (ph.) who just passed. Willie Hardwick--we were putting up blocks and he took one of my blocks that I was supposed to put up and then he took off and ran and I threw the block and hit him in the corner of the head and he started screaming and Ms. Carey grabbed me to spank me and I reached up and pulled her wig off and I was just mortified (laughter) I was just like ah; I remember that. And I remember my first grade teacher at Longfellow, I was going there for half a year her name was Mrs. Hopkins (ph.) and Mrs. Hopkins had this thing that if you were bad she would and squeeze your jaw, you can't do that stuff now. Yeah, you can't do that; she would be under all types of charges but you know, yeah. So would Ms. Carey you know, things they do now--well it is not favorite but I remember them. Speaker 1: No they can't do the ears anymore. Speaker 2: No, they can't do that stuff now, can't do that stuff now, no. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true. Speaker 2: You're facing twenty-five to life for that kind of behavior (laughter). Story_ID: 168246 Speaker 1: So, all right, so we move on to the integration experiment at John Muir [Elementary School, Berkeley, California] right? So what was that like being a--? Speaker 2: A handful of Negro students because that was the language then. It was fine, it was fine because the interesting thing I think is that at that age unless you're a child that has been indoctrinated with some real toxins, you're just a kid and so, and so the criteria was like you like kickball, I like kickball let's play. You like dodgeball, I like dodgeball let's play. It was more, it was more along those lines; I had lots of friends; a cross section. You know friends that you know, other Negro kids like myself that rode the bus other kids that lived on the hill the Claremont [Berkeley and Oakland, California] area. It was--it wasn't anything, it was fun. My mom [Faith Prather] participated in the--she, one year my mom was what we called room mothers and so she was in charge of bringing all the snacks and stuff and organizing the Valentine's party and the Christmas party and things like that. I liked that, I never sort of pushed away from parental involvement. I, I liked parental involvement. You know like father and son night, my dad [Bruce Williams] would go and I liked that very much. Speaker 1: Okay so now did your favorite subject change any at John Muir? Speaker 2: No I probably--for some strange reason not at John Muir for some strange reason when I went to Columbus [School, Berkeley, California] I became really good at math. Those four to six years I became really good in math. I was doing algebra in sixth grade, you know what I mean. I became really proficient in math and I don't know why, I don't know why I gravitated to it. So math from four to six and that was probably the last time math was my favorite subject. Speaker 1: You think you just had better teachers? Speaker 2: I don't know; I have no idea and I don't know why, in fact, up until my son--when he got up to geometry I could just help him just like that. Once he got to geometry, he was on his own. I mean I passed geometry, he was on his own up until geometry. I recall that stuff just like it was yesterday. I don't know why now you can't--I won't say I'm not proficient in math, I was an econ we will talk about that later when I was an econ minor in college so there is a little math there. It was just something that I was really good at. Story_ID: 168247 Speaker 1: [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed when you were what? Speaker 2: Third grade [at John Muir Elementary School, Berkeley, California]. Speaker 1: Third grade, all right. Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Yes, yes I was home after school doing my homework and the news came on, an important announcement, and just very flippantly this being a third grader I said, "Oh let me guess Lyndon Baines Johnson just got shot," that's what I said, but it was actually Dr. King. So it was, you know. If I can go back for just one moment or something you know, I did--when you asked me about politics, we didn't talk--one thing my father [Bruce Williams] did is I would go on precinct walks with him. I would go on precinct walks and the first one I went on was in '66 [1966] when [Edmund Gerald] Pat Brown [Sr.], former governor running against a well known actor named Ronald Reagan. And when Reagan won, he was hosting a show at the time called 'Death Valley Days' and we were forbidden to watch 'Death Valley Days' after Reagan won; we couldn't watch it, my father forbid us to watch it (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah that's right he was the host of that, yeah. Story_ID: 168248 Speaker 1: So you were around political talk on some level? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Did you, in terms of reading material, did your grandmother [Naomi Brooks] or your father [Bruce Williams] and mother [Faith Prather] bring in many magazines and newspapers and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: We always took a newspaper. We always took a [Oakland] Tribune, mostly Tribune but the [San Francisco] Chronicle too. We always had a newspaper and of course, it was like a rite of passage for every black family in the '60s [1960s] to take Jet--to subscribe to Jet and Ebony; that was just a given. I would always--I would look for two things, I'd get the Jet and I'd look for two things. Who was number one on soul brothers top twenty list and then I would go to the centerfold. Those were the two things I did with the Jets (laughter). Speaker 1: I think a lot of people went to that centerfold, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know it's funny you just brought up another memory about Jet. I remember and I don't know how much Jet costs now but I remember the Jet was twenty cents until [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated and it went up to a quarter and I think even--I raise that because even looking at me now, just being that observant--I was that observant, I was that observant then. Any little thing changed, I, I noticed it and I remember when King was killed it went to a quarter. Speaker 1: Berkeley [California]--I don't suppose there were any riots in Berkeley? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there were, well there were the UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] protests in People's Park [Berkeley, California], I mean I never saw them, I was never around those things and it was at a time, you know--it was also at a time--and this actually sort of ties in I think to why my parents split up because that was a--it was mid-'60s [1960s] that was when do you stay with traditional King ideology or do you embrace the emerging Black Power Movement. My father was a more King, my mother because she was younger--the Black Power stuff made more sense to her and I think that's when they started to grow apart. Speaker 1: Okay was your mother ever a part of any organization? Speaker 2: Not that, not that, not that I remember, I mean she may have participated in a couple of rallies but not, not not that she was ever a member of the [Black] Panthers or anything, not that I remember. Story_ID: 168249 Speaker 1: As you were growing up through--I mean in junior high school [Martin Luther King, Jr. Middle School, Berkeley, California] or high school [Albany High School, Albany, California] did you--you know, Berkeley's [California] such a activist place, I mean did you ever hear any activist speak? Speaker 2: Wow that's a good question. No probably I remember, I remember in '72 [1972] when I was in seventh grade, eighth grade '72 [1972] seventh grade I had a Eugene McCarthy [sic] button for that election but then again even going back to '68 [1968] (unclear) year I literally followed the presidential campaign both sides, Republican and Democrat for the New Hampshire primary all the way to the end; I followed it all. In fact, when Robert Kennedy was killed, my bedtime then I think was about 8:30--I had to be in bed by 8:30 but it was the night of the California primary and so my mother [Faith Prather] let me stay up because I wanted to watch the returns and so I watched the returns and it soon as they announced Robert Kennedy as the winner, they would say, "Okay Byron you've got to go to bed now." And so I went to bed and my mother came right back in maybe five/seven minutes afterwards and she let me watch the speech--part of the speech then I went to bed. She came in minutes afterwards they had just shot Bobby Kennedy. Then I started remembering about Robert Kennedy being assassinated. Speaker 1: Was he your favorite candidate? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was eight but I was a Kennedy guy back then (laughter). I was definitely a Kennedy guy. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So that's when all the conventions were broadcast on all three networks. Speaker 2: Right, I watched it all. I watched it all. I watched the Democratic convention, I watched [Hubert] Humphrey, I watched the entire thing and then--I did go--I had to go to bed, I didn't know until the next morning that [Richard] Nixon had beat Humphrey, had to go to bed, you know. But even back then--even before you get to the activist stuff I was still following politics; I was fascinated by it, I was really fascinated by politics. Speaker 1: You were a Eugene McCarthy fan? Speaker 2: Did I say McCarthy, I'm sorry I meant [George] McGovern; in '72 [1972] I was a George McGovern. I didn't like Gene McCarthy because he was running against Bobby Kennedy in '68 [1968]. That was, that was problematic for me right there (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, George McGovern was--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: '72 [1972] Speaker 1: '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Yeah, did I say McCarthy, I meant George McGovern. Speaker 1: I was wondering why you said it. Speaker 2: No it was George McGovern. Speaker 1: McCarthy he came out against the [Vietnam] War before anybody else. Speaker 2: Right, he did, he did. Speaker 1: Some of his domestic may not have been that--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he was a--looking back at that, Gene McCarthy was to '68 [1968] what--what's his name who ran for governor of Vermont then he ran in 2004. Speaker 1: [Edmund] Muskie [sic, Howard Dean]? Speaker 2: No, 2004 remember "Yaaaaaa" yell. Speaker 1: He became the Democratic Party head. Speaker 2: Yeah, I couldn't think of his name right now but it will come to me later--(simultaneous) (unclear). He's a real doctor but he was that candidate that I'm just against, I'm against the war and that was really all he ever said. His thing was he was against the war, same type of thing. His name will come to me later. Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah we know it but I can't think of his name either. But he is famous for that holler. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Story_ID: 168250 Speaker 1: In high school now you went to--? Speaker 2: Albany High [School, Albany, California]. Speaker 1: Albany High School, okay. After--this is after Martin Luther King [Jr. Middle School, Berkeley, California]? Speaker 2: I do have--if I can touch on King for just a minute since you're regurgitating all these memories that I thought I had thrown away. I wrote a paper, a play in seventh grade and my English teacher--I don't even remember her name she handed it back to me and she said to me, "Byron you can write," and from that moment forward I always believed I could write. I look back--that's a transformative--I've talked about that before but I--that was a transformative moment for me. I always knew I could write after that. Speaker 1: What was the play about? Speaker 2: The play (laughter), I'm laughing--the play was about this guy who robs a bank with his, with his girl and they didn't get away. They didn't get away, they got, they got killed but it was--it wasn't very--too elaborate but yeah. It was something about the way I wrote it, she said I could write. Story_ID: 168251 Speaker 1: Did you have any idea that you could write? Now, now did you--were you part of the high school newspaper or anything like that or--? Speaker 2: I was--junior high [Martin Luther King, Jr. Middle School, Berkeley, California] I was part of the junior high newspaper seventh and eighth grade. I was the sports editor and we had a high school tournament here called The Tourn [ph.] of the Champions and I would cover that and I would cover that tournament and write. I did that even in high school [Albany High School, Albany, California], I was in the paper in high school but yeah I was on the junior high newspaper, seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, did you cover sports in high school, too? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Did you have any particular sports heroes growing up? Speaker 2: I'm a [San Francisco] Giants fan. There is Willie Mays, that's it. I'm a Giants fan, Willie Mays. Speaker 1: Now Willie Mays he was, I guess he was a star when you were a kid. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes! Speaker 1: By '68 [1968], '70 [1970] he played until what? Speaker 2: '68 [1968], '70 [1970] in fact he played until '73 [1973] (unclear) with the [New York] Mets in '73 [1973] and I actually went to the World Series when the A's [Oakland Athletics] were playing the Mets and Willie Mays was dropping balls in centerfield, it was just and it brought me to tears I was just like wow. But when I--my dad [Bruce Williams] was a Giants fan so I was a Giants fan. So when I became aware of baseball say '64 [1964], '65 [1965] relatively that's when I really became aware of baseball you know it was the Giants. My dad was a big baseball fan so he taught me some of the intricacies of the game. Speaker 1: Orlando Cepeda was the other big star. Speaker 2: Cepeda, [Willie Lee] McCovey, [Juan] Marichal and of course the dreaded [Los Angeles] Dodgers. Yes I do hate the Dodgers, I still hate the Dodgers today, hasn't changed yet (laughter). Story_ID: 168252 Speaker 1: Now you were tall growing up, I take it, I don't know. Speaker 2: No, no I wasn't, I just had one amazing growth really just major growth spurt. My freshman year [of high school at Albany High School, Albany, California] I was about, I mean 5'8", 5'9" but for my freshman year when I came back my sophomore year I was 6'2". It's just like in one year just boom, you know. So I always thought I was going to be like 6'7", 6'8" but it didn't quite materialize like that. Speaker 1: So how tall are you? Speaker 2: I'm 6'4" but I was thinking 6'7", 6'8". Speaker 1: So did basketball become more important as you got taller? Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened was in eighth grade--ninth grade, ninth grade I'm sorry as a freshman I got cut and it was something about that experience that really--I just started to work at it. I would just everywhere I went I had a basketball. If it rained I was at the park in the rain playing basketball. I was always in the backyard dribbling and I convinced my father [Bruce Williams] to send me to basketball camp and he did it. So then the, the--going into my sophomore year having grown as well not only did I make the team, I made the junior varsity but I was also the leading scorer and rebounder. The next year I started on varsity and I was all conference, then my senior year when I was all conference I was all state, all American in high school, all American. And then I went to the University of Nebraska [-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] and that didn't work out and I transferred to, to, to Idaho State [University, Pocatello, Idaho]. Basketball became--I don't know just the--a light went off, a switch went off and I became obsessed with basketball. Speaker 1: So what did you play, forward or guard? Speaker 2: I played forward until my senior year then I was a point guard for my high school. Which was rare then, you know 6'4" point guard so it was rare so I was like huge and I really thought I was good until we had a high school all star tournament which I was participating in and then this guy came for the other team at half time, 6'9" a big goon, 6'9". His name was Earvin Magic Johnson and I realized that I was not nearly as good as I thought I was (laugh). Speaker 1: This is a national high school all star game? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: This is like the McDonald's [All American Games]--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: No it wasn't McDonald's; it was a tournament so they had all these guys from all over. Albert King--remember Albert King? Yeah he was supposed to play, he didn't. Gene Banks who went to Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] played in it. But I remember Magic came at half time and look at this guy; you have just never seen anything like it, you just never seen anything--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Was he playing point guard then? Speaker 2: Yeah, well he was--no he was playing, he would just get the rebound and just bring it down and he just did what he wanted to do. It was just--and he was so big and I probably weighed back then about, I don't know, 180 pounds max and this guy is like 6'8", 220. We were mesmerized at somebody that big was doing more than what I could do. It was just amazing, it was just amazing. And when I got home after that tournament I said there is this guy named Magic--I've never seen anything like this. This guy is the best player I've ever seen. And the rest now as they say is history. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 168253 Speaker 1: Well in [Albany] High School [Albany, California], how were your grades in high school? Speaker 2: Great because my father [Bruce Williams] had a rule, anything less than a B, I don't play. My father, he probably would have let me play but just the way he was I didn't want to risk it because he was like really matter of fact, "No," that was it; never yelled, "No." So if he said you couldn't play, you couldn't play. That means if I got a B minus, I couldn't play (laughter). Probably in retrospect that's probably why I didn't take things like trigonometry in high school (laughter). That was probably why I wasn't risking the B factor. It was two things about that though, I used my father--when I say used, I liked school, I always liked school and I liked studying and so that was never any issue but I used him in the sense that everybody felt sorry for me. "Byron can't, he's got to study, his dad is so mean," and so I used him but the fact is I liked it. Now since I had a great jump shot that kept me from being a nerd, if you took away that--if I couldn't play basketball I would have been a nerd, there is no two ways about it. I would have just been a nerd. But I had a jump shot so I wasn't a nerd but I blamed it on my father, so (laugher). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now were there any favorite teachers or mentors in high school? Speaker 2: There were a couple of guys. One guy who I ironically I just talked to a couple of days ago his name is John Whitman [ph.]. He was a coach and actually he was a coach from another school but he would come around in the summer and I remember I had a reputation my junior year, I could score but that was sort of the--people would say well that's all he can do is score and listening to John and I say John you know, I really would like to be a more all around player and he worked with me between my junior and senior year and I had the luxury a couple of weeks ago of talking to him. He is living in Arizona now and I was talking with him and telling him how much I appreciated what he did for me because that got me a scholarship; that saved my parents a ton of money. And so, so that work he did with me, I ended up my senior year--I averaged twenty-five and six assists, not bad for high school. So John Whitman in that way was certainly someone athletically. And the other person who ended up being the dean was a man by the name of Gary Gerhardt [ph.]. When I was a freshman my grades were okay but not great and he pulled me in the office and he said, "You know you're just, you're just better than this." And I remember saying I'm fourteen so I think I know everything but you don't understand, my friends and dah, dah, dah. I remember him saying to me, "I understand Byron, I understand you're a coward; you don't have the courage to be the person that you are." He called me a coward and it just kind of stunned me; that was an important moment for me. I always liked having the respect of adults; I was never one of these kids to where if an adult--if I had disappointed an adult, not just my parents anybody, I was never so I don't care. I always wanted the respect of adults and I felt that I didn't have his respect so it kind of, you know. So I think I've always been an old soul in that sense. So having his respect was not having his respect it was sort of more powerful than the peer pressure. I was just sort of weird like that is all. So those two in high school and then the most important was my father, you know, and it was just, you know, you know--and I wanted his respect more than anything else. Story_ID: 168254 Speaker 1: Okay, so you saw your father [Bruce Williams] on a regular basis? Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes. I mean I mean, "Byron I'm disappointed," that would have just killed me, that would have just killed me. My dad got it when I say got it, he got me, he supported my basketball, meaning that he invested in me--he would sent me to basketball camp. I never was like just dad I need this, dad I need this but he was supportive of it because he got that I wasn't just goofing around, this is something I was serious about, I was getting good grades so he was very, very supportive of my athletics and where that could possibly take me, he was supportive of that. Speaker 1: So you played ball in school, you were working with the paper; any other activities in high school [Albany High School, Albany, California]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was also involved in the debate team now how nerdy is that (laugh)? I was on the debate team, we won a couple it wasn't called regional it was called sectional, I think that was what it was called and I liked that a lot and I was in a couple of plays, a budding thespian, I was in a couple of plays as well. Speaker 1: Do you remember what plays? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was in one that was written by, I was in one that was written by the drama teacher and--an African American woman and she wrote a play about Malcolm X and I was the reporter who was going around trying to find stories about Malcolm X. I remember the role because I was not--the role was not a well-liked role, it was the most popular role but it was not well liked because people would tell their story about Malcolm X and I would question it. And then sort of by the end I got it then I had to do this long soliloquy at the end where I talked about how I got it and what Malcolm meant like that. When we came out for our bows--I remember the first night we came out it was on a Friday night everybody booed me and she explained that meant you did a good job because you were convincing and so I said okay if you say so (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you have any counseling about college? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: Did you have any college counseling? Speaker 2: No, no, the college counseling was for my father--(unclear) okay. The counseling was in the house that I grew up in a house that my grandmother [Naomi Brooks] went to college, my mom [Faith Prather] went but she never graduated. My grandmother went and graduated so I grew up in a house where the expectation was that you were going to college. We're not going to have, we're not gonna have a big celebration that you're going to college, you're not the first to go, that's already been done but you're going to go. That was--I remember my dad--even when I was young Hubert Humphrey did a commercial about the importance of staying in school and going to college and my dad--every time that commercial would come on he'd make me watch it with him (laughter); that's when Humphrey was vice president, I remember that. So it was just a foregone conclusion, it was always a foregone conclusion I was going to go to college. Speaker 1: So did the counselors advise you about what school to go to? Speaker 2: They advised me on classes, they advised me on what classes to take to be prepared so when I got recruited it was getting me in and me getting in. Probably the only school I couldn't have gotten in to--I probably could not at the time gotten into Stanford [University, Stanford, California], I don't know. Speaker 1: So you're in a position a lot of high school students are not in where they are sending you letters trying to get you to go to school and play ball? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And it helps that you're a good student too. Speaker 2: Right, I was--I took as much as I liked basketball, it was a real passion of mine, I never wanted to be the dumb jock. I mean I never--I always wanted to have other interests. So all of my friends--none of my friends were--I mean I got along with the guys on the basketball team but none of my friends were athletes, most of my friends were nerds, if you will (laugh). From the drama, from the paper, you know, from debate; those were people I spent most of my time with. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Talking about politics, current events, things like that; I mean that's the stuff I did. Story_ID: 168255 Speaker 1: So you go to the University of Nebraska [-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska], right? How did you--did you choose them out of the other suitors? Speaker 2: Let me go on record to say if I had to do it all over again, when this guy named John Thompson [Jr.] tried to get me to go to his school, Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] that was a mistake (laughter). But Georgetown wasn't Georgetown then and I didn't you know. Speaker 1: He was in the process of making it Georgetown. Speaker 2: They were a good team but they weren't the power, they weren't you know what they were becoming. So I probably--I'd say the one thing that I didn't get when you're older you know better but I probably would have looked at it differently saying that this is a really good school. I was so arrogant, I knew I was going to go to college, I knew I was going to graduate wherever I went so it didn't matter to me. So Nebraska while not a basketball school per se, was a big name university in a big time conference, the Big Eight [Conference] was big time conference back then and so I went there; it was a disaster (laugh). Speaker 1: Yeah you said it was a football school, basically not a basketball power. But did you think you'd have a better chance to really dominate a team? Speaker 2: I thought I had a better chance to play. I didn't look at things like style of play, does this style of play fit the way I play. I didn't factor things like that which might be a good consideration. Speaker 1: Did you meet the coach ahead of time? Speaker 2: Yeah, I met him,, you know, and he wanted me and dah, dah, dah. I'm going here, it was far away so this may be a bad choice but Nebraska seemed exotic (laughter). You know, I'm a kid growing up in the [San Francisco] Bay Area, you know. But it wasn't, it wasn't, it wasn't a good situation for me. Speaker 1: Okay now Nebraska Cornhuskers, this was 19--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: '78 [1978] '77 [1977] '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay so what did you first notice that was wrong about Nebraska? Speaker 2: Well it wasn't so much Nebraska but what I noticed that was wrong is the way I wanted to play is not the way the team played (laughter). It was going to be at least two years before I got a chance to play and the assistant coach who had a lot of authority was a guy by the name of [Henry] Moe Iba [Jr.] and Henry [Payne "Hank"] Iba is one of the great college basketball names--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Hank Iba, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, right that was his son, Moe didn't like me and if Moe didn't like me that's not, that's not a good situation (laughter). Speaker 1: What style did you have that didn't fit it? Speaker 2: Well it's interesting because I--my style was really--I played point in my senior year because we needed a point guard and I could do it. But I was really an off guard and I really moved without the ball and but moving without the ball is not something that's appreciated back then at least with African American ball players. We want you to go up and bite the rim (laughter) catch it with one hand and just--I wasn't, I mean I wasn't slow but I wasn't the quickest. But now for example, speaking frankly had I been white I would have been very quick, you know I would have been very fast but I wasn't--I'm moving out the ball, I could get my shot off on anyone but it just wasn't the style they worked for them, so it is what it is. Speaker 1: Okay so--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: I still, I still every Saturday morning I go online and I get to Nebraska game--radio games online--I still listen to the games, I still follow the Cornhuskers so even though I was only there for a year, I still follow Nebraska football (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 168256 Speaker 1: So how did it come about--you just knew you had to leave [the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska]? Speaker 2: Yeah I just knew--it just wasn't in the cards for me and I wanted to play; I just had to play. So I didn't want to be somewhere and just sit, I had to play. Even though I thought I was better than the guys that were playing ahead of me and I, I think that what happened subsequently bore that out that I was right about that. So I went to--I transferred to Idaho State [University, Pocatello, Idaho]. No, no I'm sorry I went to one year junior college, I went to Wenatchee Valley College in [Wenatchee] Washington for--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: Wenatchee, W-E-N-A-T-C-H-E-E Speaker 1: Okay Wenatchee-(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: In Washington, in Wenatchee, Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I played for my old high school coach. Speaker 1: So this is 1979? Speaker 2: Yes '79 [1979], '80 [1980] something like that. I played for my old high school coach. Speaker 1: And then to the University of Idaho? Speaker 2: Then to Nebraska. Speaker 1: Is this Idaho State? Speaker 2: Idaho State, I'm repeating what you say, no this is Nebraska, I said Idaho State from Wenatchee to Idaho State, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I'm messing you up. Speaker 2: No, no, no, it's my glasses, I don't have my glasses on so I can't see, that's what is messing me up (laugh). Speaker 1: Now where is Idaho State? Speaker 2: Pocatello, Idaho. Speaker 1: Pocatello, that's right. So you got a chance to start. Speaker 2: Yeah, started two years there. Speaker 1: And what conference are they in? Speaker 2: They're in Big Sky [Conference]. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Now this is--I haven't met very many African Americans from Idaho so I don't know. Were you one of the few? Speaker 2: If you didn't play football or basketball or track you weren't going to meet any (laughter). Does that answer your question (laughter)? Speaker 1: Okay so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. There weren't very many, it wasn't very many at all. Speaker 1: What kind of social life did you have? Speaker 2: It was mixed; it was mixed in that I had a girlfriend at the time who came from Wenatchee. She went to Idaho State as well and she came from Seattle [Washington]. But that, that, you know, so. But, but, but the thing was my, my--the people that I hung out with same thing, pattern the same: they were in the poly sci [political science], econ departments; those were the people I hung out with. Those, so I still--that nerd side of me sort of pacified me in that, in that--during that time. Story_ID: 168257 Speaker 1: Well let me, I didn't ask you about this but 1978 is the year back here in San Francisco [California] when a lot of people from San Francisco were caught up in Jim Jones. Speaker 2: That's right and I was actually--I didn't know anything about it until I saw it on the news in Lincoln, Nebraska and then Harvey Milk--I mean [George] Moscone got killed like a week later and I didn't know anything about that until I saw it on the news and I called back here, what's going on (laughter). I was not living here then. Speaker 1: Right, right did you know any of the people of the Jim Jones--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Not until--I didn't know anyone until maybe four or five years ago. Speaker 1: I knew you grew up in Berkeley [California], not in San Francisco but--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: No but some of the people that as a matter of fact, there is a couple of people that I know from this church that had family members that died in Jonestown [Guyana], yeah. Speaker 1: That's why I asked because it was such a big news item. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But no I was very ignorant about it at the time until I saw it on the news. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Back then everyone thinks you're from California and everything is the same. So people are like what's going on with your city (laughter), San Francisco is not my city, what are you talking about? I didn't know, I, I caught it like everybody else around the world caught it. Story_ID: 168258 Speaker 1: So Idaho State [University, Pocatello, Idaho] so, now what was your major? Speaker 2: Political science and I minored in macroeconomics. Speaker 1: Alright so this is 1980? Were there any particular mentors or significant teachers while you were there? Speaker 2: Steve Caan was a significant teacher. I took constitutional law from him; he was a guy that really got me interested in the [U.S.] Constitution and not just knowing what the amendments were but really in a real visceral way and we will talk later about why that is so important to me. Steve Caan was certainly--probably the most, the most influential. Speaker 1: His last name is C--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Caan, he spelled it C-A-A-N, Steve Caan. Speaker 1: Okay like James Caan? Speaker 2: Yeah but he pronounced it Caan, yeah, right same way. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you do well on the basketball court too? Speaker 2: Yeah I did well on the basketball court, all conference. I got drafted what was known then as the Washington Bullets, now the [Washington] Wizards so I did well. Speaker 1: Okay well let's see; let's go with when you graduated first. Did you graduate with any honors or distinctions? Speaker 2: No, I just graduated; no I didn't quite--I didn't graduate with honors, I just graduated. Story_ID: 168259 Speaker 1: Okay and it was a big thing; were you excited about the NBA [National Basketball Association] draft? Speaker 2: Yes it was an honor; it was an honor. I'll never forget because my father [Bruce Williams] told me that I had been drafted. And, 'cause they called, I was out and they called and said that, "We just drafted Byron Williams dah, dah, dah." They called and so he met me at the door with this huge grin on his face; he was just so proud and I felt good. I remember that moment more than the draft itself. I felt good because I felt like I hadn't let him down because he trusted me, you know, and he had supported my playing basketball in lieu of other things. And I felt like I hadn't let him down and that my work had, was, was vindicated. Speaker 1: So is this 1981 or '82 [1982]? Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982] all right, so this is--is there a story about going to camp with the [Washington] Bullets [later, Washington Wizards]? Speaker 2: Well the only story that I have is that I was having a really good camp; I was playing really well; I started to count and there were eleven guys with no cut contracts. So it's like I don't care how well I play I'm not making this team (laughter). That's probably of the story that really sticks out. I'm not making this team I don't care what I do. Speaker 1: Who was on the team then? Speaker 2: Greg Ballard, Spencer Haywood was on the team then, John Lucas was on the team then, oh God what's his name, left handed went to [University of] Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky], Kevin Grevey is that right, yeah. Yeah Kevin Grevey was on the team then, Rick Mahorn, Jeff Ruland, those were the guys on the team that year. Speaker 1: They had one--didn't they win a NBA--they were in the finals--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: They won the NBA championship like four years earlier with those-Elvin Hayes was no longer on the team but they won like four years earlier. They were always a team right on the cusp of making the playoffs. They might get in, they might not get in and once they got in first round they're out. [Eugene] Gene Shue was the coach and [Bernard Tyrone] "Bernie" Bickerstaff was the assistant. Speaker 1: Right, right Bernie Bickerstaff he's been around a long time. Speaker 2: Yes, is he still around? Speaker 1: Yeah he's with the [Cleveland] Cavaliers now, I think. Speaker 2: Is he? Now think about this, this is '82 [1982]. I mean Bernie (unclear). Speaker 1: He's assisting Mike Brown, I was reading about him the other day or he's a mentor to Mike Brown. Speaker 2: Okay but this is '82 that we're talking about and Bernie Bickerstaff was the coach then. Speaker 1: He was one of the first black assistant coaches way back in those days, an historical figure. Speaker 2: He's still around, that's amazing. Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't think you--you got cut, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes I got cut and when I got cut that was like the end. What I mean by that it wasn't a sad thing, it wasn't a bad thing but it was like I am not-you mentioned, do I have a story, I do have a story now. The way you get cut--one of the ways you get cut is that the trainer will say to you the general manager wants to talk to you, okay. So, so when you walk over to the general manager, the general manager is the one that tells you you're gone. And I remember there was a guy, I don't even know his name but there was a guy that had that walk and he had tried out a couple of times--this wasn't the first time he had tried out for the Bullets. I remember hearing him screaming, "You cannot be serious" almost John McEnroe-like and was just beside himself; almost a tantrum like that he had been cut. I said oh God I don't want to be that guy, I do remember that I said I don't want to be that guy. So when I got cut I just didn't have a desire anymore, I had done everything that--basketball had taken me a long way, you know. It had done a lot for me and I didn't feel like--I didn't want to just pursue it and just keep trying to make a team and get caught on. Maybe I could have you know if I were playing now yeah I would look at opportunities in Europe because now they are more plentiful now, I would certainly do that. They weren't as plentiful so I just that's it, you know that was it. Speaker 1: Okay so you had other options of things to do? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that was it and so I didn't pursue anymore. Story_ID: 168260 Speaker 1: So what did you do next? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I went to the Pacific Stock Exchange [San Francisco, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this is I guess the fall of '82 [1982] something like that, as a floor, as a floor runner. That was like the lowest job you could have. Speaker 1: Okay that's where you have the little colorful--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I was one of those guys. Speaker 1: Okay but that's a way to learn how the stock market works? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: 'Cause you were an economics minor [at Idaho State University, Pocatello, Idaho]? Speaker 2: Yeah but nothing that I learned undergrad, I learned more working on that floor. I learned much more about economics and what moves the economy, much more than anything I learned as an undergrad. Speaker 1: What was the most important thing you learned? Speaker 2: Probably the most, the most, the most important thing is that economics is a social science and all this money that's moving is still moving based on human behavior and how you feel about something. That, that if the president speaks and you feel that it is good, you're going to invest and the market is going to go up just the reverse. Even more importantly if Alan Greenspan speaks, you know, I mean, Alan Greenspan, I mean you'd be on the floor and you'd have the Reuters News just flashing all the time--you remember the old E.F. Hutton [& Co.] commercial you know when E.F. Hutton talks people listen. Speaker 1: That's right, John Hellsman (ph.). Speaker 2: Yeah. But when people are sitting there reading the Reuters tape all day and then you'd hear something that Greenspan on the Dow [Jones Industrial Average] and then everybody would stop to see what Greenspan had to say. And so, even though we're talking about money, we're talking about finance, it still moves on how people felt which makes it a social science; it's about human behavior, still driven by human behavior. And it didn't matter if you didn't understand what he said, if they thought what he said was good, if they thought what he said was bad, I mean just fell, it's how you felt. So much was hinging--billions of dollars were removing and flowing, hinging on feelings (laugh). Speaker 1: I've often thought it was like betting in [Las] Vegas [Nevada]--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: That's exactly what it is, that's exactly what it is. And just like you can go to Vegas and bet on anything, like if there is a football game Saturday, I can bet on the first kick off being a touchback or whatever. You can pretty much bet--you can pretty much invest in anything. You can invest in investing in the Dow, I mean just where you think--you can invest in anything. So yeah. So that's probably the--and the other thing is that it really demystified things for me, it demystified the, the, the economy and even now the way I look at the economy now it's demystified. In fact, I used to for a number of years, I think. I don't know how long I did it say '84 [1984] to maybe '86 [1986] something like that, I would go to different schools, different high schools and I'd give a lecture. Is the stock market important if you don't invest? And what I would do, I'd start off by--I would teach all of the kids how to read the stock tables in the paper and just demystify it. This is not that big of a deal and then I would go through this sort of role play with them about how if you're General Motors over here right and you have layoffs, 'cause they all said no stock market doesn't matter if you don't invest. If you're General Motors over here and you have to lay a thousand people off, you're the coffee shop here; those people do not come into your coffee shop. Now you have to lay a couple of people off and now you're the milk delivery here that delivers to the coffee shop. Very, very simplistic but just showing them the interrelated nature in that I used to give those talks all the time on how these things are important even when don't--even though you're not directly impacted, these are things you need to understand. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168261 Speaker 1: So you were a runner [at the Pacific Stock Exchange, San Francisco, California] for how long and did you--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: I was a runner for about a year then I was a market quoter for about a year--two years and then I was an assistant broker for about two years and then I was a floor trader for about two years. Run those numbers I can tell you how--because I was a floor trader when the market crashed. When did the market crash, '88 [1988], '89 [1989]? '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Okay when George W., I mean when George H.W. Bush was president. So you were an assistant broker? Speaker 2: I was assistant floor trader--no I was actually a floor trader on the equity side. You had an equity side, you had an options side; I never traded options. I was a floor broker. Speaker 1: Okay so you were right here in the [San Francisco] Bay Area? Speaker 2: Yeah and the building now is a gymnasium. Where the Pacific Stock Exchange was is a gymnasium. Everybody is all upstairs on computers now, none of this screaming and yelling all that's all gone. Because that's what you used to do; when I worked there you were screaming and yelling like 'Trading Places' that's what was going on but that's all gone. Speaker 1: Now they are playing basketball there? Speaker 2: Yeah, swimming and lifting and whatever else. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168262 Speaker 1: So during all this period of time, now were you involved in social change activity at all? Speaker 2: I was--I really was--the word I want to use is "confused." Now, I was uncertain is probably a better word; uncertain's a better word. I knew that I was supposed to be doing something but I'm not sure what the heck that something is. So I'm just sort of riding this out because it, you know, it started off as--it was a job number one, it was one that I had to be there at six in the morning but I was off at one (laughter), I loved the hours. And I loved what I was doing but I never felt that was what I was meant to do. So I always had this question in mind; I always had this question. So I was still aware of stuff; I was still following politics and current events, those types of things but there was something missing, there was something missing and I just didn't know what it was. I had no idea. Speaker 1: Did you find out in '89 [1989]? Speaker 2: No I didn't find out in '89 [1989] but '89 [1989] started it because I had to leave [the Pacific Stock Exchange, San Francisco, California] (laughter). The market crashed, that's when I left when the market crashed. So '89 [1989] helped. So I went to work for Charles Schwab in institutional brokerage, for institutional brokerage for a couple of years after that and then they had a downsize and I lost that job. I then did--probably the best move--one of the best moves I made. I took a job for a--some sort of rinky dink telemarketing company, you know just calling people. You want to buy aluminum siding kind of thing. But I also volunteered for the Democratic Party which was headquartered in San Francisco [California] when [Edmund Gerald] Jerry Brown [Jr.] was the chair of the [California] Democratic Party. And I volunteered and it turned out that I had the ability to write like Jerry Brown. So I could write in his voice, I had the ability to write in his voice. So I would--he'd get all these letters wanting responses and I would write the letters just like Jerry and then they had the automatic signature and he'd sign them and so I had that ability. And then I got a--because of that, I got a job with the Democratic Party. Story_ID: 168263 Speaker 1: Okay so for those young people may be watching this, what does it mean to write in someone else's voice? Speaker 2: Oh, well, what it means is that everybody has a style the way they write, everybody has a style and so it's not just putting the words on paper it's understanding how they put words together on paper. So it's reading how they write and then replicating that in a way so that when the letter goes out under [Edmund Gerald] Jerry Brown's [Jr.] stationary, someone won't receive that letter and say Jerry Brown didn't write this, some flunky wrote this. Some flunky did write it, me but I was able to write it in a way that it sounded like it was coming from Jerry Brown because it was consistent with the way he wrote. Speaker 1: With the vocabulary and the way he phrases? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So this is about 19? Speaker 2: About '91 [1991] something like that. Speaker 1: So this is better than telemarketing? Speaker 2: Oh yeah they [Democratic Party] hired me and then I ended up doing some fundraising too. So that's when I really learned how to call people, how to call donors and ask them for money. The party had a magazine called Democracy and I was raising money to finance that magazine so I learned how to--so I would write the letters as Jerry Brown, send them out then call the people up, I'm calling for the governor. I learned how to ask people for money. So that turned into I became the development director for the California Medical Association's Political Action Committee. In other words the doctors' PAC [political action committee] for the State of California and I would do direct mail fundraising for all the doctors throughout the state for political reasons, for political issues. That meant I was always reading every little bill that would come down the pipe in Sacramento [California]; I would read it and if I found anything for a doctor to be conceivably upset, I would send out this direct mail got to get your money in, got to get your checks in. I would travel throughout the state and appeal to doctors to give money to the PAC. Story_ID: 168264 Speaker 1: And then something else happened--well it actually going back this is another significant thing that happened for me. Eighty-nine [1989] we missed something that was very important; there was a woman who I really wanted to go out with bad. I wanted to go out with her bad. Speaker 2: Now you're single up until all this time? Speaker 1: I'm single. I'm still single. I wanted to go out with her bad. Finally she agreed to go out with me but we had to go to the Allen Temple Baptist Church [Oakland, California] to their revival. I'm like, "Really, we got to go to church?" Well it turns out we went and that night it was [HM Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.] who was preaching; I had never heard anything like that before. This is '89 [1989], I had never heard anything like that and it made me go home that night and started to re-read the gospel narratives for myself. Because prior to that after I left co--after I left high school [Albany High School, Albany, California] to college, I didn't spend a--I didn't go to church that often. I found it useless, I found it sophomoric; it just didn't do anything for me. Speaker 2: So had you been an avid churchgoer growing up? Speaker 1: Yeah we went when we came here, yeah. We went and--but it was something you had to do, it wasn't--you had to do it. So I was avid by force (laughter) by parental fiat (laughter). But then I came--then I started going back to church. I started coming back to church on my own after that and started to enjoy it differently, started to enjoy it differently. And so now I've got this--I'm on this political track professionally, I've gone from the stock market to the political track professionally. But now there, there are these theological impulses that are starting to bubble up and so in '93 [1993], I had, I had left the California Medical Association by then and I was running a nonprofit and I had gotten married; got married in '93 [1993]. Not to the woman who took me to Jeremiah Wright. Speaker 2: Okay--so how did you meet your wife and who was she? Speaker 1: I met my first wife--well I was at a fundraiser and she saw me and I saw her and I kind of smiled and then I didn't think she had any interest in me but in turns out that we both had a mutual friend. So she called the mutual friend over and had the mutual friend introduce us. Then we started talking and started going out and then we got married. Story_ID: 168265 Speaker 1: So I'm running a nonprofit, I get married in '93 [1993] and I'm running a nonprofit organization. Speaker 2: What was the name of it? Speaker 1: City Kids [ph.], called City Kids. And I then I decided--that's when I decided to go in the seminary. But it was strange though because I was going to seminary but I didn't want to pastor a church. I didn't want to pastor a church; I had no interest in pastoring a church, none, zero. Speaker 2: Why not? Speaker 1: I just--it just didn't appeal to me, I think that's probably the best answer. I didn't find it appealing at all. Speaker 2: What did you foresee yourself doing? Speaker 1: Well I saw myself writing (laughter), I saw myself writing. It will come full circle in a minute. The same year, the same year that I got out of the seminary was '97 [1997] that same year I was going through a divorce so I got married in '92 [1992], I said '93 [1993], I got married in '92 [1992]. Same year in '97 [1997] when I was going through a divorce, my grandmother [Naomi Brooks] was dying and I was trying to graduate from seminary; it was a really tension-filled year for me. It was a lot going on. My good friend who is pastor at the McGee [Avenue] Baptist Church [Berkeley, California], Michael A. Smith, he and I were talking one day and he was going through some things and I remember--I don't know if he said it or I said it but one of us said it's going to get better than this. We were both commiserating each other; we were both at our wits end, if you will. And so then in '98 [1998] I took a job in government affairs at PG&E [Pacific Gas and Electric Company, San Francisco, California] and the best lesson I learned from that experience--most important lesson was just because you're good at something does not mean you should do it. I was good at being a lobbyist but--just because you're good at something does not mean you should do it. I had been flirting around, sending in occasional pieces to the paper, getting them published and that was where the burning desire was and I remember having a friend--Michael and I were talking and so in 2000 I quit PG&E. It paid well, I was good at it, I enjoyed it and I quit to do two things, to write and to start a church (laughter) after vowing never to pastor a church here I go. I wanted to start a church that and Michael and I envisioned was to have a church that it was based on inconvenient love. Which is taken from the last words of Jesus on the cross, while he's dying he's still providing comfort, he's still forgiving people at a most inconvenient time for him. And so a church that was based on that inconvenient love which meant for me--still means for me that some of the more popular hot button social issues that dominate the discourse whether it be gay marriage or abortion we need to look to those things through a different lens. We shouldn't look to them--I know you can find something in Leviticus that justifies this but there is still this inconvenient love that emanates from the teachings of Jesus that you can't ignore. So even if you don't like this individual, even if you don't even like what you think this individual is doing you must affirm their humanity. Story_ID: 168266 Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000] now your--you're not going back to school yet, right? Speaker 2: No I started going in in in ninety--I started going to the seminary in '92 [1992] and I went and took a couple of classes at night and, and just went through until '97 [1997], I finished in '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: Okay so that's--what degree did you finish in '97 [1997]? Speaker 2: I got a master's of arts with an emphasis on liberation theology. Speaker 1: Okay and that was from the--? Speaker 2: Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, Graduate Theological-- Speaker 2: Union. Speaker 1: --Union in Berkeley, okay. Let me ask you-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --just before we get to-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Liberation theology, you know, some people may not know what it is, so. Speaker 2: Okay, there's a lot of ways liberation theology can be defined. The way I define it is that how does God speak to the least of these; those on society's margins with the understanding that God is a God of liberation. That, that, that any theology, any type of theological discourse is trying to subjugate somebody else's will, their freedom; that's wrong. God is a God of the oppressed, of the least. So you see it--it took shape in Latin America with the Latin American liberation theology which really took roots especially under this Gustavo Gutierrez and it really caused tension within the Catholic Church in that region. A lot of people look at black theology as--which has really been authored by [HM] James Cone as a liberation theology. I won't go too much in the weeds but I don't quite see it that way; mainly because I don't see it that way because the slaves were not engaged in some kind of systematic theological output. The slave theology certainly was one of questioning. I'm not sure--like the preacher would say you will get your reward later and the slaves say I'm not sure about that (laughter). I've got some questions, in fact, even though I've worked from can't see in the morning until can't see at night I'm still going to go back--we are going to go out in the fields and have church again, you know in the bush. But liberation theology from my perspective is understanding that God is a God of liberation and that those on the underside of life how do they hear, seek and feel, experience God's voice so they can experience that ultimate freedom that God wants for all of God's children. Story_ID: 168267 Speaker 1: I know that--I don't know if he was still around the time that you were in school but Howard Thurman who is at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: He is a little before me, yeah. Speaker 1: Is his book 'Jesus and the Disinherited'-- 'Jesus and the Disinherited.' Speaker 2: Is that something in the--because he was out here. Speaker 1: Yeah he started a church in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 2: Did you meet him? Speaker 1: I probably wasn't even thinking church when Howard Thurman died. But 'Jesus and the Disinherited' really--I mean that book really touches on just sort of that thematic how I view that, that theology of liberation. Speaker 2: The other theologian, Reinhold Niebuhr-- Speaker 1: Well (laughter). Speaker 2: That influenced [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--Dr. King. Speaker 1: And who influences me to this day, I'm very much a Niebuhrian is the phrase--is the terminology used and in fact, it is sort of the core lesson. I am Niebuhrian not so much in the church but I am in my column. That's where those Niebuhrian impulses really, really come out and we talk about the column and what I do with my column. I think that's where that really comes out. But I'm very much a fan of the writings of Reinhold Niebuhr as I am a fan of--very much a fan of what I like to say the authentic Martin Luther King in that too much of King, in my view, has been whittled down to the last half of one speech. He is far more than that, in fact, I say all the time that if we allowed Martin King to be Martin King after he died, you may have to go to work on the third January--the third Monday in January but we'd a lot better people. That's kind of how I look at it. We've condensed him down to that one speech and he's so much more than that. He, he unquestionably, as [Asa] A. Philip Randolph said we introduced King at the March on Washington he remains the moral conscience of this country. You know, if, if there was anyone to be added to the Mount Rushmore of America, in my view it's Martin Luther King because [Thomas] Jefferson pens the Declaration of Independence but what King does is hold the mirror up to the nation for moral self reflection. How we're doing with these words? You know, when King came along the country was failing but he did America a favor. Those thirteen years from '55 [1955] to '68 [1968] from Montgomery [Alabama] to Memphis [Tennessee] he did America a favor. America still owes him a debt of gratitude. I ought to wake up every morning thanking King for what he did. Story_ID: 168268 Speaker 1: (Laughter) where were we, I'm sorry, you got me (laughter). Speaker 2: We were just talking about your studies and we're leading to the founding of this church [Resurrection Community Church, Berkeley, California] and because this is--to found a church on what you coin as an "inconvenient love" is--this is a big undertaking. This isn't something easy. I was wondering like who--what influenced you, what set that philosophical--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well you know my friend Michael [A.] Smith and I we were talking and it got to a point where you can talk and you can say well this ought to happen and this is what should happen, this is not happening. You can do that or you can take a risk to do something about it and I think we chose the latter. We believe that if people are given the opportunity to look at their faith as a statement of courage, you cannot have authentic faith and not also simultaneously be a person of courage because it takes courage to have faith. Now it doesn't take courage to memorize some passage in the Bible that you want to use to beat up somebody else over head with, that takes no courage, I mean that's cowardly if anything. But to authentically--I think that all the great religions whether it's Islam or whether it's Judaism or whether it's Buddhism, Hinduism, I think that you will find this--I call it inconvenient love but you will find in this love at the core of all these great traditions. You will also find a requirement for courage. I mean those two go hand in hand. Faith requires courage and courage requires faith they are definitely co-relatives in my view. And so we just believe that there are some people out there that want that. That want that because too much of church in my view and I say this in love but too much of church in my view oversimplifies the human condition. Sometimes the answer to the why, why this, why me, why that; sometimes the answer is because. That's the answer. Not because you were doing a number of bad things, not because you went away from God's teachings, no sometimes the answer is because. And then when you reach that point, what are you going to do then? Better have some courage, you know, to fortify your faith. And so I just believe people want to hear that. There is a market for that message and I hate to sound so clinical but there are people who want that message and that they could come into an environment and you come to Resurrection Community Church [Berkeley, California] on Sunday, the church feels like love. I'm not saying it's perfect but it feels like love. You come in, first time there; everybody is going to introduce themselves to you. They are not going to put you off in a corner, you're sitting in the wrong seat, you're sitting in my prescribed place, no, no, no. You're going to feel love and it's going to be a personal invitation from at least two people to invite you to come back; you are welcomed here. And to me that's a glimpse of what the kingdom of God ought to be. I mean that's a glimpse of what it, what it ought to be. Story_ID: 168269 Speaker 1: I mean, any type of theological discourse that's used as a wedge issue to ostracize a certain group, it's not consistent with Jesus. If the proof of God is tied directly to the gross national product of the nation, that's not consistent with the teachings of Jesus. Speaker 2: There's an American doctrine, I guess, I don't know, it's probably an official name for this that God favors America because it's a pious Christian nation that causes it to be prosperous and such. When something bad happens like 9/11 [September 11, 2001], it's because of people considering gay marriage or some other abomination that is conceived as something that will drag the country down. Speaker 1: Stupid, that's absolute, utter nonsense, utter nonsense. On all, on all counts, I mean that we're the most shining--that little shining city on the hill, I mean that's idolatrous--that's idolatrous in scope. That because--that one that you just raise was, I think, brother Pat Robinson [sic, Pat Robertson] and brother [Jerry] Falwell that blame it on gay and lesbian brothers and sisters, no. You know let me just say two things about that: to be a great nation in my view means that you acknowledge your high and low moments with equal valor, that's a great nation. So what does that mean for America; that means that you talk about the bravery of the Declaration of Independence that the founders put their lives on the line when they signed that document. But you also acknowledge the inconsistency that some of them, not all but some of them owned people while they were touting all men are created equal. It means that yes you tout western expansion but you also acknowledge the Trail of Tears. Yes you acknowledge the greatness of World War II [WWII] in defeating Nazi Germany but you also acknowledge Japanese internment that appropriated the land of countless numbers of innocent Japanese brothers and sisters. That's being in touch with your high and low moments; that to me makes a great nation and I think that I love America, I could be as disappointed as I am is that at times in my column if I didn't love the country, I love America but is it a shining city on the hill? No it's struggling with its high low moments like everybody else. I mean one of the great problems I see in this nation is that too many people have embraced what I like to call a false narrative of America. It's one side of the story; it's a false narrative because it doesn't understand that America is a nation of stories. We are a people of stories. Everybody has a story, Native American brothers and sisters have a story about America; this is not consistent with that false narrative. African Americans have a story that's not consistent with that false narrative. Women have a narrative that's not consistent with the false narrative; we're a nation of stories. One nation of stories and so too often and this infiltrates to the church, too often we cling to that false narrative and anyone that has a counter-narrative instead of listening to the counter-narrative, we want to move them out of the conversation. Story_ID: 168270 Speaker 1: So what were the, I guess, nuts and bolts in trying to found a church? Did you start it in a home or--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: No we found a church that wasn't being used (laughter). We found a church that wasn't being used, we had--we both grew up in this church--the McGee Avenue Baptist Church [Berkeley, California] and the only rule that we had was we could not tell anybody who was actively going to this church, friends of ours who were actually going to a church; we were not going to steal them away to come to our church. So it meant-- Speaker 1: So this is the neighborhood you grew up in, basically? Speaker 2: Where we are right now, yes. It would probably take about seven minutes to get to the house I grew up in. So we called people that we knew that had participated in some of the Bible studies that we used to hold and we called them and we sought them out. We did some grass roots stuff, handing out flyers and just walking down the street getting into conversations with people. Hey we're starting a church, love to have you over. I mean just doing things, just really simple, basic stuff, nothing really too complicated. We opened the doors February 2001. Story_ID: 168271 Speaker 1: Now did you see--did your church [Resurrection Community Church, Berkeley, California]--was it opened under a denomination? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no and the reason why and that was an option; the reason why we didn't do that was because we didn't want to--not that we had a problem with denominations or I have a problem with denominations since Michael [A. Smith] has left. He is now pastor at McGee [Avenue Baptist Church, Berkeley, California], nothing wrong with denominations if it's the right one but we were less interested in adopting the polity of a denomination then we were trying to crystallize this understanding of inconvenient love. And that--and probably the way I say this--I say this often to the church; it is hard for me to believe that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] actually liked [Theophilus Eugene] Bull Connor; it's hard for me to believe that, he might have but it's hard for me to believe he liked Bull Connor. But Martin Luther King understood that his humanity was inextricably linked to Bull Connor's and so he had to affirm his humanity and so we liked to make like and love interchangeable but they're not. Liking someone or not liking someone, liking what someone does or not liking what someone does is irrelevant to the theological equation in my view. And so you still have to affirm their humanity, it's I mean you mentioned earlier about churches making an issue of gay marriage, who lost a job when a gay couple got married? I mean whose 401K went under because lesbian sisters wanted to publicly make a public commitment before their friends and family, who lost on that? And you can understand that when has the nation lost when freedoms were expanded to a group who had been denied a freedom that everyone else is enjoying? When has the nation been a loser, never? Speaker 1: Now at the time that this church was formed though as you mentioned Jerry Falwell and Pastor Robinson's [sic, Pat Robertson] reaction to 9/11 [September 11, 2001], that's just a year afterwards and gosh, I had another point. As much in the news in discussion that the Episcopal church, with Eugene Robinson [sic, Vicky Gene Robinson], the first gay Episcopal priest a friend of mine was very much involved on that and that was a big issue in the news then and some Episcopalians left the church, left. So all around the country the election in 2004-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --With John Kerry in Ohio, gay marriage was an issue upon which that they tried to discourage black voters for turning out for John Kerry-- Speaker 2: Right, nah, right- Speaker 1: --And it worked from what I heard. Speaker 2: I was going to say some took the bait, some took the bait. I would say that my position at least publicly even before then but publicly, and I say publicly because of the columns I have written, my position publicly in gay marriage has been this way since, I think '95 [1995], in fact my editor at the [Oakland] Tribune told me back in 2002 that I was the first columnist that he had read who said you know, civil union is nothing but a mechanism to pacify heterosexuals. It's marriage or nothing. Everybody should have marriage, we should not have marriage for one group and something else for another group to make this other group feel better about themselves, no that's wrong and so the reason why, it's two reasons. One of the reasons I've been so strongly supporting gay marriage this goes back--you asked me earlier about the [U.S.] Constitution and what professor I told you was Steve Caan and his influence on me and really understanding the Constitution, the fourteenth amendment clearly states and I know people say that was about slavery. No, no slavery may have been the reason that the fourteenth amendment was ratified but the fourteenth amendment clearly states all people, A-L-L, all. Now unless there is a new definition of all that I'm unaware of it says all. If you were born in this country or a naturalized citizen you get two things. Due process of law which is so important to the Constitution is mentioned twice, in the fifth amendment as well as the fourteenth amendment and you get equal protection of the laws. So right there it doesn't matter what you like (laugher), that's what the country signed up to. And so for the Jerry Falwells, the other preachers to rail against gay marriage because they didn't like it is inheritantly the un-American position to hold. See if you're willing to ignore a Constitutional amendment the country signed up for that almost tore the country apart in order to get that amendment, if you're willing to ignore that based on something you don't like then you really haven't committed yourself to American values. And so the people in this country that I find them and found them to be un-American. I've written that in my column, in fact. Story_ID: 168272 Speaker 1: Now when you founded the church [Resurrection Community Church, Berkeley, California] was the congregation largely drawn from people that felt disregarded or on the outskirts of--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: No they were largely people--they started as largely people that we knew; they started largely as people that we knew. What really made a difference for me was the column then people started to know--read my column. And, oh he's a pastor, he's writing like this well let me come over and see what's he talking about. Speaker 1: Now wait a minute now, let's go to the beginnings of the column, we should talk about that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: When did the column begin? Speaker 2: The column began also when I left PG&E [Pacific Gas and Electric Company, San Francisco, California] and the way it happened very simply was I said earlier I wasn't sure about what I wanted to do, I know I want to do something. Remember back in my twenties, I said I wanted to do--I wasn't sure what it was. Well by the time I left PG&E I was sure. Speaker 1: So this is in--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: 2000. Speaker 1: 2000, okay so the same year the church was founded? Speaker 2: Yeah, I built a website and I wrote a column--I wrote one column a week. Speaker 1: So you created your own website and just started writing. Speaker 2: Just started writing. Speaker 1: Okay now you were--nobody's paying you to do this? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Nobody told you you couldn't do it? Speaker 2: No I just did it and then I sold the column online to several progressive websites. One of them oh what's--I can't think of the name of it--the local phone company. It's our CREDO now but what was it before but what was it before it was CREDO [previously Working Assets Wireless]? Speaker 1: Local phone company here. Speaker 2: It was called CREDO or something. Anyway they had a website and I sold it to them and then I was in a coffee shop in Emeryville [California] and they were doing a story--the Oakland Tribune was doing a story on the revitalization of the Emeryville area and I was happy to be in the area. A reporter said, "Do you mind if I talk to you for a moment?" I'm like, "Sure." So we were talking about the redevelopment, about the coffee shop and she asked me my name and what did I do and I told her I'm a writer and she said, oh yeah I've read your stuff, you're really good. She said, "You should call our editor, Kevin King and I'm going to tell him you're going to call him, you should call him." So I called him, pitched him my column, he put me in twice a week (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay so you're in--what organization is this? Speaker 2: This is the Bay Area News Group so I'm in--we're in the San Francisco Bay Area. I'm in every major paper in the Bay area except the San Francisco Chronicle. So I'm in the Contra Costa Times, I'm in the Oakland Tribune, I'm in the San Jose Mercury News, a host of smaller papers. I'm in a couple of papers outside of the state. Speaker 1: So this is the Bay Area News Group syndicate? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168273 Speaker 1: I happened to meet--I met this other lady who happened to be friends with Arianna Huffington who had come out with this new website called The Huffington Post (laughter). So I'm one of the early--I'm not the first but I was with The Huffington Post in the first year of its inception. Speaker 2: That's in 20--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well Huffington Post was later down, that's probably like '06 [2006] maybe '05 [2005] or '06 [2006] I think The Huffington Post was. Somewhere in there. Speaker 2: I think you're right, yeah. It's before [HM Barack] Obama won the election. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we knew about Obama because he had given a speech. He wasn't even president; he wasn't even close to president. The column is really what I call public morality and what I mean by that is that's not a religious distinction but it is one that leans heavily on the Declaration of Independence and the [U.S.] Constitution and sort of how are we doing with those things because we like to call ourselves Americans experiment so public morality is my way of saying how are we doing with this experiment. So--and I also rely heavily on Reinhold Niebuhr. And Niebuhr's influence in my column--Niebuhr is known for articulating what's called Christian realism that you can't have a Christianity, a faith that sort of pie in the sky, it has to be grounded in the realities of the human condition. So sometimes the choice may not be between good and evil as Niebuhr would say. Choice may in fact be between evil and more evil. It gets that complicated, it gets that messy and so you've got the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, a little Christian realism thrown in plus my own inconvenient love. Put those together and you've got a Byron Williams column (laughter). Speaker 2: All right-- Story_ID: 168274 Speaker 1: So church, you know, the church as I know it from Flip Wilson, the church has to crawl before it can walk? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So how did you start--did it [Williams' church, Resurrection Community Church, Berkeley, California] start big or small? Speaker 2: It started small and it has grown but it still needs to grow; I mean it still needs to grow. The one thing I am thankful for the people that we have. I also recognize that it's common if I can give you something you don't have to work at it. If I can give you a car; you'll take a car. You know, if I just give you a job, you'll take it and the same with faith and church and so if you have a church that says you just do this, boom boom boom, read these scriptures, read this way, there's no work there, I mean there's no work. But that's more appealing. Speaker 1: A formula to go to heaven. Speaker 2: Yeah and that's more appealing but and I also know the thing you know, you self-reflect. Sometimes, you know it's you, sometimes not all the times. But you have to self-reflect, you have to think about where you are, where you want to go, how is God speaking to you; you've got to work at that. If you're going to commit yourself let's say to the church, if you're going to commit yourself to inconvenient love you are given each and every day far more reasons not to engage in inconvenient love than you are to engage in it. You are given far more reasons, it's always easier. So it's hard work; I know it's hard. Speaker 1: You're calling it inconvenient love because it is not easy to do. Speaker 2: Exactly and I'm the one who articulates it. It's a struggle for me (laughter) so it's not like I got this thing down, I got this thing nailed to a science because I don't. I don't have it nailed to a science so I know it's a struggle; we're struggling together. I need the church to help me and I'm there as their pastor to help them, we're all struggling together but that's were growth comes from. But I guarantee everyone who attends Resurrection Community Church [Berkeley, California] will tell you they are a better person for having had the courage to engage and embrace inconvenient love. I have no doubt in my mind about that. Speaker 1: Now the facility that you operate from, is that the original facility you started at? Speaker 2: No we were at one other facility and then this one came open so we took this one. There's a lot of stuff as you start as I don't always have the schedule. There is a lot of stuff going in there but that building is over a hundred years old. It's a great old building and the acoustics are so good that I don't use--we haven't used a microphone in maybe five or seven years, it's not necessary because the acoustics are that good so it's not necessary. And plus I'm, I'm on the loud side anyway so given those two things we haven't used a microphone in years. So that's how we've come together and then we've reached out and been available to that community. Certainly doing things that--you know, for example God forbid should the next Trayvon Martin thing happen, we could certainly be that place where voices throughout the community even people who don't necessarily attend the church, we can be that place where those voices, that frustration can be acknowledged. Speaker 1: So do you hold a lot of community forums? Speaker 2: We don't do a lot, I mean, I, I, I--but we definitely, we definitely do them. I'm also chair of the citywide [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] breakfast that everyone--we started three years ago and there was I think 175 people, last year we had 404 and this year coming up the 2014 breakfast we're anticipating about 500 people. You know, so it's starting to grow and, so. Speaker 1: Okay so your congregation is--is it primarily a black congregation? Speaker 2: It's mostly but not exclusively. It's mostly but not exclusively. It really is whoever comes through the door. And the people who have happened to come through the door have been majority African Americans but whoever comes through that door. The only requirement is that your heart just needs to be open and that's really more between you and God than it is between me and you. So (laughter) in your heart I mean; you're welcome. Story_ID: 168275 Speaker 1: That's--you know, we interviewed [HM] Reverend Eugene Rivers out in Boston [Massachusetts] who got his start out here at the Azusa Christian Ministry in the [San Francisco] Bay area in which it was an organizing kind of a ministry. Is your ministry like an organizing one? Speaker 2: No we have--have a couple of people--corporate people who have developed some strategies for us to attract more people. I mean you always want to grow, I mean you always want to be a safe place for people with families; you always want to, you know, to be, be that place. I think the other challenge that not just Resurrection [Community] Church [Berkeley, California] where I pastor but all churches face right now is that times are changing and when I was growing up--when I was a little boy you didn't have baseball games on Sunday or basketball games on Sunday, you know, but now you have that. The times are changing and we have to really fight, I say that in a positive way, for our voice to be heard because the dominant theological voice has no appreciation for the gray. That life is black and white, it's Democrat or Republican, it's gay or it's straight and it's just not that simple. And if that's the dominant voice that you hear, it becomes really, really to say well enough with that church stuff, I'm done those guys are a bunch of kooks who are just trying to get paid. I understand that but there are still a lot of people out there that are looking for something and I think we are one of the answers for the something. We're not the answer. We're simply one of the answers on that little corner, a little community church that band together and support each other. When we've had young people graduate, church is there. People have lost loved ones, the church is there, I mean, people get sick and want to have surgery, I mean--it, it is a family, it really is, it really is a family. Story_ID: 168276 Speaker 1: What programs do you have [at Resurrection Community Church, Berkeley, California]? Speaker 2: We have a youth culinary academy that we do. I don't know if it's a program, we have several nonprofits that rent space to do various things. Wanted to do performing arts and they have plays every other weekend. The culinary youth is probably the biggest and then there is a literacy that we're doing with that Malcolm X [Elementary] School [Berkeley, California], the elementary school that we passed. There's also a literacy that we do which I really am excited about that and really want to grow that. I was thinking about even changing the name and calling it The Naomi Project after my grandmother [Naomi Brooks] just because she got me to read (laughter) and I think if we can get more kids--not just reading that's identifying words but really develop a real love for reading, I think that would be just fantastic. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168277 Speaker 1: We mentioned the candidacy of [HM] Barack Obama a while ago but--did your church [Resurrection Community Church, Berkeley, California] or did you yourself in your column support the candidacy of a--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, two things, number one I never preach my column in church, number one. I don't--I the only thing that I do politically at the church on the political side is that every election we have the League of Women Voters come in and explain all the initiatives that are on the ballot and they explain them to the people--members of the church and if you vote for this proposition x, if you vote yes that means you want this and going on and on, that's all we do. My view personally I was personally happy in 2008 that Barack Obama was elected president of the United States. I even shed a tear that night a couple of tears in fact but I wrote in my column that it was a great moment for the country because I cannot identify any other industrialized nation where an individual representing no more than 12 percent of the population would be elected its leader. No Jamaican would be prime minister of Great Britain, no Algerian would lead France you can just go on right down the line. Nowhere else but America so that's a great moment for America with that said once the inauguration was over then I held President Obama to the same standard in my column that I held his predecessors. And so, but I don't--but as a practical matter I do not feel as pastor that it is my place--one it violates separation of church and state and our nonprofit status but even more than that for me. It is not my place to tell people how to vote and what to vote for, I mean that's an insult to the people that I'm serving as pastor, that's an insult and it's not my place to tell them. It is my role to make them as informed as possible just like I do with Bible study and service to make them as informed as possible and they can make a decision on their own, an informed decision. The thing when they read my column, I don't advertise my column, they all know I write a column, if they want to read it that's fine but even in my column I don't carry anybody's water because my column again, Declaration of Independence, Christian realism, inconvenient love, the [U.S.] Constitution so sometime you can fall into that. Sometimes you can fall outside of that if you fall outside of that I'll be critical of you. So I've been critical of this president on certain things and I've applauded this president on certain things. Story_ID: 168278 Speaker 1: Okay now in 2010 you appeared on MSNBC's 'Debating the Black Agenda' and what is the black agenda and what I mean what was your side of that debate? Speaker 2: (Laughter) well, where was I in the debate is that I was asked a question where should the black agenda go from here? That was the topic and where I came down is that I thought--I looked at one area economically--the economy and what I proposed on that show was right now we spend in excess of one hundred billion dollars in subsidies. We provide subsidies to multinational corporations in excess of one hundred billion dollars. My way of thinking is if you are a multinational corporation if you didn't get that subsidy, you would still do just fine. So why not look at small businesses and when I mean small businesses I don't mean the federal designation because that could be up to five hundred employees, I mean fifty or less. If you higher fifty or less why not put those subsidies with those small businesses? Why not subsidize a small business to hire someone to work in their shop? If you do that not only do you lower unemployment but you stimulate the economy. I think that our--the emphasis and so the example that I used to make that point on how it effects the black community when [William] Bill Clinton took office the official unemployment rate for the country was 7 percent. For African Americans it was 14 [percent] this was 1992. When Bill Clinton left office in 2008 [sic, 2001] unemployment was 4 [percent], African Americans unemployment went from 14 percent down to 7 [percent]. So if you stimulate small businesses that way I do think it would definitely have an impact on the African American community because even though the problem is more profound, any solutions would be more profound because we would stand to benefit given our large numbers of unemployment that are lar--that are more than the national average. Story_ID: 168279 Speaker 1: Now you serve on the board of the National Black Justice Coalition. Speaker 2: I do, I'm on that that is a coalition, organization committed to equality for gay and lesbian brothers and sisters. I'm actually the--what I am is the chair--the national chair of their religious committee and I'm honored to do that mainly because I support the issue but it's also--it puts me in position of being an ally to that movement. I think one of the things that we don't talk about a lot in this country is privilege. We talk about it in terms of white privilege and that certainly exists as well but I'm an educated, middle class, heterosexual male, it's a lot of privilege involved, there's a lot of privilege loaded in that, in that, and so it's important for me to try, to try. I'm not saying I'm doing it or mastering it. But to try to realize the sexism and the homophobia the elitism that exists within me and so they asked me to serve as a--to chair that committee and I was honored to do so. Story_ID: 168280 Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell us about the book 'Strip Mall Patriotism: Moral Reflections on the Iraq War.' Speaker 2: 'Strip Mall Patriotism' that was my first book and that was a collection of columns that I did from the war's inception which was what, 2003, from the war's inception in 2003 through 2006. And the title actually came from a column that I had written about the Iraq War and this was back when everybody was gung ho for the war and I called--you know that "in America either you are with us or against us" mentality, remember when that was pervasive. Speaker 1: Love it or leave it? Speaker 2: Yeah and so and really drumming up the going to Iraq and I called that fervor "strip mall patriotism." It's just one size fits all, you don't question, it's no different than when you go to a strip mall. If you go to a strip mall in Oakland [California] or you go to a strip mall in Duluth, Minnesota you know the stores that are already there (laughter). It's prefabricated, one size fits all. It's not authentic patriotism--it's not love of country, it's just short-term cheerleading for, for a--what turned out to be awful, awful, catastrophic cost. And so I was very proud of the fact that I was one of those--not the one, one of those who opposed that war from its inception. I thought it was morally wrong in the beginning, in fact, in that strip mall patriotism the very first column that's in there was a column I wrote when [HM] Colin Powell spoke at the UN [United Nations] and that's a column I'm particularly proud of because I wrote that he didn't make the case to go to war and that was really flying in the face when even some of my liberal brothers and sisters were saying yeah he made the case and I said no he didn't make the case and I wrote it and stood by it. I was a little nervous, what if I'm wrong here but that's the risk you take. I was very proud of that column and proud of that little book. Story_ID: 168281 Speaker 1: Your second book ['1963: The Year of Hope & Hostility']-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --just came out this year-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --is about--it's a hundred and--well this is the fiftieth anniversary of 1963 which was a pivotal year, right? Speaker 2: Yes 1963 was the year of hope and hostility. Again for different reasons I'm very proud of this effort too. I'm proud of this effort largely because it's hard to believe but it's--my book is the first to chronicle the events of this year which was just incredible. January 1, 1963 was the one hundredth anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation becoming law and [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in '62 [1962] is trying to get [John F.] Kennedy to issue a second Emancipation Proclamation and Kennedy doesn't want to do it because he wants to stay in the middle. The way I talk about that is not so much I think Kennedy is right or wrong but I look at politics as an amoral enterprise. It's not moral, it's not immoral, sometimes it has moral outcomes like the Emancipation Proclamation, sometimes it has immoral outcomes like the trail of tears (laughter) so it's both but it's amoral fundamentally. And Kennedy had a close election in '60 [1960] with [Richard] Nixon, he's worried about reelection in '64 [1964]. The South had key leadership positions in [U.S.] Congress. Speaker 1: His party was split between Democrats and Dixiecrats. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly so he wants to stay in the middle. So he's reluctant to issue a second emancipation proclamation that King is urging. January is the month that George Wallace, "Segregation today, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever" [sic]. In February Kennedy signed the last of three Cuba embargos and then tries to assassinate [Fidel] Castro under Operation Mongoose [The Cuban Project] while he is also trying to normalize the relationship with Castro at the same time. How do you do that, I don't know how that works. Then in April/May you have the Birmingham [Alabama] campaign with [Theophilus Eugene] Bull Connor, his police dogs and fire hoses. Story_ID: 168282 Speaker 1: You made a point, I think, in the book ['1963: The Year of Hope & Hostility']. I heard you on Tavis Smiley ['The Tavis Smiley Show'] talk about this is a year when American television coverage doubled--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes, yes, in fact it's hard to believe now as I was saying to brother [HM] Tavis [Smiley], it's hard to believe now but the evening news part of '63 [1963] was only fifteen minutes. And so it--the evening news was only fifteen minutes to a half hour. Television got to Birmingham [Alabama] so prior to the Birmingham campaign with the police dogs and fire hoses Gallup Poll had civil rights as a national issue and around 4 percent of the nation thought it was a national issue. Well one of the reasons is that you read in the paper there was a bombing, there was a protest. You read that in the paper but television was down in Birmingham and you saw it and the day after the coverage of the police dogs and fire hoses overnight civil rights became a national issue for 52 percent of the country, overnight. In June of '63 [1963] we had one of the most transformative days of the twentieth century, in my view and I'm pretty sure I am the first to write it this way. We had a twenty four hour period on June 11, '63 [1963] where the Buddhist monk set himself on fire in Saigon [later Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam], first indication this little place called Vietnam that most people don't even know about yet is going to be a real problem. [George] Wallace stands in front of the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] to block Vivian Malone and James Hood from entering the University of Alabama, [John F.] Kennedy goes on national television and raises civil rights to moral issue for the nation and then Medgar Evers a couple of hours was killed. That's a twenty-four period of American history and it's sort of--for me it symbolizes the title of the book, '1963: The Year of Hope & Hostility' and you had that hope and hostility sort of intertwine right there in that twenty-four period. Of course, that was also the year [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] wrote his letter from Birmingham jail, you had the March on Washington, Kennedy went to Berlin [Germany] "Ich bin ein Berliner." He gave the peace speech where he then later that year signed a limited nuclear test ban treaty, President [Ngo Dinh] Diem had the coup against President Diem in South Vietnam and then of course, you had the Kennedy assassination. And I think because the Kennedy assassination really takes up all the oxygen in the room. We look at everything else sort of a la carte but they're connected. When I was in Birmingham earlier this year in the civil rights museum the one in Birmingham [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama] they had headlined newspapers from Korea, Germany, Sweden, Saudi Arabia with the police dogs on the front page. This--what was happening in Birmingham made John F. Kennedy's call for democracy globally look hypocritical. It allowed Mr. [Nikita] Khrushchev to say well Mr. Kennedy you talk about democracy but that don't look like democracy what I'm looking at in Birmingham. And so, so, so, so when we link the stuff together, I mean of things that I do with my column and as a writer, I'm interested in history from the vantage point of interrelated nature and so we have sort of looked at these things a la carte like the Kennedy assassination, March on Washington. You sort of look at this year, look at what happened. I even mentioned the fact that that was also one of the four little girls killed in the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama], I mean a lot happened this year but probably the main thing that made '63 [1963] unique from let's say '68 [1968] was a lot of people sort of look at it as a landmark year as well. The difference between '63 [1963] and '68 [1968], no year stands on its own. You, every year is depending upon some previous events so no year stands on its own. Like when I talk about Vietnam [War], you can't talk about Vietnam unless you are willing to go back at least to 1945 and the Potsdam Conference with [President Harry] Truman, [Premier Joseph] Stalin and [Prime Minister Winston] Churchill, that's one. Second thing that makes '63 [1963] unique, I won't say it's a definitive year but what makes it unique was that it combined hope and hostility. Most of the events we think about in '68 [1968] were largely negative. King assassination, the Robert Kennedy assassination, the Vietnam protests, the Democratic [National] Convention [Chicago, Illinois]. But '63 [1963] is unique because you had the Birmingham police, the police dogs, fire hoses and then you had a letter from Birmingham jail, you had Kennedy speak to the nation on civil rights then you had Medgar Evers killed. You had King speak to the nation about his dream, three weeks later he's eulogizing three or four little girls killed in 16th Street church. See hope and hostility that's what really to me made this year so unique and made it one that I felt worth writing about. Story_ID: 168283 Speaker 1: Right, right, right, there was a time when there was major demonstrations and most of the northern cities allowed public accommodations downtown, jobs in city government, major department stores all that sort of thing. Speaker 2: And one of the things going back to television, television captured what was going on in Birmingham [Alabama]. It didn't capture some of the things that were going on in Chicago [Illinois], some of the things that were going on in Detroit [Michigan], some of the things that were going on in New York City [New York]. It didn't capture why especially in urban areas the message of the Nation of Islam was taking hold with a lot of black people, why it was resonating; it didn't capture that. It just captured the Nation of Islam as a fringe element and so--but it was really was--in fact I would even say that the events of '63 [1963] is what lead to the events of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: That's the year that Malcolm X left the Nation of Islam, '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Yep, yep, right, right. Speaker 1: His remarks--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: [John F.] Kennedy assassination, that's right. Yeah, I write about, I write about that, I, I , I capture that, yeah. Speaker 1: A pivotal year. Story_ID: 168284 Speaker 1: No, what I was going to say though, interesting thing about '63 [1963] we're talking about this is the first book ['1963: The Year of Hope & Hostility'] written on '63 [1963]. What I find interesting about that is that what I hope doesn't happen is someone comes along and writes another book on '63 [1963] if they don't get turned down, "We already have that book." And while I talk about the Cold War, civil rights, Vietnam, Cuba in that year, I'm always concerned that will certain issues get marginalized. We already have a civil rights book on that. I always get concerned and we've got more books on Abraham Lincoln, its untold the number of books on Abraham Lincoln. In fact, that new Lincoln library [Lincoln Museum and Library, Washington, D.C.] the center they created in Washington, D.C. that it goes up, I think the books for Lincoln stack up like four stories. All the books written on Lincoln so I just hope that this book gets in and then it gets marginalized. We already have a book on '63 [1963]. I didn't tell the definitive story on '63 [1963], I sort of said to the nation let's look at this year, this year is unique, it's transformative, it is informs us of who we are. I mean, one little subtle thing--two subtle things about '63 [1963] that was the year the [U.S.] Supreme Court upheld--or affirmed Gideon vs. Wainwright [372 U.S. 335] decision that you have to have an attorney. That's fifty years where yeah you've got to have an attorney, not just on capital cases. When you go before a court, you have to have an attorney. If it's a felony, you have to have an attorney; that's just fifty years. Another thing that was very subtle about this year--it was a subtle thing but yet important thing in my view. Sidney Poitier won best actor for 'Lilies of the Field' in '63 [1963] and to me the reason I write this in the book--the reason that's important no offense to Hattie McDaniel when she won in 1939, first African American to win an Oscar for 'Gone With the Wind,' no offense to Hattie McDaniel in her legendary career but Olivia de Havilland couldn't have been mammy in 'Gone With the Wind.' You had to have somebody black be mammy in 'Gone with the Wind.' Well Homer Smith, Paul Newman could have been Homer Smith the role that Sidney Poitier won for, William Holden could have been Homer Smith, Steve McQueen. There is a number of A-list actors in Hollywood who could have been Homer Smith. Sidney Poitier won that award for being a good guy. Homer Smith was just a good guy and anybody could have played that role and because he won a best actor for a role that anybody could have played that he wasn't marginalized, I think that becomes a transformative moment for Hollywood even though they still struggle with it. I think that became a transformative moment, at least for me that he won because that role was just being a good guy. He wasn't a slave, he wasn't a pimp, he was just a good guy. Story_ID: 168285 Speaker 1: That's one, and I thought about this and I didn't know about this all my life but about five years ago a friend of mine who has now passed away in Xenia, Ohio told me about New Year's Eve of 1862 where black people in churches all over the country who could go to church in those days sat up until midnight and wasn't called a Watch Night anticipating January 1, 1863, the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation. Speaker 2: And that's a tradition that's gone away. I've spent a lot of nights at this church growing up Watch Night but now a lot of churches in the urban areas don't do it. People don't like to come out now at night and it's not as prevalent as it used to be but that is the tradition. Speaker 1: It's an interesting analysis of anticipation of the year 1963 a hundred years later people were thinking about the hundredth anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation where we still hadn't achieved it even though-- Speaker 2: And it's still a ways to go but again even--I'm sadden more by I think we've all sort of embraced what I like to call it cheap [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. A low calorie, less filling, taste great Martin Luther King and I'm not saying that disparaging the legacy of King but I really think we like to make him milquetoast, that makes everybody comfortable. Martin Luther King is far more radical that he has been publicly portrayed and it's been a strange coalition of black and white, liberal and conservative that prefers this milquetoast version of King than the one who gave his life for a deeper cause. Speaker 1: Interestingly enough there's a poem by [HM] Ruby Dee where the refrain is, "Now that he's conveniently dead" [sic, 'Now That He Is Safely Dead' by Carl Wendell Hines] which kind of reverberates your inconvenient love. Speaker 2: In fact, I have quoted that poem because the next line is, "We with eased consciousness will celebrate him" [sic] (laughter). I forgot what I'm saying in that knowing the cost for which he died is still a cost. It goes back to that but no it's always easier--we like to lionize people. One of the things I write about in the book that we lionize John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King far more in the political discourse but George Wallace, Alabama Governor George Wallace of those three from '63 [1963] he's been the most influential on our politics. Wallace realized if you have this Southern populism plagued with white fears, you can build a coalition around that. Story_ID: 168286 Speaker 1: You can build a coalition around white fears. So [George] Wallace starts this in '63 [1963], he runs in '68 [1968] third party, has the largest third party presidency candidacy to the number of votes since [Theodore] Teddy Roosevelt. Richard Nixon comes up with what's called the Southern Strategy where you appeal to white voters. Ronald Reagan gets the nomination in 1980--a republican nomination and the first thing he does is go to Philadelphia, Mississippi where [Andrew] Goodman, [James] Chaney and [Michael] Schwerner were good and says I believe in states' rights. Jesse Helms in '88 [1988] or '89 [1989] running against Harvey Gantt in '89 [1989, sic, 1990] for the U.S. Senate does that hands commercial. You wanted that job but they had to give it to a minority. George H.W. Bush ran the Willie Horton ads on against Michael Dukakis. Even as late as 2007 where Harold Ford [Jr.] was running for the [U.S.] Senate they had the white playboy bunny you know, "Harold, call me." It's been largely with the Republican Party but that whole notion of political success by way of playing to white fears has been a successful one and it goes back to George Wallace. That's why I say George Wallace has been the most influential on our politics. Story_ID: 168287 Speaker 1: Now you did a lot of traveling in relationship to the book is what I heard on 'The Tavis Smiley Show.' Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been as far as like Johnny Cash, "I've been everywhere man" (laughter). Yeah well the first person--let's talk about some of the people that I interviewed. The first person I interviewed for the book was [John F.] Kennedy's speechwriter [Theodore] Ted Sorensen. That was the first person who sat down with me for the book. The person who wrote the forward for the book, Rev. James Lawson he trained everybody in Birmingham [Alabama] on nonviolent, civil disobedience and he also was the individual who called [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] in 1968 and said we've got a problem in Memphis [Tennessee] with the sanitation workers, can you come and that's when King was assassinated. I met a man who I dedicated the book to by the name of [Hunter Pitts] Jack O'Dell. Jack O'Dell was the individual who worked for King, who FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] director J. Edgar Hoover said was a Communist. That Kennedy demanded King if you want me to support a civil rights bill you have to fire Jack O'Dell and Stanley Levison. So there were some of the interesting people who are still around that I actually met. I've been to (unclear) I went to Birmingham to that civil rights museum [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama] and the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama]. I obviously had made a pilgrimage to Boston [Massachusetts] to do some research with Kennedy [John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, Massachusetts] and I went down to Atlanta [Georgia] and actually some of the King stuff is right down the road at Stanford [University, Stanford, California]. So most of the King stuff is down in Stanford, that was relatively short jump. Speaker 1: There's a [Theophilus Eugene] Bull Connor too that I heard that--(simultaneous) (unclear) Speaker 2: Yes, yes when I was in Birmingham my wife [Gabrielle Wilson] called me, she asked do I need anything and I said no I'm good. I said yeah there is something you can get me, I need Bull Connor's address, where is Bull buried, I want to visit old Bull before I leave Birmingham. And she text me back Bull Connor is buried at 600 Martin Luther King [Jr.] Drive. I just loved that (laughter), I love that story. I'm sure what happened Bull Connor died and afterwards they changed the name of the street, Bull you are stuck there now. And in fact, I will be going to the fiftieth anniversary of--it's called JFK 50 in Dallas [Texas] and I'll be down there doing some things. Speaker 1: That's this month, right? Speaker 2: That's this month, yes. I'll be down there for that. Story_ID: 168288 Speaker 1: Do you have a future project? I mean what's your next--? Speaker 2: My next book? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah next book? Speaker 2: I don't even know what my next sermon is and that's like five days away. No I actually do know what my next four books are going to be. But my next book because I--my role with history is I really like the interrelated nature of history. I'm fascinated by the fact that from 1960 to 1968 you had a movement, a grass [root] move--movement every year. In '60 [1960] you had the sit-ins, '61 [1961] you had the freedom ride, '62 [1962] Albany, Georgia, '63 [1963] Birmingham [Alabama], '64 [1964] Mississippi and Fannie Lou Hamer, '65 [1965] Selma [Alabama], '66 [1966] Chicago [Illinois], '67 [1967] Vietnam, '68 [1968] sanitation workers. You also had the Black Panther Movement come up; you had the United Labor Farm Workers Movement [sic, United Farm Workers Movement] come up. So to me the interrelated nature of those movements, those independent grass root movements that sort of was really raising their voice, that's fascinating to me and I want to explore that, I want to write a book on that next. I think the key and I'm not the first to say this, everyone feels this way that's a book that I would want to read. Hasn't been written yet so let me kill two birds with one stone (laughter). Story_ID: 168289 Speaker 1: Now your church [Resurrection Community Church, Berkeley, California] should be like you notice interaction in earlier days in the church sort of hands on, everybody knows of family atmosphere type of church, do you have any desire to blow it up to mega status? Speaker 2: Well that, that, that, that, that's God's call, that, that, that's really God's call. You know I love what I do. I'm the only pastor, syndicated columnist in the country. I'm the only--I'm the first one to write a book on 1963 ['1963: The Year of Hope & Hostility']. I am doing my life I know exactly what I want. Where that takes me, it takes me. But fundamentally will I want the church to blow up at the expense of no longer doing the things that I like to do? No. I mean I find--I consider myself very successful in that I am doing exactly what I want to do. I think I do it well and I'm very pleased with Byron Williams; I like him (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168290 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question and you alluded to--you may have answered this question already but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Wow, that, that, that's a great question. Not because I didn't have an answer but it really pauses to think. You know part--you know like I was saying earlier when I was talking about being in high school [Albany High School, Albany, California] and the dean, his name was Gary Gerhard (ph.) basically said Byron you're better than this and I think in many ways we're better than this. You know we've done a lot of great stuff and I want to delineate we were talking about the African American community because when we say African American community are we talking about the Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] of the world, the Oprah's, the Bill Cosby's. Are we talking about those who still believe in the promise of America, you know, trying to hang on to that greasy pole or are we talking about the people who I like to call the Bob Dylan demographic. You know Bob Dylan wrote the song "When you've got nothing, you've got nothing to lose" ['Like a Rolling Stone']. Are we talking about demographic so there is always a question for you when we are talking about the black community? But with that said, I--there is still too much nihilism in certain parts of our community. There's--whether it's in Oakland [California], Chicago [Illinois] or Detroit [Michigan] or New York [City, New York] there is too many areas where nihilism is the dominant ethos and if you don't--and if you are affected with nihilism then not only do you not care about yourself, you don't care about your neighbor. You can't grow, you can't thrive. I mean in some of those places, the next John Coltrane might be in those suffocating conditions. The next James Baldwin might be in those suffocating types--the next [HM] Barack Obama might be in those suffocating conditions and so we don't know the toll--the social toll that nihilism is taking on--holds on us as a people. I think that that--if so we could get rid of, if we could get rid of that because no matter how we look at it, no matter what things we think we need to improve or we need to change right now, our darkest today is infinitely more brighter that the slaves brightest yesterday. And there's no reason that descendants--we are descendants of people who in 1865 just got freedom, that's all they got. They didn't get land, they didn't get property and they made it work. We have far more resources and ingenuity and creativity to be as good as we can be and I just get concerned that that nihilism trumps that, covers it, suffocates it, some of it not all of it but some of it. That make--? Speaker 1: That makes a lot of sense. Story_ID: 168291 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too, when we you look back on everything you've done at this point in your life, is there anything maybe you would do differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: I would have went to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] instead of going to Idaho State [University, Pocatello, Idaho]. No not really here's why, it's not that I haven't made mistakes, I certainly have. But I got here as a combination of mistakes and successes. So while no you would like to not make mistakes, I wouldn't have gotten where I'm at and I'm in a great place, I'm happy where I'm at and that's not just paved with success, there's a lot of success that's been rooted in failure. So no, I would have went to Georgetown though, I would have done that one over. There is actually one more sort of related to that. I probably would have went to law school to be a constitutional law professor; I probably would have done that, that's about it though (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 168292 Speaker 1: Once again if you look back over everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy at this juncture? Speaker 2: I listened to my father [Bruce Williams]. You know Will Rogers said, "When I was seventeen, I thought my father was the dumbest man I ever met, when I was twenty-one I was surprised to see how much he had learned in four years [sic] (laughter)." On some really key moments, I listened to my father and that is really--that's made the difference; that has made the difference. My father was the first one to show me inconvenient love (laughter). Story_ID: 168293 Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your family. Now you've got a--yeah your personal family. Speaker 2: I remarried, I have one son from my first marriage, Malik Isaiah Williams who is off to college now and he's on his way--he's eighteen going on forty. I am currently married to the lovely Gabrielle Wilson who is a--she's the host at a jazz show here locally, in Berkeley [California] and she thinks she knows as much about jazz as I do and so we debate about that but a really, really good person who enhances the peace that I'm striving to obtain. So it's just-so she has two daughters as well and but we're empty nesters; it's just her and I. I lost my beloved Zeus, my boxer [dog] earlier this year and so I'm right at the point now where we can have a new addition, a new boxer, in fact I'm bringing him to the house. We already know it's going to be male; his name is going to be Mycroft which was Sherlock Holmes' older brother, so (laughter). Speaker 1: Smarter, older brother too. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. Story_ID: 168294 Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) wow, how would I like to be remembered? I think that--what comes to mind is that you know that guy Byron Williams was on to something. He was on to something. Whatever that something is whether it's reading one of my sermons reading on my theological essays, reading one of my books and it prods the person to go deeper, yeah. I mean that and actually that would be--that is a way that I view that eternity can happen. That once you leave this earth that people still reading your stuff and you're getting someone to think, you're getting the light bulb to come on. Something along those lines that would be good enough for me. Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you...