 Story_ID: 277234 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P.] Winter; that's N-A-D-I-N-E, Winter, W-I-N-T-E-R-- Speaker 1: Now you have a-- Speaker 2: --no s. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you, you have a middle name too, right? Speaker 2: P as middle initial, which stands for Poole. Speaker 1: Poole? Speaker 2: That's my maiden name, Nadine Poole Winter. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, the Poole has an e on it, and date of birth is 3/3/24 [March 3, 1924], in New Bern, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And how, how do, how do you spell New Bern? Speaker 2: N-E--two words--N-E-W, B-E-R-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm retired from government. I'm a former council member for sixteen years, but occupation now, I do outreach health. That means that I go out in the underserved and the poor neighborhoods to educate people about their health. I'm on a small grant from the department of health. Speaker 1: Okay. Would you say that you're a social worker by training or, or-- Speaker 2: Everybody brand me as a social worker. My degree is in business, but I've been doing social work type, some type of social work all of my life. So, I guess that's my profession. In fact, back in the old days, I belonged to the National Association of Social Workers [NASW]. And I know it would be unheard of in this day and time not having an MSW [Master of Social Work]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're the founder of Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.] and, and the founder of Health Outreach Information-- Speaker 2: Information Network. Speaker 1: --Network [Health Outreach Information Network, Inc., Washington, D.C.] (unclear). Speaker 2: I always have to have a action kind of agency to take care of the underserved or the poor. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: May 2nd, isn't it? Trying to-- Speaker 1: May 2nd? Speaker 2: --2005. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? And you don't have to give your street address, but-- Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: You don't want the street address? Speaker 1: No, but-- Speaker 2: Okay, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: In your home, right? We're in your home, right? Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C., Southwest Washington. Speaker 1: Yes, but we're in your home, right? Speaker 2: Oh yes, in my home (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 277235 Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer. And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: I guess like all southerners, I like chicken (laughter). Speaker 1: Now do, do, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Pink. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, I like all seasons. I like it cold, and I like it hot. So, no, I do not have a special time of the year I enjoy. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, Washington, D.C. (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For here to New York [New York]. I like excitement. I'm not a relaxing type person, so the answer would be Washington, D.C. and New York. Speaker 1: Okay, now the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: God is great, and God is good (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I say it all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm a survivor, you know. Speaker 1: That's right. And there was a big march yesterday. Were you involved in that? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I just been saying it all my life 'cause I don't know how I got over some of the jams I have gotten in. So God is great, and God is good. Story_ID: 277236 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Sam Poole] side. And I'll start with your, your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Elnora, E-L-N-O-R-A, Poole. Speaker 1: Okay, what is her maiden name? Is there- Speaker 2: Kenion. Speaker 1: Kenion, okay. That's, is that K-E-N-- Speaker 2: E-N-I-O-N. Speaker 1: K-E-N-I-O-N, okay. All right, now what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Indeed, I have, I tried to do it. I think it was 1911, but I, I couldn't, I am not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. About how old was she when you were born, do you know? Speaker 2: I think I was, I think she was about twenty-one or twenty. Speaker 1: Okay, that'd take her back to, let's see, that'll take her (unclear) yeah, 1903 or, or-- Speaker 2: That sounds about-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --right, 1901 I think I saw on something. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I have a little--are we on tape? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right, now, well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: At my age, again, I've heard so many stories about my mother's side of the family. I'm not sure how far back I can actually trace them or whether the stories that I've heard all my life--for an example, my mother was one of thirteen brothers and sisters. And they all came from a place called Maysville, North Carolina, which is right outside of New Bern [North Carolina]. I guess it's about twenty miles different. And in that little hub, Potters Hill [North Carolina], Wilson, North Carolina, it's just everybody's related to everybody. And my mother's father, the way I understand, Grandpa John [Kenion] was like the, I guess you would call him like the mayor of the little village or whatever. (Unclear) we're talking about a, over a hundred years ago. And 'course every sister he would visit. I'm just imagining back in those days that they'd cook for him, and John would stay two or three days, and then go on someplace else. Now that's the way I see the history. But I'm not gon' find a family member, I have never met a family member would talk about the history. I've had some interesting bouts with people who've walked up to me and say I'm your grandfather's son. And I don't think the family ever knew about it. So that's my conclusion about how things operated in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I could write a book that'll make it very interesting (laughter) to people (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think--does, was you--did your grandfather, now he didn't go all the way back to slavery days, did he? I don't think he-- Speaker 2: I don't think he went back there. I went to the archives, and the first thing they tell me that for colored folks or Negroes, the first really recording they'd had was 1864. And I don't think I could go that far back, but they tell me about my great-grandmama, Suki [ph.]. And her job was to have children. And she was really elderly when they start telling me these things. And they'd buy her a house and, so she could reproduce these children, I guess to keep the village going. I'm just assuming that's the kind of background. So I've been to the archives several times, and there's no history other than to say we didn't record back in those days. And I often wonder about these people who can trace their background, because the archives just don't seem to have that kind of history. Story_ID: 277237 Speaker 1: Now you say your [maternal] grandfather [John Kenion] was like the mayor of this little area. He was like an important person (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanted to call him something else, but, but I think his job was to visit, take care of whatever needs they have. If they didn't have food, he made provisions for them. But I, almost like a circuit minister back that day, even though he wasn't a minister. But I used to ask my people, well, how did he get from Potters Hill [North Carolina] to New Bern [North Carolina]? If you had a horse and buggy back in those days, when there was no cause for 'em, you know, how much did you make it? How far did you get? It is my understanding that New Bern, North Carolina and Maysville [North Carolina] all, as I said, fifteen, twenty miles apart, they used the river a lot. And there was a river that ran through there, and they would get on it and have, make themselves a little canoe or--I've forgotten what they called it. Speaker 1: A raft or something-- Speaker 2: And they'd go down the river to the next closest spot wherever he was going to stay that night. Speaker 1: Now what was the name, the name of the river? Speaker 2: I don't know, but there is a Neuse River down there, and I've often wondered if that's the river. Speaker 1: What is it called? Speaker 2: N-E-U-S-E, Neuse River. And then there's another one. I can't remember now, but all I can remember is them sending men on rafts down the river, and they were in the logging business. They would send logs down the river. Everything they had to transport just about they would transfer, transport with these logs. And I have a bell here that my mother [Elnora Kenion Poole] gave me and--my grandmother [Mary Kenion] gave me before she died, and she always wanted [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P. Winter] to have this bell. And I can remember now they would go on the porch and ring this bell, and they would all come up to eat from the river. So, and grandpa was always gone because he was in the next village, so it-- Speaker 1: Now did they all work for the same logging company or-- Speaker 2: I imagine they worked for him, who was the person in charge of logging. Story_ID: 277238 Speaker 1: I was little then and not naive. I've always had a very inquisitive mind 'cause I don't ever rem- remember any of my sisters and brothers down there on the, on the logs. I was always somewhere involved in wherever they were working, and I can see them now sending those logs down the river. And grandpa [Winter's maternal grandfather, John Kenion] would say I'll be back Thursday. Well, I never thought to ask where you're gon' be between now and Thursday. But there were no hotels, so somebody had to take him in. I have tried since we had this family reunion to trace some of this history that I have in the back of my mind. But I don't know about other families. My family will not talk about it. I have a 97-year-old aunt in New York, and she's almost in total denial of anything that we bring up. And I said you know I used to hear such and such a thing. Oh, that's not true; oh that's not true. And one day about six years ago I met this man. It's been a little longer than six years ago. I met this man who told me he was my grandfather's son. Well, I had never heard his name before. And for Negroes or colored back in those days, we were more brown-skin or light brown-skin, because I understand my grandfather was Indian [Native American] or part Indian. He certainly looked it. And my aunt didn't want to relate to that. And he was what I consider in today's language, the language of the street, he was jet black, good-looking black man. And I--when he said he was my grandfather's son, he certainly didn't resemble my grandfather's son to me. But when he started calling the family's name, I told him to come on over and meet the family. I was excited, so when I got home from church I told my aunt, who was visiting me who was in her late-eighties at that time, I had met this man who--oh, they just lying on papa again, just lying on papa again. I said well, I invited him over. And she says well, I'm leaving. I said well, you can make it the best way you can 'cause I'm not taking you to the station. We got--I was trying to get some history. When the man came over about an hour later we just all fell in love with him, and you could tell he was a Poole or an Kenion. I mean he's grabbing and huggin'. She wasn't too warm during that session, but later on that night just before he left, she got his name and address, and he has been visiting us almost every year since. I consider him one of the family. And surprisingly enough, when my aunt was down her last year, she said something I never--at ninety-six then, last year--when have you heard from my brother? I mean so the attitudes change I guess. But she was living in the old days when they were in total denial. And there's a lot of them out there who are half-brothers, but if their families are like mine, they will not discuss it. Speaker 2: Your mother's [Elnora Kenion Poole] father was in the logging business. Speaker 1: He was in the logging business. Speaker 2: And is that, is that, is that pretty common there in that part of North Carolina? Speaker 1: It was in that hub. Again, we came from a place right around Camp Lejeune [North Carolina], Wilson [North Carolina], Maysville [North Carolina], Pottsville [sic. Potters Hill, North Carolina]. And when we went down for family reunion, we got in the car just to see how many people we could meet. Many of the names we'd never heard of before. And this was like two years ago, so we still, we have another one coming up in July. We do it every first of July. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So we are trying to put together a family history. Story_ID: 277239 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Elnora Kenion Poole] talk about what things were like when she grew up? Speaker 2: Oh yes, mother would talk about it. But again, my mother's people were like, I guess, the hub of the little village or town or county, so it wasn't, things were not bad for her. While they were children who didn't live in the household, I know now what happened. If the grandfather had a child someplace else, when she cooked, she cooked for everybody. It was a farm. I can remember the watermelons and the peaches just as far as I could see he obviously owned. So, when she cooked--and that's how I learned how to cook. I always prides myself on being a good cook. You get in the kitchen, and you just cook all day long and anybody hungry would eat. Speaker 1: Now, now did they have their own school in that little part? Speaker 2: The way I understand it, the school was in the church. And it wasn't a named school when my (unclear) was coming along. It was the church, and they had a circuit teacher, and they would get trained that way. My aunt that I speak about that's ninety-seven now, by the time she came along, they had a school and a school building. Obviously it was a church that they converted to a school. And she came to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] so she could continue her education because she went to the teachers college a few years there. But that's much later than my mother 'cause she was the youngest, I think, of the thirteen children. So she's ninety-seven, so I think I'm talking about my mother being at least ten years older than she was, I'm saying at least. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is your aunt's name that, that you've referred to so many times here? Speaker 2: I think she was really not, ooh, name, her name is Ms. Jarvis [ph.]. But-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I didn't wanna, she wouldn't like reading about herself. Story_ID: 277240 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Elnora Kenion Poole] get a chance to go to high school there? Speaker 2: I'm assuming back in those days you had one room, and it was like elementary right straight through high school. Mother was not, in my opinion, uneducated but without formal education, if you know what I mean. By an example, when we moved to Winston-Salem [North Carolina], she was able to be what they called a dietician now. I guess you have to have all types of degrees. But she was the dietician or cook in one of the schools there. She was knowledgeable. She could read and write. But I'm imagining her formal education. See, that would be also twenty years they would have progressed to that point. And something else peculiar about my family, they always seek knowledge. I can see mother now going to any of these churches that would have reading classes. And I know in A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion Church they used to have 'em all the time. And mother would say I'm going to reading class; people going to Bible class now. The churches operate a little differently. Back in those days, the church was everything to everybody, and it was a reading class as far as she was concerned. Speaker 1: So the church was school and-- Speaker 2: School; it, it was everything. If you wanted something to eat, they had the vegetables. They would--I can remember just people bringing in all the corn, sweet potatoes, and things they couldn't or wanted to give away. They didn't have money, so they gave of themselves. And you could just go and get the food. In other words, it wasn't necessary to be hungry. Speaker 1: You could go to church and get it, and get it. Speaker 2: You can go to church and get it. And then you knew how the canned food in the jars, and you, you always--but the churches are so different now. And I guess for older people who came from little villages, not those--now I, it's hard for me to talk about the urban life of, of, of people back in those days. But to talk about people who lived in those country roads with no sidewalks and the things that you see on television, I can relate to that. Speaker 1: So your mother became a die, a dietician when you all moved to Winston-Salem? Speaker 2: When we moved to Winston-Salem, she was the dietician or the cook. I've forgotten, I think they, she did call it dietician. And I'm not sure, as we speak, how much she knew about what a dietician was, but they, she was a good cook; she provided wholesome meals; and she bore the title. Story_ID: 277241 Speaker 1: I'm gon' ask you some more about your mother [Elnora Kenion Poole], but let me ask you about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sam Poole. That's the only thing I've ever known, and he had four other brothers. And these five brothers, the way I understand it, that's where we have this reunion every July 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, and 4th of July. And I've already made my reservation in New Bern [North Carolina] for this year. My father came from New Bern. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother came from Maysville [North Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --which is about eighteen or twenty miles different. Speaker 1: Now what's your father's birthday? Speaker 2: What is his birthday? Speaker 1: Yes, when was he born? Speaker 2: I don't know, but I understand he was about twenty years older than mother. Speaker 1: Okay, so that would put him 1880 I guess or so, 1881-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's-- Speaker 1: --something like that. Speaker 2: --that's about the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they said he was twenty years-- Speaker 1: 'Cause he was born around 1881, I guess-- Speaker 2: That's about-- Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: --sound like something that-- Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-eight [1888], '81 [1881]. Well, what do you know about his side of the family? How, how far back can you trace those ancestors? Speaker 2: Well, now that's the reunion we have, and that's interesting. It was five brothers, and they were all contractors, bricklayers, or carpenters or something. So when you go down to New Bern or Maysville, anyplace in there, it's hard to find a building or a church that those five brothers didn't put up. In fact, my first year down to the reunion one of the aunts had saved a check that my father had signed back in 1901 for some material for the church where we were having the service, and that's a long time (laughter). And-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's over a hundred years ago now-- Speaker 2: And, and she had-- Speaker 1: --yeah, a hundred and four years ago. Speaker 2: --the check. I just hope that I can buy it from her or do something and get this check. But I don't know whether Sam was the baby of the five brothers or how they came together. But when we meet now, we are all the offsprings of the-- Speaker 1: (Pause). Speaker 2: Oh, we're gonna pause here. Speaker 1: --and it's hard to find a church or a building that they didn't have a part in. I don't know whether he was the oldest or the baby of the five brothers. Speaker 2: So they, they, they, they, they did contracting work-- Speaker 1: They did-- Speaker 2: --mostly that-- Speaker 1: --contracting; they were builders. Speaker 2: Did they have a formal name for their, for, for a company-- Speaker 1: I doubt it. Speaker 2: --or is-- Speaker 1: I have never seen anything in writing. But if you wanted and the, any brick work, they were specialists in that. Story_ID: 277242 Speaker 1: In fact, when we went to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] from New Bern [North Carolina], you see, I had to be five or six years old when I left New Bern to go to Winston-Salem. And again, I made up this story, I'm told. We got burned out because we had one of the most gorgeous homes, the only thing I can remember in New Bern, North Carolina. And I remember this fire, and this fire burned our house, our brick house so badly that the town became alarmed. And they put us in a truck and covered us over. That's the only thing I can remember. And go--we drove look like all night till we got to Winston-Salem, and that's how we got to Winston-Salem. Now during the years, I would not like to repeat what I thought and of history as I became more involved in the Civil Rights Movement and people standing out laughing in front of our house while our house burned. But at five or six years old, you have your own mind and imagination 'cause, because there was no TVs for me to relate to. When we got to Winston-Salem we went to live with our family members who had a brickyard, and we made our own bricks. And that's the way we made our notoriety. Back in those days, while the bricks are burning and the till is going, and the horses pulling the, the troll, you know, the whole thing became almost like a movie scene to us. And bricks became very special to us. Even after I got grown, I'd see a pile of bricks and I'm going over to see if they good bricks or if they going to, how long they gon' last. We became kind of a, grew up on a brick pile. And my father's [Sam Poole] specialty was fireplaces. And if you had a Poole fireplace you were somebody. Speaker 2: Okay, now, now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 1: I don't know how they met. Again, there are a lot of stories floating around how they met. It was my impression that he, he was going with one of the older sisters. And how he wound up marrying the youngest sister [Winter's mother, Elnora Kenion Poole], I don't know, but again, that's a subject that's taboo in the family. I don't know how they met. Story_ID: 277243 Speaker 1: How did you make bricks? How did you all make the bricks? Speaker 2: You get the clay, and you dump all this clay in there. And they make it just like you make bread. And you get a certain consistency, and then you take it out and you put it in what you call trough. And you put it in there, and you fill up each section made like a brick. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then you use a level-- Speaker 1: So you got a grid like, a grid-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --like from-- Speaker 2: So then take it, and then you even the top off 'cause you even it off on the bricks or whatever it is. Then you put 'em in the till, and you had the mule that would pull all these bricks, and then put 'em in the till, and burn them. And the interesting part about that, you got these big tills all around right in the heart of Winston-Salem [North Carolina] burning bricks. And the men would sing just like the slaves used to sing: (singing) "Hodey ho, bump." Well, that meant when they got through singing, that was bricks in this side was ready to go. And they would do that, especially at night; we'd burn bricks all night. Speaker 1: Do you remember the rest of that song, remember how, how it went? Speaker 2: No, but I know that it was--okay, yes, I can remember this, whatever came up in their mind, that's what they would sing: (singing) "John, pooh-baby, Tom, Tom, Henry, didum, John, Jah." And they would do that all the time, and they would kind of communicate with these songs, because--we're not on tape, are we? Speaker 1: Yeah, we're, um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, I was a little spitfire back in that day. And my father [Sam Poole] always kept me with him. And they would call me Little Sam. Everybody called me Little Sam. And I remember one night going up, and my father was, just before payday, and he had to make the pay. And when they stopped work and say, (singing) "Here come the little Na-dine [HistoryMaker Nadine P. Winter]." And everybody would then get up and start moving their--, (singing) "She's coming, she's gon' windy." And I remember, and then I kind of caught on to me what they were doing because I could see everybody working. But whatever they wanted to say, they would say it in a song. And I guess I was not supposed to be intelligent enough to pick it up, but I learned very quickly. And my father trusted me, so when he brought the money back it wasn't like you writing a check for somebody. When he got ready to pay them, he brought the money back in a sack, and I had to count the money out. So I was kind of the person in charge of the money sack. And it was such an interesting life because I've had men come to me, grown men: you owe me (unclear) you don't get another dime. You didn't come in at 10:02, you know. I was always--and I think that shaped my life. I am not much different now. I'll feed the hungry, and I will take care of you, but I expect a day's work for a day's pay, and I haven't changed on that. It's, it's hard for me to change. I try, but I learned how to work hard and get paid for what I earned, and it's instilled in me. Story_ID: 277244 Speaker 1: --The family moved to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] when you were about nine years you said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was about six or-- Speaker 1: About six-- Speaker 2: --five or six-- Speaker 1: --oh, five, okay. Speaker 2: --years old, yeah. Speaker 1: Five or six, okay. So this is about, oh, 1929. That's where I'm getting a nine from. About 1929 or so? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now this is be, is to be, at the beginning of, of the [Great] Depression. Speaker 2: Oh, we came through the Depression. That was something. Whatever my [maternal] grandfather [John Kenion] had--I can remember him coming to Winston-Salem, everybody lost, and we were on the bread line. It, it was the depression for us. Speaker 1: Now did your grandfather and all of them lose too? Were they with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He lost his money, but they had a house and see, the farm. So, people survived by taking care of each other. But when people tell me about poverty and coming through the Depression, I came through the Depression, and I can remember full well how people survived during that. But again, you had a different kind of unity. You learned to take care of each other. Story_ID: 277245 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: What do you mean by earlier? Speaker 1: An earliest, your first childhood memory. Do you have a first childhood memory, the first thing that you ever remembered that you know that you remembered? Speaker 2: Well, with me, let me be honest and say it again: I tell things that I think I remember, but I've got my fingers slapped by family members so often. They tell me I don't remember that. And I-- Speaker 1: Well, that's all right. Tell, tell us what-- Speaker 2: But to me-- Speaker 1: --what you think is your first one. Speaker 2: Well, my earliest childhood memory is my house burning down. And I tried to trace that. I've been back to New Bern [North Carolina] any number of times. That's what got me interested in the family reunion. I wouldn't have been there. And my aunt took me to the courthouse, and I asked for the records. See, I have kind of a civil rights background. And I was determined to find out, and this hasn't been that long ago. And when I got to the courthouse, we're going through all those records, so I asked them where was the record around 1929, '30 [1930], and '31 [1931]. And the clerk told us all those records had gotten burned up. And we had to go into Goldsboro [North Carolina] I think. Wherever we went, those records had gotten burned up. And of course being from a civil rights, I--this is only a few years ago now--I put my hands on my hips. I said strange that every time we go somewhere, all the records have gotten burned up. And we have not found out. That's what drove me into the archives. I'm going to keep probing, but I just don't remember what happened to a beautiful brick house in the heart of New Bern, and I can see fire. And I'm going to tell you, that left a lasting impression on me. I'm frightened today of fires. I, I just have a real obsession when I see a fire because I know it takes lives. Speaker 1: Okay (coughing) pardon me; I'm sorry. So do you think the [maternal] family has some property in New Bern that-- Speaker 2: I'm sure-- Speaker 1: --that they may have lost because of there were no, there were no records of-- Speaker 2: I, maybe, but mainly, I want to know what happened to the property, what happened to the fires, what happened to this, and what happened. But children are just beginning to do that now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My brother is beginning to ask questions. And never before in my family would anybody ask any questions about anything. Story_ID: 277246 Speaker 1: My mother [Elnora Kenion Poole] was very religious, and her religion--my father [Sam Poole] was very militant. I don't care what came up, mother was going to pray it away. And she would say well, God knows best, [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P. Winter], and don't question His word. And I'd go to bed one night, she said, and she heard me saying my prayers. I said God, I just want to know the answer to some of my questions. But mother asked me to get up off my knees and come there, and she talked to me. I remember that like yesterday. And I don't care what the situation, how bad it was, she would always feel as though it was going away and wouldn't face it head on. Speaker 2: You think that's a good attitude? Speaker 1: No, I don't. I, again, was more like my father. I could tell some weird stories about his militancy. Story_ID: 277247 Speaker 1: We used to have the farmers come to town and bring eggs and chicken 'cause you didn't have any African American stores. You had the Jews and the Chinese and the-- Speaker 2: Oh, they would actually, I mean the Jews and the Chinese would like come to your town with this? Speaker 1: They were in the town, and they would-- Speaker 2: Oh, they were-- Speaker 1: --sell-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the stores. They had the stores; they owned the stores. You could buy a nickel's worth of lard and a, five cents worth of sugar and all of that. And the farmers would come to town in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] and bring the chickens and eggs. And they never called your parents by a name. Where's Aunt Elnora [Kenion Poole]? And that annoyed me. And we had, didn't have, we were poor. We were dirt poor. I never knew what being poor was until I got grown, but I realize as I reflect black, we were born, we were, my brothers and sister [Vera P. Gaskin] was born in what you call a shotgun house. You know what a shotgun house is? Speaker 2: Tell us. I know, but tell us so-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) A shotgun-- Speaker 2: --describe it, so-- Speaker 1: --house is where you stand at the front door, and you can shoot right straight through the house and never hit a thing. You'd hit the tree out in the backyard 'cause the doors were lined up, and they were three rooms, kind of shack. But mother kept it like a palace. I mean she, we did the floors, and we did everything. And imagine four children sleeping in one bedroom. Speaker 2: Now, now where do you fall in that order with your-- Speaker 1: I'm the fourth child-- Speaker 2: You're-- Speaker 1: --I'm the second oldest. Speaker 2: Second oldest, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And again, we had toys and things for Christmas. And I can see my mother, my parents now going through the trash, and that's why I do it now. For those the people who know, I love flea markets and all. Everything just about in here you're looking at, I have some history of, of how I got it. But she would take the toys if somebody else did 'em, and daddy [Sam Poole] would take this skate, it's a skateboard and take it off and grease it up and fix it up and whatever, so we always had a plenty. But I heard [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory tell a joke: mother always had a totin' sack too with her religion, when the food that was left over. We ate well. Story_ID: 277248 Speaker 1: But as I started to say, when this farmer came to town this time, another vivid story, he'd bring the eggs and the chicken. Well, we looked forward to the scrambled eggs and fried corn on Christmas morning. But by the time she'd crack a half a dozen eggs, three or four of them rotten or bad, that meant we didn't have six eggs or eight eggs. So he came to town that Saturday morning; I never will forget, one of the reasons they kind of shipped me out of town. When he came back, and I told him that, I said the eggs you're bringing--, "Where is Aunt Elnora?" "She's not your aunt," and I said, "and those eggs you brought in here the last two or three weeks, there's two or three of them rotten." And he was denying it. And in Winston-Salem we lived in what I call a lower middle-class neighborhood. And, "Elnora, you gotta take care of this one. This is one is feisty." And he went up on the porch to complain about me. And I opened the chicken coop, and all the chickens I just made come out, and they running all over the neighborhood. I mean the chickens were flying, and he was yelling. And when was this younger, and we had a couple of people in our neighborhood who taught school and all up the road. And people were running out to get this man chickens to put 'em back in the chicken coop. I don't think he lost about two chickens because they retrieved most of them. But then he wanted to take care of me. I mean nothing would satisfy him until mother whipped or reprimanded me in front of him. And I remember she would not do it. It's the first time I had remembered my mother defying anyone. Story_ID: 277249 Speaker 1: So you were really impressed by that, I, I can see. So your mother [Elnora Kenion Poole] finally-- Speaker 2: It's just one of the many things I did that I'm not really what I call proud of, but I would fight back. I was like my father [Sam Poole]. And my mother, as I said, was religious, and she was gon' pray. And, and if somebody said something, she would take it more or less. And, but for this particular incident, I was impressed, because mother would not reprimand me in front of, and she took me and pushed me in the back of her. And he was determined to get to me. And we lived with our back door just full of woods and trees and bushes, like an open field in back of us. And when mother kind of pushed me in back of her, I took out across the field in the back of it. I got halfway, about a half a mile, and I realized, I said if he does something to my mother, then I'm going to have to defend my mother. And I remember making a U-turn and coming back, and by that time my father was coming down the road. And my father said what's going on here or something to that effect. And I remember him getting that chicken coop and that wagon and got--and when my father was chasing him down the road, father said if you ever come down this road again, you'll never leave. And I remember that yesterday. I've never seen that man till this day. I remember the family name, and when I got back to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] on one or two occasions I wanted to look up the family, but I said I won't. But people stuck together. And my mother said I needed to leave Winston-Salem--it was in the summer--and stay about a month with my aunt in Baltimore [Maryland] and for her to work on my temper. Speaker 1: Now how old were you at that time? Speaker 2: I guess I was old enough to know the better, twelve, thirteen years old, fourteen, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was incidents like that one. I could go on and on and on, 'cause I realize why I had to be the water boy in the march from Selma [Alabama] to (laughter) Montgomery [Alabama]. I'm not exactly the passive type. And rather than fight back when you know you can't win, I need to let other people take on the more aggressive role. But I cannot stand by and when I see something wrong, without speaking out. Story_ID: 277250 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and you've answered some of it already but, what, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights and sounds? Speaker 1: And smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Smells? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Tobacco. I'm a cancer survivor, and I blame the tobacco. You go into Winston-Salem [North Carolina]. Before you even cross the border, all you can do is smell tobacco. And when we got there, and I'm five or six years old, that's all I ever smelled until I left Winston-Salem. In fact, the place where we lived in Winston-Salem was called, a tobacco area. R.J. Reynolds [Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] had put up all those little huts for the people down in there. So that's the sight and the sound, more or less. They had their own bus company in Winston-Salem. But it wasn't a pretty sight to, if you're going someplace else from your little neck of the woods downtown, fine. But if you wanna go someplace else, you had to transfer--not transfer--you had to get on another bus. And you had no business, in their mind, going out in Ardmore [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] or any of the other, so. Especially in Salem, you wouldn't have no business at all; they almost stop you if you cross the line. So, it's Winston-Salem and-- Speaker 1: Okay, so it's two different places. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And, and people who thinks, may think everything is all right really don't realize how some people saw segregation back in those days. I can never understand why we could not go the change store, so to speak, to shop. We had to shop in our neighborhood where everything costs twice as much. So the sights and sound to me are not pretty. I'm a survivor. Speaker 1: So the black community was all segregated and-- Speaker 2: Segregated. We had our own bus company; we had our own cab company, and for those people, were handfull-ed, existed, lived well, but again, they were not free 'cause once they got out of that, even though they owned the bus company, if they were going out in another section, they had to ride the back of the bus just like we did. Story_ID: 277251 Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school? Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: The grade school you, you attended. Speaker 2: Fourteen Street Elementary School [sic. Fourteenth Street Elementary School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Atkins High. Speaker 1: Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: High School, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school. Again, I wasn't, I guess, the top of the class, but when it came to organizing and getting 'em together and little outings, I was always out in front. And so that always gave me something to do. I guess I could think of a, more to do. Back in those days they had home economics class, and you learned how to cook and keep house. And those are things that I'm good at. Now I don't know what grade I would get in English and math, and, and especially the history class. If I recall, I was not top of the line, but in those other classes I'd make up for them. I, I was a homemaker. In fact, I probably knew as much about the homemaking as the teacher or more. And back in those days I was known in the city as a cook. I was seven and eight and nine years old, and I could stand on can, and I never will forget, make cakes melt in your mouth, because that's what I grew up doing, even when I was with my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Kenion]. Like I said, she fed the whole village. And I can remember peeling potatoes and chucking, shucking corn and all of the things that, that deal with homemaking. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: I think it was home economics (laughter), if I had to say what it was. I'm not the academic type, I guess, just to sit still. And the only thing I really didn't like was history. I never liked history. Speaker 1: Now why, why not? Was there a reason? Speaker 2: Well, even with, with, with history today, history is what people say it is. It's not necessarily the truth. I pick up and read articles. I went to the Washington D.C. City Museum [City Museum of Washington, D.C., Washington, D.C.]. The only people they had in the City Museum, and that's why they would close, was so inaccurate. They had one of my colleagues and the back of the man's head, but she only came to Washington long after we did. And that wasn't Washington, D.C.'s history at all. So to me history, even as a young kid, is what the writer says it is, and it's not the way it existed. If they had written about Winston-Salem [North Carolina], they would give you a glowing-- Speaker 1: Did, did they have any black history when you were coming up in school? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Yeah-- Speaker 1: It was a black school so (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --Negro history was heavy. But again, let me say, I'm not sure if when you read about Frederick Douglass is that what he said or that's what he did. I remember once they bundled me up. They just knew I was good at what I was doing. And the principal had recommended me, and I felt real bad lettin' him down. And I went to this summer camp so that I could enroll in--and I was graduating then from high school--Livingstone College. Story_ID: 277252 Speaker 1: Are you in an A.M., A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion, were you, were, were-- Speaker 2: I've been an-- Speaker 1: --were you in--okay. Speaker 2: --Episcopalian all my life. I was born into-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the Episcopal, but I attended the A.M.E. Zion church more than I did the Episcopal church. The Episcopal church had a circuit minister. You couldn't go--you had a class in the Episcopal church, and you had to be of a certain income and a certain color, even if you were Negro or colored to go to the Episcopal church. I remember once my mother [Elnora Kenion Poole]--it was snowing, and she sent my uncle to pick us up at the church, my sister and I. And I came out and I saw this truck, and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Nadine [P. Winter] and Vera [P. Gaskin]." And I said, "Yes?" He says, "I'm your uncle from New Bern [North Carolina], and I came to pick you up." And I said, "How did you know us?" And he says, "You're the darkest thing came out the church. It had to be you." And I, stuck in my mind ever since: the Episcopal churches, you had to be of a certain light complexion and very class. That's what the Episcopal church was. So I leave the Episcopal church every Sunday and go to the A.M.E. Zion church, Goler Memorial AME Zion Church [Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. In fact, I spent about a third of my time in those storefront Baptist church. I lived in the church. To summarize what I'm getting ready to say, when they sent me down to Livingstone College, the principal of the school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]--I still remembered his name, Mr. Reynolds [ph.]. I was such a bright and aggressive young lady, he kept saying, he just knew I would be a missionary. When I got to Livingstone College I loved it, but the bishop was doing the lecturing, and he started telling me about Adam and Eve and the snake coming down the tree. And this woman was the snake, and the woman--and I remember--my last day down there in class 'cause they got rid of me the next day, I asked him how did he know that snake was a woman, could have been a man. And of course you could hear a pin drop in the class. I didn't fit; I was a misfit. I wasn't supposed to ask that question. I was supposed to take the attitude that the snake was a woman and enticed the man, because they were writing the Sunday school literature. And so I didn't fit. And so they came to me very nicely and said that I could not enroll in Livingstone College. And that's another thing that stuck out with me: you couldn't have diverse opinions because that's the way it is, and brings me into another subject, and I hope you don't, we don't dwell on that. But if you notice, a lot of people just stay with a religion whether they believe in it or not, Catholics, case in point. I looked at the things that the pope disagreed on. I mean it was longer than what they all agreed on. He's against abortion. He got his own opinion about all of these contraceptives, and you just right on down the list. And I imagine half of the congregation was on birth control pills or, or had an abortion and, and you know. So, again, you learn to, I call that kind of being in a hypocritical world. You accept things the way people want you to accept them rather than your own opinion. Story_ID: 277253 Speaker 1: I was the same kind of, of person I was as I probably am today. I questioned things, and people in leadership roles don't like to be questioned. And when I asked him [professor at Livingstone College] about how did he know the snake wasn't a man, and rather than this woman encouraged him, he told me the Bible said so. And of course, I waited a few minutes. I said who wrote this in the Bible? I just, one question after the other, which did not set well in those days. And so, you, you kind of give up on, on people like me, and you move on to those people who can listen and do what you ask them to do. So that didn't work out for me at all. Speaker 2: Now let me backtrack a little, but how did you decide to go to, to Livingstone [College, Salisbury, North Carolina]? Was be, was it because of the church, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church? Speaker 1: Because of the church I went everything the church had. And I would organize the BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union of America] and the--that's the six o'clock for the young people. I was very active. I've always been an organizer. And strangely enough, and being an organizer, is not how loud you talk but how factual. Because whatever you say, if you really have some reason for saying it, and (unclear) question, there may be a lot of people listening to you who don't disagree with you but is not gon' publicly agree with you. So, instead of having twelve people at the BYPU, I'd have fifty and 100. And he just thought I was a leader, a born leader. But I didn't fit the mold. So I wasn't angry, but I knew when I left home I wouldn't fit the mold. Story_ID: 277254 Speaker 1: What year was it that you graduated [Atkins] High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: I think it was '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in your high, how, how many students were in your high school when you graduated? Speaker 2: Ooh, it had a large crowd. I don't know, but I imagine about five or six hundred in the-- Speaker 1: In the grad-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: In, in the class, in the whole, whole school? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know how many. Speaker 1: Well, you, estimate is all, is, is all I'm asking for. Speaker 2: In my graduating class, I would say there's 250 or 200. Speaker 1: That's pretty good (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a large school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But again-- Speaker 1: So, did you have any favorite teachers in high school? Speaker 2: I had one or two favorite teachers, but I think what you keep asking me, it puts me into a mold, rather than, I just didn't fit. The teacher I liked the best was the one was the hardest on me in the subject I hated. But I respect that man even today. His son-- Speaker 1: What is-- Speaker 2: --is around. Name was Togo [D.] West [Sr.]. Speaker 1: Togo West, I've heard of him. Speaker 2: Oh, you'd better get it straight when you--I'm kind of a, not a puritan, but I am a no-nonsense-type man. And you know, you're gon' come there and back in those days, and half of your breast showing or whatever you're doing, not in Togo West's class. And he was the teacher, when I look back, I admire the most. He was no-nonsense, no sleeping through his class, in a subject that I probably just barely passed. Because while he was talking about math, then I could pick up, and I remember one day he picked up something, and I dominated the class. He started talking about how you make money. Well, you know, (laughter) my antenna went up. So it wasn't just two and two to him; it was what, what do you do with that? And he can relate it to everyday life. So I went through life respecting that man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I guess he could've whaled me. Speaker 1: But, but, yeah, he's, yeah he's pretty-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --famous now. I don't know what he went on to do, but yeah, Togo West. Story_ID: 277255 Speaker 1: You were at Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina]. Did, did you stay a year or did you, did it, did it last-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --did it last-- Speaker 2: --I stayed about six months I guess. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like, now we're into 1942 I guess, right? And you went-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: So did you, what did you do after you were, you were kicked out of college. How, how did you feel? How did your parents [Elnora Kenion Poole and Sam Poole] feel about it? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know how they felt, but I felt good. I felt I was a little ahead of my time anyway. You know, my birthday is in March, and as I said, this was in the summer. So, I just been in and out of school and workshops, and there was always something to do. And then, we were so poor, I never felt it 'cause we didn't have money to go off to school like other people. I found myself down to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in a work study. I did more work than I did studying and still didn't have--and see, it was five of us. My sister [Vera P. Gaskin] was down at Saint Aug [St. Augustine's College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina]. That's how I know about St. Augustine. And then I had a brother right close to me; we're right together. And we got three of us should have been college at the same time. So, it wasn't easy. Speaker 1: So you went to Hampton afterwards? Speaker 2: For a while, I think about three and a half to four years, but I didn't have money there. Speaker 1: So what happened? Did, did you ha- have to drop out? Speaker 2: Then I left. Story_ID: 277256 Speaker 1: And we used to go to North to work. And this is when my life, I guess, changed. And you could work on the farms on in the homes of the rich people. I don't know whether you know that, but they used to-- Speaker 2: No, in, in, in-- Speaker 1: --send for students. Speaker 2: --Hampton [Virginia]? Speaker 1: They send for students. And the fellows would work on the farms, and the women would work in the house. And then you could do that every summer. And then my father [Sam Poole] was dying of cancer. My mother [Elnora Kenion Poole] had cancer, and here I'm trying to keep this little homestead going. It wasn't easy during that time. So then I stayed in New York [New York], went to Brooklyn School, College [Brooklyn College, New York, New York] at night to finish-- Speaker 2: Now, New York, now how did you get to New York? You, you went there-- Speaker 1: They were-- Speaker 2: --during the summer, you said, to work? Speaker 1: Went to this during the summer. Speaker 2: Okay, so you worked for-- Speaker 1: And I went up, went up-- Speaker 2: --rich-- Speaker 1: --to work in one of the white house, one of the white resident's mansion. Speaker 2: Who did you work for? Speaker 1: I was just thought I'd-- Speaker 2: Do you remember? Speaker 1: --stop just a moment 'cause I remembered her name, and then it slipped me again. But I was the cook. As I said, I can cook. I was the cook. And when she said to Mrs. Treehorn [ph.], who was the nurse down there, she want, she'd come up--that was her summer home, and they would have all these parties. And they asked 'em if they had anybody can cook. Not only could I cook, but I had been working in white folks' kitchen all of my life. 'Cause when we got to Win, Winston-Salem [North Carolina], if somebody was going out on a party and they wanted some help, they would call little [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P. Winter]. So, in addition, by this time, the brick piles were gone. They had stopped the smokestacks. And I would go with a lady I never will forget who did nothing but parties. And she worked for the R.J. Reynolds and all the rich people, and she would take me with her. And I learned how to cook most anything. So when I got to, I think we were in Waterbury, Connecticut, and when I got there, I was the cook. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I earned enough money to help my parents pay off the mortgage, which was very low, very, whatever it is they had, and buy the food. And by this time, my father, as I said was very sick, and he stayed sick four or five years. I don't think he passed until about '48 [1948] or '49 [1949]. But I was able to earn money, always able to earn money because, again, I had something to offer. So I enrolled in Brooklyn College at night to finish up. And then I stayed there and got a good job (unclear) signing subpoena duces tecums for the State of New Nork--New York. Speaker 2: So, go back a little bit. So you, you, you graduated from Brook- from Brooklyn College, was it? Speaker 1: Brooklyn College. They had degrees-- Speaker 2: Brooklyn College. Speaker 1: --during those days, not-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --necessarily a big graduation class. Speaker 2: About what year was, isn't that you graduated? Speaker 1: I don't know, because I came to Washington [D.C.] to work on my thesis. And when I-- Speaker 2: So you decided to work on a master's degree after that? Speaker 1: No, when I came down here, yes; they had what they call accelerated degrees. So, I came down here. I was writing a position paper, what they called directed studies, which is not a thesis really. I don't know the difference, but. And I, I got totally involved. I got my master's from Federal City College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --here in Washington. Story_ID: 277257 Speaker 1: You said you got involved first in New York [New York] and then and then-- Speaker 2: In-- Speaker 1: --here [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: Now what was New York like when you were there? What, what was going on, and what kind of things did you get involved in? Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) that was the place to be. There was a fight, four or five fights. I lived in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. I lived right on the subway line in Kingston [Avenue] and Throop [Avenue]. Everything took place at Kingston and Throop. And they'd fight so (unclear) everybody hated each other. The Italians hated the Jews; the Jews hated the blacks; and the blacks hate--it was a vicious circle. So I opened what they call a storefront community center. As you can-- Speaker 1: Now how did you get the idea for that, and, and how did you-- Speaker 2: I said all through my life and all through the resumes you're gonna look at it. I've always been organizing. I just feel like if people get together, they can solve their own problem, and I keep pushing my wishes off on people. Speaker 1: Now how did you get funded to, to do-- Speaker 2: Didn't get funded. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'd go to the merchants and asked them if I could use the space upstairs. And it was a bowling alley. I never will forget. And the man said yes, I been doing it here. I didn't know what it was to pay any rent. People know there's a need. And when you have the Jews fighting the Italians and the Italians fighting the blacks and everybody, they knew it was a need. And if I'm going to get out there and organize the people, and then you have all kinds of card games and, and learn to work together. But if we didn't fight every day, we didn't have a good day. And we began to come together, and I haven't changed from that. Speaker 1: Now what did you, did you start by trying to go door-to-door in the neighborhood to get the people-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --to come out. Speaker 2: --once we got to fighting, whomever the losers were (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Would come to (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Whoever the losers were, if it's two of us, two losers, you know, the blacks and the Hispanics or the blacks and the Italian, and we'll say well, let's go down and play some cards or let's do this tomorrow. And one by one they would come in because the merchants then, large Jewish community at Kingston and Throop, they would give us pastries rather than throw 'em out. It wasn't a lot of community centers or places to go. And they said [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P. Winter], you come down here, I'll give you two dozen donuts in the morning. So, you ask me what's my favorite expression when you started out: God is great, and God is good. I never wanted for anything. And then if we had something else we wanted, you get out and you go ask; ask and ye shall receive. And then the parents started bringing things in. They saw what you were doing. I think a lot of things people can help themselves, if somebody take the leadership role to show them how to do it. And we, I kept that center until I moved to Washington [D.C.]. So I'm going to make this point. When I came to Washington, we started doing the same thing. With those migrants I tell you who was up in the market (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I'd organize 'em in different groups. Story_ID: 277258 Speaker 1: Now what year did you move to Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: About 1950 I think, '49 [1949] or '50 [1950], about nineteen, let's, let's say '45 [1945]. Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945]. Speaker 2: Yeah, about 1945. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, 1945, now that's when the war ended? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Pearl Har-- Speaker 1: --there by the time the war-- Speaker 2: --Pearl Harbor was nineteen--War World [II, WWII] was ended in '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: Pearl Harbor day was 19-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the war started in '41 [1941] and ended in '45 [1945]. Speaker 2: Forty-five, [1945], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, so were you there at the end of the war? Speaker 2: Yeah, I came-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --down here. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's '45 [1945], okay. All right, you were going to Federal City College [University of the District of Columbia (UDC), Washington, D.C.], work, working on a master's degree. Speaker 2: Yeah, I got my master's-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --degree, took me five years to get it, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --again, I'm working, going to school, and that was the charter class-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay. Speaker 2: --which is known now as UDC. Speaker 1: Okay, University of District of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --of Columbia. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right, so, in the neighborhood now, now you, so you started up a storefront social service-- Speaker 2: Storefront-- Speaker 1: --agency. Speaker 2: --community service agent. Speaker 1: Now what, what did you call it and where was it? Speaker 2: It was down on Fulton Street. It was called Unity [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Called Unity, huh? Speaker 2: And we did a little of everything in there. And surprisingly enough, those of us who just had a fight a year ago, was then helping other people. That was some of the best time in my life because you're right in the midst of everything. So here I'm working and, and, and trying to take care of myself and down there and left a niece that kept me out of trouble. And, and times were hard and then. I go back to my favorite express because sometime I wonder how you do things. Speaker 1: Now, what was your, your thesis in graduate school? What was your-- Speaker 2: Supposed to be urban renewal. Speaker 1: Okay, so you wrote about urban renewal? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: And urban renewal I guess was just kind of starting then, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just about the beginning of it. And it was a dir- called directed studies. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't have any grades or anything you had to--directed studies means that you-- Speaker 2: It's like a thesis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You had to write position papers. Story_ID: 277259 Speaker 1: What was Washington, D.C., like in 1945 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's un-describable. People were living down here at Southwest [Washington, D.C.]. They were being displaced. People were cooking outdoors. Speaker 1: They didn't have any gas or-- Speaker 2: Didn't have any stoves. Speaker 1: Stove. Speaker 2: And the interesting part about it, again, I came in and start organizing. You cooked on lard cans. And these lard cans, you could buy like a nickel's worth of lard or a nickel's worth of sugar. And they had 'em in these big cans. And the people were pushing and shoving and carrying on. And what I would do is organize them: Jones family, 315, to, you know, you do it that way, and people began to get along much better. And then I, they started moving 'em out. Now I may be bad on years, very bad on years. And they started moving 'em out East Capitol Street. And you moved out East Capitol Street, and you go out there. That's where most of the people from Southwest moved from here out to East Capitol Street. And there was a lady named Ms. Bernice Busey [ph.], and I, we would go to the people's houses. And even three months or four months after they moved in those housing unit, they still had the stoves covered over. And we would teach them how to use the stoves, how to wash the dishes, how to keep the place clean. The government would put 'em out there, but there was no services connected with that. And we did that, and there was some young people who pretty much started running programs out of that. I remember one young man named Bernard Brisco [ph.]. He was a real asset with getting programs together. And we had formed like a civic association with people like Mary and Charlie Rogers [ph.]. And then the housing department [National Capital Housing Authority], as you know, Walter Washington was one of the first. And then there was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a, he, he was the housing department--head person? Speaker 2: Yes, he was with the housing department. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he had an assistant named Hamilton Smith [ph.]. And Hamilton Smith and them would help get things together. All you had to do was ask, and you asked and they would make a way to get it. And Capitol View [Washington, D.C.] became a live place, a place to be, and it's been growing ever since. Ten years ago it had started going downhill very badly when crime began to creep in. But it's back, I understand now, where the units are good, and they're moving people out, and things are beginning to happen. Well, back in those days, it wasn't easy because the people were moved from a setting that had been rural-type operation to now, where they're out, where they have electric and gas. And-- Speaker 1: There are a lot of immigrants from, from the South coming into Washington in '45 [1945] and early '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Well, a lot of people came in, but a lot of these people had been here for years, kind of born and reared around here. Speaker 1: They were living a rural kind of life even then. Speaker 2: Yeah, even on the inner city 'cause they didn't have. The only place blacks could work to be recognized at all was the [U.S.] Government Printing Office [U.S. Government Publishing Office] and the [U.S.] Bureau of Engraving [and Printing]. Speaker 1: Why those two? Speaker 2: My--because you did not have those good federal jobs. I don't care what people tell you. Story_ID: 277260 Speaker 1: I worked in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], and I worked for a general. I was in charge of the reserve records. And he was a two-star general. He had never finished--he had a high school degree. I could write better than any of the people on that line. They had no college education. So the universities began to set up college degree programs right in the Pentagon, and that's how a lot of those generals got ahead. They didn't all come out of West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York]. I worked for a general I never will forget. I did all of his writing. So to make a long story short, when you think of the late '49 [1949] to '50s [1950s] through 1959, you had more degreed people working in the Pentagon. If you got a, above the basement level of the Pentagon, you were a big shot. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: My first salary was $1900 a year. Speaker 2: What, what was your title? Speaker 1: Just clerk is all I can remember. Speaker 2: Okay. So, so you worked from, from--when did you start at, at the, at, at the Pentagon? Speaker 1: Well, I had about ten different jobs. I worked for the census. But the last job I worked for is the general who was in charge of the reserve, the [Washington] D.C. reserves. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's where I think I did the best job, 'cause I was like a seven or a nine [General Schedule (GS) level] when I left, and the seven or to be promoted to a nine. I would get an award every year for the things that I was doing. And a lot of the people who are now gone on, like my brother-in-law, who was a medic, he had full-time practice. But he delivered mail in the Pentagon on a bicycle at the time I was there, 'cause you didn't have good grades with people, I don't care how educated you were. If you were African American, you had no good job in government at that time. Speaker 2: Okay, now when did you start with The Pentagon? And how long were you there altogether--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, what had happened, I think I had four or five part-time jobs. And I think it was like 1950 before I got a good position there. But according to my retirement, I had like six months retirement in, six months over there, Census Bureau, Veteran's Administration, half a dozen different-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a lot of different departments. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 277261 Speaker 1: In 1959, that's the year you started Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I resigned from--I told the general that day--nobody believed me 'cause I had worked my way out of the basement [at the Pentagon, Washington, D.C.]--that I was not going to do that any longer; in fact, I was just burned out. And I went to work in a vacuum sweeper place, and we sold vacuum sweepers, refrigerators. And the guys running the place was named Oliver Cowen [ph.], and he sold filter (unclear). And I worked there possibly, ooh, for about four years. In the meantime, people would come in looking for jobs. They would come in looking for a place to stay. And so I was kind of running an employment service, a free employment service on his time. And one day he said to me that I was spending an awful lot of time on charity work. And I told him as soon as I saved up enough money I would leave and come back and give him the free time. And I saw this group out in front of this house getting ready to bid on it. The house was going up for bid. I had never bidded on anything in my life. And I stood there, and he started auctioning off, and I started raising my hand. Well, nobody told me I had to have $500. And so I finally had the highest bid, whatever that was, like eight or ten thousand dollars. And he asked me for the deposit, and I said what? He says the deposit, after I won the bid. I told him I didn't have any deposit. And it was a man standing in the crowd, and he was with the Industrial Bank [Washington, D.C.], and his name was Mr. Panagus [ph.]. He said, "Let her have the house and see, Doyle [ph.], if you can work out whatever problems she has to get it paid for." Story_ID: 277262 Speaker 1: You were concerned about how you were gonna pay for your ha-- Speaker 2: House. Speaker 1: --your bills after you got your house. And there's a story behind that, right? Speaker 2: That's a long story, but I better not tread on it 'cause she just died. Cecelia Penny Scott really bailed me out and made me. Back in the old days, bootlegging and number running and all of that stuff was illegal. Now they changed the name; it's called lottery. It's still the same, gambling. The liquor store are open, and you can shop as long as you want. You can get as much liquor as you want. But back in the old days you couldn't. So she became the hub of U Street. Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], all the things were next to a place called Cecelia Bar and Grill [sic. Cecelia's, Washington, D.C.]. And what she didn't own, the other sisters owned. One had a liquor store, one had a nightclub. They became like the image of U Street. They were pretty; they were efficient; they were smart; and every musician I believe that ever came to Washington [D.C.] during those days wound up at Cecelia's 'cause it wasn't any place else to go. Even if you had a gig down at the Loew's [Palace] Theater [Washington, D.C.], you went in the back door; you played, and you left. So you wound up at Cecelia's Bar and Grill. Story_ID: 277263 Speaker 1: Did she have a place to stay too, like a, a rooming house? Speaker 2: My house, the Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.] was about a ten-minute or fifteen-minute walk from her bar and grill [Cecelia's, Washington, D.C.], straight up Florida Avenue. She's at one end, and I'm on the other end. I'm at 507, so that's five blocks to the right. And she was 7th Street, so that's twelve blocks different. And when I got so I had not paid the mortgage; the lights were going to be cut off, and Oliver Cowen [ph.] said to me, I don't know but one person can bail you out, and that's Cecelia [Penny] Scott. That's where all the number runners, Killer [ph.] and all, Edgar [ph.], and Mannen [ph.], and this one, and every known number writer wound up at Cecelia. So he took me down there, and Cecelia, he told her that I was feeding the hungry all. Yeah, I've been up there. I saw all those people there. She had a filthy mouth. And she said you come back here at seven [o'clock] this evening. Well, that's after the numbers are in. And I went back down there scared to death, had the Hospitality House was full of people who had no place to go. This woman had more heart in her little finger than the average person I had met, including the preachers. And so I went back down there by seven, and she, sit over there on the corner. And I sat over at the table in the corner, and even the girls came up to see: what would you have? Cecelia say give her a Coke, very domineering sort of. And about half an hour after that everybody was cheering, and aaah and yelling and raising. And she announced very clear, she says I'm gonna pass this pot. It was a big bowl. And she says I want everybody to put somethin' in here, and I don't want to hear anything clinging at all. I want to fill up this pot. And of course, this is all brand new to me. I thought I'd seen it all. She passed this pan. And I was going to have a foreclosure like two days away. I hadn't paid the lights were going off the next day. The gas was already off. I had put heaters in there to keep the people warm. She started on this end and (unclear) she looked up and saw somebody puttin' five dollars in there, and she had bad mouth, like she said take that GD five dollars out of there. I don't want to see that kind of crap in here. And she raised so much heck people filled that bowl up. And she says I want you to go upstairs and count that. I had enough to pay the mortgage for the next three months, and I paid the light. I was so arrogant, I asked the light company, you need anything in advance? I mean I counted that money. She says I want you to come down here every Friday evening until we get caught up. She says and I'm gonna tell you something else: I'm not giving you this money. I'm gonna serve on the board and make sure you spend every dime correctly. I had never had a good board. We had do-gooder boards, you know. This one, in the saying, this one 'cause they didn't have two quarters. They were poor like I was. I passed that plate around; I must have had two or three thousand dollars in there. And during that time, that was some money. My mortgage was only three hundred and something dollars, so I paid the mortgage; she joined the board, and we never looked back after that. Mrs. Agnes Meyers [Agnes Ernst Meyer]--I was working at Junior Village [Washington, D.C.] to support my family. I got a letter in there, which I'll show you. Agnes Meyers wrote a letter and said that we're enclosing $10,000, and the money is to be used for [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P.] Winter's salary so that she can come in and do this full time. We've had some good people helping us. And Cecelia said you go out there, and you tell them you quit. And I went out there and told 'em I quit, and I came on in. And I can see more people walking around this city with briefcases, doctors, lawyers, people who are in prominent roles who at one time or another stayed at Hospitality House. Now if you want to make me cry, just let me look around and see some of these success stories. Story_ID: 277264 Speaker 1: Let me tell you what happened to me not too long ago. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I went in the district building, and I went to the restroom. And I noticed this girl. I'm washing my hand, and she was very polite talking. And then I noticed two or three people went out, and I thought she was gonna wash all the skin off her hands, she just kept going. And when the last person went out, she said [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Nadine P.] Winter, you don't know me, but she identified herself. She said we stayed in Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.] about nine months. And I had a time limit; I move you out. And I haven't told you how militant we were. We go in the house, take the boards off, fix the houses up, didn't belong to us at all. And we had what we called sweat equity--fix that house up; paid rent--the light, gas; wouldn't pay any rent, dared the man to even ask us for rent. It was boarded up anyway. He couldn't do anything with it. When he came by there, it looked like it was on 16th Street. We had it all fixed up, had a family moving in there. We must have had thirty or forty houses like that, where we would put people in. And then when you got on your feet you moved out into a rent-paying house. Then we put somebody else in there. But to make a long story short, this girl in the restroom with the briefcase, and I said where do you work now? She say I'm the assistant corporation counsel. But she didn't want to identify with that poverty, and I see a lot of people like that. Perhaps when this story break, and I send it out or whatever it is, I've often said I'd love to get those people together, people who actually had no place to stay. We had one little girl there, that Cecelia [Penny Scott] had a daughter, had the most gorgeous designer clothes you ever wanna see, and I--nine years old. She had never been in school. I had never seen her mother sober since I'd been in that neighborhood. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Her mother slept outside. She was nothing but the block, the neighborhood's prostitute. If you wanted to go to bed with somebody, she did it right out in the open. And we all called her Doll Baby. Doll Baby, Cecelia got dressed, got her clothes, paid everything that was necessary, got her hair done. Wearing Cecelia's daughter's clothing, she looked like Polly Prim sitting up in school. And right now she's big secretary-- Story_ID: 277265 Speaker 1: And you will see in some of those books I have, two or three books have a write-up about me, said they could see poverty at Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.] like they had never seen before. Speaker 2: Now one of the people that wrote about that was James P. Comer [HistoryMaker Dr. James Comer]. Speaker 1: Comer, yeah. Speaker 2: Dr. James P. Comer. And tell us how you met him? Speaker 1: Well, he came to Hospitality House with Dr. Shepherd [ph.]. Speaker 2: About what year did he come, do you think? Can you guess or no? Speaker 1: I don't, I'm bad years. We had been there-- Speaker 2: Was it early '60s [1960s] or-- Speaker 1: Early '60s [1960s], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she came, he came to Hospitality House. And here you see people with four and five children who have lost hope. They had no place to turn. And when they came to Hospitality House the reason we were so good at what we do--God is great, and God is good--we gave them the tangible things that they need, but we gave 'em hope. That's what my mother [Elnora Kenion Poole] gave me. My mother put those white folks' clothes she had made (unclear) and she'd say [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P. Winter], you're the prettiest thing on the street. Well, I did not know I wasn't the prettiest thing on the street. I'd prance around like I was dressed up in designer clothes from Paris [France], and that's what we would do for the people. And if I had to say what makes us unique from somebody else, you just can't give somebody something; they earn it. And so the newspapers wrote this big article, "Help is quick, but no handout." We don't hand out anything. When people bring clothing in there, and you get your children off to school tomorrow, you come in there and fold some clothes and press some clothes, and get them ready for the next person. And that's the kind of agency. And a lot of people fell out with me, especially the people from the white population. They meant well, but I would never let them come in and cook for these African Americans or Negroes or colored people. They can cook better than they can. And for them to come in, to patronize. It doesn't build self-esteem. And so we had a church that we worked with. I've forgotten the name of the church out in Bethesda [Maryland]. And the preacher was so good 'cause he understood me. Some of the parishioners didn't. But my philosophy was and what we really pushed, self-help, and that self-help became the way of life. Story_ID: 277266 Speaker 1: Another person that came through there was [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, the former mayor of the city [Washington, D.C.]. But he came through when he was, he was then the chairman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. And when, when-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was president of SNCC. Speaker 1: --when, when SNCC broke up, I think it was after the summer of '64 [1964] and when, when some of the SNCC members broke off and-- Speaker 2: He resigned immediately, soon as he got to the district, but he came here as the chairman of SNCC. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now what happened was-- Speaker 1: Did he talk about what, what happened? Speaker 2: He came-- Speaker 1: Did he tell you? Speaker 2: --into Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.]. He never told me what happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he came into, I think we were at 1107--no, we were down on K Street. I've forgotten that address, but he walked in there and Bogarted his way up the steps. Now some of my good staff during that day, Lola Singetarian [ph.], Walistine Talafaron [ph.], all of that group can tell you 'cause they say the so--guy downstairs name, said his name was Marion Barry. And I had about fifteen or twenty people to interview, but he wanted to get in front of everybody and push. So he Bogarted his way on up into my office, my office on the second floor. Speaker 1: Now you said--I don't want to interrupt you, but, but you said that he had a note from somebody, gave him a note to come to see you? Speaker 2: Come see me. He so-- Speaker 1: And who, who gave him the note, do-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: You, you don't know, okay. Speaker 2: What I do know is that they told him to come--he repeated this and some of the former staff will repeat it--to come see this woman named [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P.] Winter when he got to Washington [D.C.]. So he came into Hospitality House. He had two odd socks--they didn't even match--and a pair of underwear, the brief kind, just the underwear, no shirts, no anything. And we called around and got him a place to stay. We sent him down to our little thrift shop where people would give us clothes we had cleaned up. He got all the clothes he want. We gave him a little change, and then he started coming back during the day to help us. But Marion was the most aggressive person I've ever run into. About the second week when he started coming around, we would have block parties all over the area in order to bring people together to talk about, you know, we would meet in the street and have music. And oh, we just had a good time. And one day I went out to Linden Street [sic. Linden Place]--and I see those people often--he had taken Hospitality House sign down and put Marion Barry block parties up. He was then sponsoring the block parties, he said, quote unquote. But it still was Hospitality House footin' whatever bill we had; we had the insurance; we had everything else. Speaker 1: Now was he-- Speaker 2: But I-- Speaker 1: --was he acting as an organizer for Hospitality House-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --in the beginning? Speaker 2: Didn't nobody--I didn't even know he wasn't, was there until somebody said he was going to Marion Barry's block party. We know we had a series of block parties planned. And the thing that amazed me was how the people came out and started rallying around him. So from that, he kind of broke off and went in another area and start doing the same thing. Now I have no problem with that. The staff got a little angry. As I said, I had a large staff of outreach workers at that time. But it didn't bother me. It's enough poverty, as at that time, in this city for anybody and everybody to get involved. And again, let me repeat: the churches weren't doing very much, so I welcomed Marion Barry-- Story_ID: 277267 Speaker 1: Did you send people door-to-door, knocking on doors and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We still do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We feel like it's only one way. Back in these poor neighborhoods, even today, it is impossible almost to knock on any door that you won't get a problem. They maybe look like they're doing well. And you in there asking 'em if they had a mammogram or anybody in here prostate. She said you know, my daughter got the worse earache. Always something comes out of that. [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Nadine P.] Winter, do you know where I can get some scholarship money? Or, Ms. Winter, my son did something and got fired on his job. So every, I (unclear) we are issue or, organizers. That's why we're effective. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We do not do what they were telling us to do back in those days. Everybody saying organize block clubs. We didn't call 'em block clubs. We had housing groups. He had health groups. We, people would come if there's an issue they want to discuss, and that's what we did. And we used those block gatherings only to get the issues. And once you get the issues, they would come to the meetings. But you call a block club meeting, you'll get five or six people. If you went organize a health club, everybody in there'll say well, you know, I did feel bad last night. I need to go on down there and let them take my pressure. So we do what, and still do, what we call issue organizing. We knock on doors. We'd go to the stores and stand in front of the stores. If you--wherever there was food being given out, which we gave out most of it; we'd get into free food. We had gardens all over Washington [D.C.], where we would grow our own tomatoes and everything in the backyards or the alleys, they are called, of some of these housing complex. And they worry about people stealing. I ain't worry about stealing. They couldn't eat all those tomatoes they picked. They either sold them or they ate them themselves, so at least they got to the people. If you want to buy a nickel's worth of tomatoes, go over there (unclear) whatever it is. I figure those tomatoes came out of our garden. We tried to discourage it, however, but there are some people just not gon' do right under any circumstances. Speaker 1: So, so how, how long--yeah, that, that, that, that still happens now, and I know a lot of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --examples of that. Story_ID: 277268 Speaker 1: But how long was it before you got your first grant? Did you go after grants or anything like that at some point? Speaker 2: Not as such. But the Kennedys, we became very close, very close to the Kennedys. John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was in the White House [Washington, D.C.] at that time, so I know when that was. And what happened was-- Speaker 1: This is 1960 to '63 [1963]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: So they just kind of adopted us. In fact, 90 percent of all the meetings we had, we had right in the White, in the, Bobby Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy] office. Speaker 1: Attorney general (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And the, the first lady [Jacqueline Kennedy] would come over to Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.]. We had one of the most prestigious group of people coming to the White House, Art Buchwald. You see all these pictures around here on the wall, and every time we got ready to have a fundraiser, I didn't have any fundraisers. They had the fundraisers, and we would get the movie, 'PT 109,' that Bobby Kennedy [sic.]--and we would show that all over the neighborhood, and charge fifteen or twenty cent, and show Kennedy on the boat. And Barney Ross [George H.R. "Barney" Ross] was on our board. David [L.] Hackett, one of the, Bobby Kennedy's roommate. So the Kennedys really picked us up and made us. And one other thing I want to say about the Kennedys is, back in those days segregation was very prominent. But once a week I would load up a bus with our children and take 'em down to Bobby Kennedy's house [Hickory Hill, McLean, Virginia] to go swimming. We didn't have any public swimming pool, and he would let the kids swim in his pool with his children. So I, I have nothing but praise for the Kennedy family. And I really don't think today that his children realize the contribution that the Kennedys made in action rather than in words. You know, a lot of people will give you a donation and tell you to keep going. I remember once we had our kids down there swimming, and Ethel [Kennedy] came out. The kids didn't have any trunks, some swimming trunk, and she had taken a pair from one of the children and brought it out so the kids could have a couple of pair of swimming trunk. And one of the Kennedy boys said, "That's my favorite pair of trunk." She says, "Then you can get some more," and she went on back in the house. So we used their swimming pool once a week for our children at Hospitality House. But then we had people like Agnes Meyers [Agnes Ernst Meyer], who gave us our first $10,000 grant you asked for it. We had all of these attorney--in other words, John F. Kennedy's cabinet worked for Hospitality House. And I haven't seen another president do that. They know what the problems are. Story_ID: 277269 Speaker 1: You went to the March on Washington in '73 [1973]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, now tell us about that--in '63 [1963] rather. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: Well, it was great, but I'm not, you're not gon' find me in any front line or anything. As I said, I came from my father [Sam Poole] who was not nonviolent, and my temperament tells me I needed to have been the water boy, which I was a water girl. Speaker 1: So what did that mean? Speaker 2: They made-- Speaker 1: What did you do? Speaker 2: --very clear, and [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was good. He says if you got to fight back, don't get in the line or march. And they taught us how to bow and cover you head and all of that. And when I got down there, I went down there with some friends of mine, one a police officer, and he was anxious to get in. But (unclear) he asked if there are those under the sound of my voice cannot abide by the rules and regulations, do not get in the line or march. There are other ways we can use your service, but we don't want any bloody line or march. I want you to stand up now, and you can help man the roads. That mean take the water, take whatever it is into (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is the--I'm sorry, I'm just, I think I said March on Washington. This isn't, this isn't that. This is the march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama], right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you're talking about the March on Washington. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, that was just organizing when everybody is coming to Washington [D.C.], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So you went down there on a bus with everybody? Speaker 2: I went, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was talking about the other. Speaker 1: Okay, but the one, the one we're, we're, we're talking about now is, is Selma to Montgomery, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, in '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Yeah, so what you're-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --talking about, the March on Washington, was the gathering. Speaker 1: Were you impressed by that gathering in '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: I was impressed, yeah. Yes, I was impressed. I think everything they did made an impression because, again, it goes back to organizing. It goes back, you have to organize and motivate the people, and, and that's what that did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, you did say March on Washington. Speaker 1: You gotta agitate it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or something (unclear) yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 277270 Speaker 1: But in '65 [1965], well, well, as close as you were to the Kennedys, I don't, I don't want to pass over the, the assassination of John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. How did that, how did you feel? Speaker 2: That tore me up. The first time I ever knew I had high blood pressure. In fact, the pictures around here will show you they were in and out of my house. I don't me my Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.]; I mean my private home. They were in and out of Cecelia Bar and Grill [sic. Cecelia's, Washington, D.C.]. So, we became like real friendly with the whole Kennedy clan. And after John F. was killed, Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] took over. He continued--the only persons we have not tried to, or ever been close to, was Edward [M.] Kennedy. And it seems to have been a span between Bobby and Edward--space I mean--so we just never pursued lettin' him know. I keep saying often I'm going to let him know what his family really meant to us. The house is full of pictures. I remember once a reporter came into interview me, and the only thing he wrote about, on every wall it was a Kennedy. I never realized that before. Story_ID: 277271 Speaker 1: But in '65 [1965] you knew you couldn't be nonviolent in-- Speaker 2: I knew I could not be nonviolent, so-- Speaker 1: Did, did you know any of the, the men involved in the Deacons for Defense [and Justice], any of them? Speaker 2: No, not-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --closely. Again-- Speaker 1: But you heard about-- Speaker 2: --I tried to stay out--I became a, I was with--see, a lot of us knew each other before we even got to Washington [D.C.], you have to realize. In fact, when [HistoryMaker] Marion [Barry] got on the council, we went back to integration of the school, Arkansas. We went back down there, and that was the best time in my life I've ever had with him. We went down there to retrace our steps. And we were down there, and we had a fellow named Bill Jones [ph.] driving. And these are all people who've been locked up nineteen, twenty, and twenty-one times, I mean the whole bang, shebang. And make a long story short, he's talking and driving and ran right in the back of a police scout car. And it wasn't much damage, but you, just tapped him, and this cop got out. And we're in Arkansas. And the next day he had to go to court. And I never will forget, Bill Jones was just a little heavier than you are and about your height. And the next morning we had to go to court. He came down. We all had these great big bush and, and didn't know what clothes was, you know, the dashiki, you know. Bill Jones came down with [HistoryMaker Reverend] Walter Fauntroy, who weighed half your size shirt. He had cut the shirt down the back and just had the front showing and a jacket 'cause we had to go into court. But, I've been very friendly with most of the people in the movement. I tried to stay in the background because my temperament would not allow me to be out front. Story_ID: 277272 Speaker 1: Now you had some interesting remarks during the break here about how people use the poor for their own job security. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, could you explain? Speaker 2: Well, back in the old days--I (unclear) talk about the old days and come up to the modern day--we had things like the United Way [Worldwide] called the [Community Chest] Red Feather or the charity organization, One-- Speaker 1: The Community Chest-- Speaker 2: --Fund Drive [Community Chest Fund Drive]-- Speaker 1: --right, they call it. Speaker 2: --whatever you're gonna do. And you look at the recipients of those. It's not for the people who are designed to get these. You create jobs, and I mean high-level jobs. If you wanna talk about recent, then you can translate that into the past. Mr. Osara [sic. Oral Suer] chairman of the United Way here in Washington, D.C., admitted in court to taking, stealing, embezzling, and anything you wanna say, $500,000. We know it's in the millions. He had a wife. If she had the Rolls Royce, he's had, the girlfriend the yachts, the two homes and all of that. This is money for charity. And he has gone to court, and of course, he gets this high pension. And then United Way for four years wouldn't take any small agencies. That's where the jobs and these are the people located right in their neighborhood. They gotta get their finances straight. How long it's gonna take you to get your finances straight? But let me make another caveat there. Speaker 1: Let' not breeze by this too fast. What you're saying is that for, say, every dollar that's given to charity too much is spent on administration-- Speaker 2: All-- Speaker 1: --of it-- Speaker 2: --the administration-- Speaker 1: --for middle-class people to already have jobs. Speaker 2: That already have jobs. They could get a job anyway. But you're creating jobs, and they are creating high-level jobs. Speaker 1: But not low-level jobs. Speaker 2: Not low-level jobs. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And the low-level jobs would be out there where the people are really serving the people, like district talk about underserved neighborhoods where people are uninsured and underinsured. For the last three or four years you can't even become a member for people to even give you a nickel, because he has stolen or embezzled, whatever-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --term they want to use. Speaker 1: So let, let's just walk through that again too, that you said that because they've had embezzlement in the United Way-- Speaker 2: Way. Speaker 1: --they decided to put their giving to small organizations on hold. Speaker 2: A new and new, these are--they put them on hold. Speaker 1: So they give 'em to the big, they give, they're giving money to the big organizations but not to-- Speaker 2: All right, we know Salvation Army can exist. We know Goodwill [Industries International Inc.] can exist. We understand that. But what we don't understand, for the very people where the problems are, they can't even become a member to get the donations that the people in the public think they are giving to 'em. Now if that's not fraud to its highest height, and you know, I'd love to organize a group of people-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: Interesting-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --part about that is they have frozen any new organizations to come in there. They've lost lots of their corporate givers. They created the problem, and I'll bet the executive director is still getting his high salary, and they are still doing business as usual. But let me make a long story short: the public's looking at it as if to say well, I'm obligated to give to them. Guess who serves on the board. Mr. Coopier [ph.], the nation first bank, PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company], the gas company. They are talking to each other because the interest is business interest. And when you think they're giving something, they're doing tax write-offs, even when they give away what they call free food sometime. Look at the tax breaks that these people are getting. Is it really getting to the poor? Story_ID: 277273 Speaker 1: I wanted to mention something in that same vein, to talk about using poor people to benefit the pockets of the wealthy. Urban homesteading, when we gave those houses away for a dollar or when we were out taking over boarded up properties that made our neighborhoods ghettos, we'd be in the houses sometime four and five months or a year and nobody knew we had even taken the boards off. We had fixed the houses up, painted 'em up, and put families who had no place to go in those houses. That's why I like to equate my life with, preference it with God is great, and God is good, but not only just complaining about a situation but doing something about it. And if you looked at the history of [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P.] Winter going back, I've always been an action person to try to teach people how to help themselves. I just don't believe in, and this is what I'd like to emphasize, giving a man a fish if he's hungry. You teach him how to fish, and he'll eat a lifetime. But that fish you give him will only give him a meal and an incentive to go out to do something for himself. And these agencies that want to be do-gooders, just a handout, I have just never joined. I try to teach people how to have some long-range plan for whatever we're doing for you today. And if they know that work--when I say they, the government--everybody know it works. I was wondering why we don't get ample support. I'm talking about these charities. I'm not talking about me; I'm talking the small charities out here who's doing that, and they can see the results of it. That's what I'd like to push. I would not leave, like to leave a legacy of just handing out; I'd like to leave a legacy of supporting people so that the people I mentioned before who are now carrying briefcase and doctors and lawyers and all of these have gotten the motivation to go on to something higher. Speaker 2: Let me ask you, were, were, were you ever trained in [Saul] Alinsky organizing? Were-- Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and not only Alinsky. We went to Chicago [Illinois]. [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory was there at the Palmer [House] Hotel [Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois]. We had nothing but welfare rights people, and we set up what you call welfare rights organization to teach people you are people, and you've gotta have self-respect. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, so you were talking about being in Chicago with Dick Gregory and-- Speaker 2: Yes, and we set up the welfare rights. And, and what I really liked about that was you told people about their rights, but you told 'em about their responsibility. Along with rights come responsibility, and we stress that, and until today I stress that. We are what we eat, and if you're dying of cancer, you have diabetes and all of these other things, you have a responsibility to do something about that. You've gotta change your diet. You've gotta do a--and it takes good training to reach the mind of people if you're going to change their habits. You just can't preach to them. You have to make them understand that they are the keepers of their bodies and their mind, if you want to know the truth. And that's the only thing I've tried to do all my life. I have over five hundred plaques and awards I'm trying to clean out right now, busy going to the storage. And I think we get caught up in doing things rather than our philosophy, and I don't want to ever lose that. Story_ID: 277274 Speaker 1: What caused you to run for city council [Council of the District of Columbia]? Speaker 2: Well, what caused me was not my own doing. I was out doing the social work, social action. And my sister [Vera P. Gaskin] was sick, and I went to New York [New York] to stay with her for two weeks. So when I came back, the school board race was on. And they had collected my volunteers and friends. I've always had a large group of volunteers, three and four hundred volunteers 'cause I'd give 'em something to do. And they had collected the petitions and set me on a path to run. I don't even remember that election, whether I got on the ballot or whatever it is; I didn't win. Speaker 1: Now this was the, let's, let's set this up. This is the, it was announced that the--and I guess it was something that pe- well, I know people here fought for the right to be represented in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in city coun- in the city council, to have a city council. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this was 1974, '73 [1973], '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were seated in '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But the school board was the first election. Speaker 1: And when was the school board? Speaker 2: The school board was elected here, preceded the council. Speaker 1: Okay, when was that? Was that like-- Speaker 2: Where was it? Speaker 1: When. Speaker 2: Ooh-- Speaker 1: When was that? Speaker 2: Anything preceding '74 [1974]. I don't know when the first year-- Speaker 1: Okay, but it was school board first. Speaker 2: But they had been electing the city, the school board. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When the council position came along to elect a council, was in '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's go back to school board then. And so your constituents had-- Speaker 2: Yeah, had gotten the-- Speaker 1: --and sort of-- Speaker 2: --petitions. I didn't get involved. And when I came in here it was like a night before the election. And I, I think I was on the ballot, and I lost. I did not become a school board, if I think, if I'm telling it correct. Story_ID: 277275 Speaker 1: But then when we got chance to run for the council [Council of the District of Columbia] and I saw what they were doing, kind of drafting me out, I looked down and it was a heavy group of hitters running, all Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] residents, and I never will forget, well-funded. And none of the people supporting them would have supported me. It mostly the real estate industry, and you're not gon' leave here and find one person in real estate is a [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P.] Winter lover. As I said, I was giving away hundred dollars for one--houses for one dollar. I was taking the boards off the house and telling him what he wasn't gon' get. And it's money. I say again, it's all about money in this town, and that's where I have a problem. Let me go back to what you asked me about the election. And the people decided that they were gonna run me for the council, and I was running against two well-funded Capitol Hill people. I probably didn't have a quarter. And I had this little place over there in my basement running. I lived up on, not too far from the Hill, on the 800 block, the 500 block of 8th Street. And they collected all the petitions. And that night when I won, the press came in with their cameras and couldn't, and gon' take my picture. Oh, I was gonna be on the news I thought, and I, it was just a new adventure for me. And they said well, Mrs. Winter, we would like to meet your campaign organization. How did you get elected? I said there they are out there on the floor. We were in the church, [Peoples] Community Church [Washington, D.C.], there are 11th [Street] and Maryland Avenue. They were drunk, and half of 'em had urinated on themselves, and they were celebrating. The press would not take that. They did not want to see a group of winos, people with emotional problems, people who lived there in the ghetto running a campaign. And the thing that makes that so nice for me and I get excited, this is truly one time I can say I was elected by the people. The people got out there. I didn't have any money to pay all these (unclear) staff, and they had all the money. And these grassroots people had put the wine, and the beer, and the liquor down long enough to work on a campaign for me. God is great, and God is good. That's how I got elected. And from that day to this, because again, I had to decide whether I was gonna give up Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.] or do the council; I had to decide that. And I felt like if I got on the inside, I could make some real changes. Now I am so proud. People who were the, would have been considered the pit of Washington, D.C. - one guy who ran my campaign called High-Fi [ph.]. If there wasn't a shooting or a killing or something in the neighborhood every week, you thought you had moved up on the Gold Coast [Washington, D.C.]. These are people who worked, and lived, and knew people. And when they said come out and vote, you don't forget they had parents too. And people came out and vote, and I got elected overwhelmingly. And I haven't looked back sense, and I'm grateful. Speaker 2: So this is 1974. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right, okay, this is the first city council. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Along with you, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was elected. Speaker 1: Doug Moore [Douglas E. Moore], Julius Hobson-- Speaker 2: Doug Moore. Speaker 1: --all of us. The strange part about it, the council got elected I think about nine civil rights people right out of the street against the money stream in Washington. Money stream was heavy, and they were running their candidates. But money does not win elections in this town. Story_ID: 277276 Speaker 1: How many people were on city council [Council of the District of Columbia] altogether? Speaker 2: There's twelve members of the city council and chairman. I think again-- Speaker 1: And, and the chairman, okay. Speaker 2: And, and the chairman. That makes thirteen. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Plus the chairman I should say. But I want to stress this. This, this is so important. Most of us had run shelters. We had been associated with the poor and the underserved people most of our lives. And for us to go out here and get elected for the first elected city councils versus the real estate and all these plush in the city [Washington, D.C.], was a real turnaround. And when and if I get a book completed, that's going to show very clearly that when the people unite and speak with one voice we can overcome a lot of our problems. And none of us, none of us never relinquish. They, some of 'em didn't run for council again. They got tired of the business community beatin' up on 'em. But there were people like Willie Hardy, who had a place called the Hut [ph.], made a tremendous contribution to this city. Doug Moore [Douglas E. Moore], [HistoryMaker] Marion [Barry], John [A.] Wilson, all these civil rights I'm calling, and we got elected to the council by the people. This was a, how much money you have in the bank and when you gon' file, or what is the thing now? Don't have to list who my contributors are. Why you don't want to list them? Are you bought off or what? And we had list-- Speaker 1: What are you hiding right (laughter)? Speaker 2: If we had listed our contribute- contributors you would have known 'em anyway. High-Fi [ph.], who's gon' know High-Fi (laughter)? I never knew his name. So, that's the big difference. And I would just like to say to people seeking office, you can win if you go out and touch base with the people; it's the people who vote. Story_ID: 277277 Speaker 1: What were the, some of the issues in city council [Council of the District of Columbia] when you, back in the early days? Speaker 2: They haven't changed at all. I was chairman of the housing committee, and that was the number one issue. People were being displaced. They were--and then [U.S.] Congress was directing us. We all had these committees, the environment, the air pollution. We don't have any factories here, tobacco factories I mean. Why should we have the highest death rate in the United States from cancer? It's got to be air pollution. It's got to be something else other than what they like to blame it on: stop smoking. People with cancer--half of my friends, thirty-three of us came together and set up a group. None of us smoke. They had lung cancer. They had every kind of cancer. I went from breast cancer to lymphoma. It's pollution that's bad. And I can tell you about Washington [D.C.]. When I lived out in Capitol View, and then people were cleaned out 'round this area and moved out there, they used to burn on weekends, above ground, the trash, just like an open field of nothing but flame where they burned trash. Now if you tell me that didn't pollute the air, I'd like to know what does. Now they've gotten sophisticated and built the reservoirs and the (unclear), but it wasn't that way when we lived out there. And there were no bus service. We had to get off the bus or the streetcar at 34th Street and walk the other fifteen or twenty blocks. So things have changed, changed drastically, but they didn't change by themselves. They changed by us nudging and pushing. And when you mentioned civil rights changes come, some of 'em may have been and still are very subtle, but there still have been changes made. And a change is made because we identified and pushed for solutions, and that's what we are. Story_ID: 277278 Speaker 1: I know there's a lot of criticism about some of the council members [on the Council of the District of Columbia], former council members. But if I had to make a real statement about some of the council members, I don't think there's been a greater people person than [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry. I know him. I know him well. I was one of the first people he contacted. I know how he thinks. I think that he may have been his own worst enemy. But when you really stop and think about it, he has helped so many people. And I just want to make sure that people recognize that. Now, I have not supported his habits. I'm just as vocal against some of the things he does, but when it comes to being concerned about people and trying to help people, he has been Johnny on the spot. Speaker 2: Now what you're saying is echoed by a lot of people that live in [Washington] D.C. You know, those of us who don't live in Washington, D.C., we, we wonder why, you know, he, he gets so much support here. But people, you know, say, they point to jobs, and they point to reforms. Speaker 1: Not only that. I, I don't know whether Marion know how to--this is terrible, but it's my opinion of him. I don't think he know how to be greedy and selfish. I think what he does, he think he's helping somebody. And when you have that kind of desire, and somebody is out there you can put your fingers on who's genuinely concerned about your well-being, he'll get elected as long as he want to get elected. Now I'm more concerned about his health. I say, Marion, you're worrying yourself out. Why don't you take a rest? But it's nothing about his skills and his qualifications for working with people. He-- Speaker 2: He, he kind of made some, would you agree that he sort made some bad decisions there along the way-- Speaker 1: Oh, good-- Speaker 2: --with his personal life, I guess is what-- Speaker 1: He's, he is worst enemy, and I don't know whether--I, I have no justification for that. I don't know whether he got overworked and got caught up in friends or what. I have no excuse. Some of us strong enough to overcome, to put all that in the burner. I don't know how he trans- but that's his personal side, and that's what he had done. But he certainly is not a Mr. Osara [sic. Oral Suer], who's going to jail for stealing, who admits he stole a half million dollars of the people money sent out to help the poor. There's a difference. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Marion is his worst enemy, and I'm not disputing that-- Story_ID: 277279 Speaker 1: What would you consider to be your, your accomplishments in city council [Council of the District of Columbia], 'cause you were in city council a long time? Speaker 2: Well, I got this book, and my accomplishment The Washington Post said I wasn't the best legislator. That's the way they put it. But I certainly was one of the best representative of the people for constituents, my constituents than any council member had ever been before then. Now The Washington Post, anytime they say anything about me nice, I gobble up copies of it, so you may not even be able to find a copy. My contribution has been to people. And I say that without hesitation. We probably get ten or twenty constituent complaints a week. I'd get two hundred. And I'm just use some comparative, whatever it is. So my contribution had been for bills and, and legislation that reached the underserved and the under- uninsured, and the underinsured, on the health issues I've have been high on the spot, things that cause health problems, the environment. I'm just not a Band-Aid person, give you a Band-Aid and, and go on. I will fight till the end to change the system to be inclusive, not exclusive or not representing only a few wards. Schools are in bad shape, but I don't know why they don't understand we have to have more adult education programs and classes. And you come along and you get some do-gooder who cut out the adult whatever it is. We're gon' concentrate on these children. Well, schools should not be all about just children. I'm not against the children--it ought to be about families, teaching 'em how to earn a living. And we're so stereotyped in here, in, not only Washington [D.C.], all over the United States, until somebody's gon' wake up one day and say we gotta concentrate on every member in that family as far as education is concerned. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you pioneered I think urban homesteading? That's one of your-- Speaker 2: Right, where we gave away the houses for $1. I'm a good Democrat. I've been the elect-off for the district on two occasions, which is a real, in my opinion, prestigious position to have been in. But on the other hand, I can say 90 percent of, of my real successes in life have been through the Republican Party. So I'm not a party. I'm an issue person. I believe in the philosophy of the Democratic Party, but the Republicans gave me fifty houses (laughter). And they said give her the houses, sort of with the idea that she's gon' fall flat on her face anyway. But at least they understood the merit of what I was saying. The houses are boarded up. They're an eyesore in the community. Give us the houses, and we use sweat equity to fix the houses up, and people can move in. And before I could do more in the district than I had done, I began to be sought after other places. That's another problem. And I began to try to spread myself too thin. But urban homesteading works. Now you'd rather give 'em to developers and change the law to say that people can't fix up they own housing, but here one of my colleagues came along and did that. I never will respect him for doing that. Story_ID: 277280 Speaker 1: Tell us about some of your opinions about the Electoral College, 'cause you were a member in the 2000 election, which was a very controversial election, where the president was elected without the majority of the popular vote, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. I have some real serious--and these people--are we on tape? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And these people who's sticking their chest out, I was the elector--I'm glad the Democratic Party saw fit to ask me to be an elector. I am proud to have represented the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], but that does not change my philosophy. I don't think we ought to have an electoral college. I think we ought to do away with it. I can't decide what the word democracy means when you can lose an election, like [President] Mr. [George Walker] Bush, with five hundred-- Speaker 1: In 2000. Speaker 2: --thousand votes and still be elected to president, 'cause you were not elected by the popular vote. You were elected by a small group of people who say they represent somebody. And you are now the president in the year 2000. Let me go back and make another thing that I think is hypocritical. I can't change the world in this lifetime, but when I come back here again I'm going to be working on some of things. But how can we be going to all of these foreign countries and talk about one man, one vote, democracy. We are setting up a democratic system for--and we don't have a democratic city--system--here in, in my opinion, in the United States. And we certainly don't have a democratic system here in Washington, D.C. Let me make the observation again that I just made. Mr. [Al] Gore won 500,000 votes plus more than Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush is the president of the United States based on the Electoral College. We don't need it. It's antiquated, and I think it is going to, in the long run, be questioned by a lot of the people, foreigners, people who--we talk about democracy in other places. I think you gotta clean up at home first, and I think the sooner we addressed, [U.S.] Congress address the issue of the electoral cutout--college, the better off we'll be. I'm against it. I think it needs to be done away with. It needs to be discussed now, and I think we ought to move rapidly to say this country is democratic. One vote, one man, one woman, one vote. And whomever gets that one, if it's a million point one, that's the person who should be president, not a small group deciding or an electoral college. Story_ID: 277281 Speaker 1: Now you're also founder, and you were executive director of Health Outreach Information Network [Inc., Washington, D.C.], right? Now when did this start, this organization? Speaker 2: Well, thirty-three breast cancer--not breast cancer, thirty-three cancer survivors came together, and we realized that we were unique. Washington, D.C. does not have factories. It has no reason to have the highest death rate in the United States and the fifth highest rate of cancer victims. But I can look at the cardiovascular, diabetes, and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], and we seem to be leading the nation in health issues. Now, I know we're going all over the world talking about health issues. I know we're talking about prescription drugs, but health means more than just going and getting an operation. We are what we eat. Programs ought to be set up. They've taken nutrition and home economics, all those programs out of the school, kids walking around the school thirty and forty pounds overweight, obese. What are we doing about that? Shouldn't we have health classes in school? Shouldn't we have health lunch, health clubs, health--now you know the city knows that, that you cannot change people unless you change their attitude. Their bodies reflect what their attitudes are. How you gon' eat French fries all day long, no fruit all week, and call yourself healthy. So Health Outreach has changed its philosophy. I'm totally against things like they call medical homes in the fashion it's written. You talk about institutions, again, getting people to institute, to institution. What's wrong with the institution going to the people, like some doctors got a thing that's I am so excited about, making a home visit, house visits, or take health to the home. You got a mother and five children. She can't haul 'em to the clinics. Even if the clinic was across the street, that means she has to get them ready, and she has to make sure she got 'em all coordinated. But what's wrong with Health Outreach going to the house, knocking on the door. Mrs. Jones, I think you have a history of high blood pressure. I heard you in a meeting the other night. I wanna take your pressure every Wednesday for the next two or three weeks. And if the pressure is elevated then you need to go to the doctor. What's wrong with taking cholesterol screening? What's wrong with diabetes screening? Take it to the shopping centers, the barbershops. In poor neighborhoods, you take the services where the people are, not build another institution and say you go over there. Health Outreach has probably done more or as much as any agency to change the attitude of people. We have notes from people saying thank you, I didn't know my blood pressure was elevated, thank you. And one lady said to me this morning I thought was interested, said when I sat down to the table with those bacon and eggs I thought of you right away. And I ate half of them. I can't imagine me getting up from a table with bacon and eggs and fried potatoes. Now that may be fine for once a week, but what happened to your oatmeal, your raisins, your cantaloupe? Our body is not going to take that harsh treatment when the death rate is higher. We can't even get the proper training because there's no one to take the information to the people. The people are turned off by the system. You need people who, we are peers: we are cancer survivor; we are diabetic, diabetes sufferers. And, and when we talk to a person in his or her own home, we get more accolades and hugs and thank-yous than you can imagine. People are thanking us for bring the serve--I had planned to go over there yesterday, but I didn't get a chance. We take out all excuses. And what we want to do is bring the death rate down, prolong a healthy life for people in the nation's capital. I don't understand why people don't, don't understand that. Speaker 1: Now, now that's you, your primary focus right now, right, is that? Speaker 2: That's our primary focus, and people help themselves. They will help themselves if you give 'em the right nudge and the right incentive. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Take away the excuses. Story_ID: 277282 Speaker 1: Now when did you start Health Outreach and-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --Information Network [Health Outreach Information Network, Inc., Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: --when we found out we were cancer survivors. The doctor came to me, one in particular, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [LaSalle D.] Leffall [Jr.], who was at that time-- Speaker 1: Dr. LaSalle Leffall? Speaker 2: Fla- yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he--I realize I'm on tape, so I'm going to have to say it like--but he kind of insulted me, nudged me. And he, he said [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Nadine P.] Winter, you're laying up here fictitious name here on the door and this and the other, call yourself a leader. And let me show you something. That's when he talked about all the people dying in Washington [D.C.] of cancer. He said these are pre- people in underserved neighborhoods. They don't know about the services, and only people like you can educate them. Well, it was kind of a snatch 'cause I'm laying up in the hospital enjoying the pavilion and you know, the scenery and all of that. And when he left out the room I thought about what he said, and I rolled out of bed. And we incorporated. At first we had to buy our own little pamphlets to give out, but then we contacted the National Institute of Health and Cancer [sic. National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland], and they gave us pamphlets. And we have no qualms about knocking on somebody's door or walking up to a man, handsome man: have you had your prostate checked? They may resent it at first. They'll say yeah, well, I'm going tomorrow. Why don't you call and let me know if you went? We are peers, and I think that's what takes [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry up front again. It shows that we are genuinely interested in the person. Maybe it's our age. Maybe it's the way we do things, but we go where the people are. We stop them on their way into the, what I call the Safeway, the Giants [Giant Food], the A&Ps [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company]. They would be going anyway. So if they going in for bread, don't forget to get the whole wheat bread if you can stomach it. It's much better than the white bread. And you just keep reminding people how much their health means to them, if they are going to see their children grow up to be healthy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Obesity is a problem, and we've got to work on that. So that's what we are doing now. Story_ID: 277283 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hopes and dreams is that they would get more involved. My hopes and dreams is that they will begin to take their problems seriously, not expect people to do for them but to do for themselves. And I think that's going to happen. The disabled, I see more of the coming up, speaking up than ever before. I see more people going, seemingly, I need to do another database and statistical report to see if people are not attending meetings much better, health issue meetings, housing issue meetings. Just don't sit back and let the system trick you. You join the system and make the system work for you. As long as you depend on other people to do for you, you're going to be lost, in this day and time when real estate is beyond our means already. And when people, cities, all across this nation, talking about surpluses and what they gon' do with it--if they call a meeting, you'll find the same meeting goers at every meeting. So I'm saying to the ordinary person, go out to the meetings, get involved, but you have to be the one to look out for your children. System is not going to do it for you. You have to take your health in your own hand, and your problems are solvable if you get involved. Story_ID: 277284 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life and all the things you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Oh yes, there are several things I would do differently. I would have, and I know if this ever gets out, my staff see it, that they will say--I would make sure that more African Americans bought houses. We are priced out of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. And I had a program once that we could've bought rows of house for fi- houses for five hundred dollars down and houses running three and four thousand dollars, taking over notes. Even though I consider myself a pretty good motivational speaker, I didn't get through to them the way I should have so that they would've had more vision for the future. Yes, I would have done a lot of things a little differently than I'm doing them. But, sometimes you get too stretched out, and people don't understand why you're doing things. So I need to have slowed down a bit. We got the only credit union in Washington [D.C.] on H Street still standing (unclear) out, it came out of the poverty program, the only one. They had dozens of them around the city. Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: But I can look around and see the success. Story_ID: 277285 Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think if I wanted to leave a legacy of any kind, it's that I really cared for people. And when I look around I see a lot of people who did listen and made something of their life. I'm not looking for any monuments or anything. I'm, I'm not interested in that. I'm more interested in changing attitudes. And I can see, I got a call from a little, a woman that had a funeral Saturday, two, two days ago. And the baby, she left at Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.] when the baby was like six weeks old. And I took that baby home. And one day a couple of years or so after that she rang the bell, and she wanted her baby. I wish I had stayed in touch. I almost cried when I saw her in the coffin. She died of kidney cancer. And I said to myself when I came out of church, at forty-one, I just wish I had stayed closer to her. She list me in the funeral program as the godmother. There're a lot of people out there I'm the godmother of, and I would like for my legacy to show that I tried, but I just did not reached as many people as I could have reached if I had slowed down a bit. Story_ID: 277286 Speaker 1: Now did your parents [Elnora Kenion Poole and Sam Poole] get a chance to see you become successful, or did they pass away before you-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't, wouldn't say I'm successful. My parents passed away before I did. But my mother, I never will forget, bless her soul. I had struggled. I had been inside one institution. I had a certificate here, one in arbitration and mediation, one in this, and my mother, dying now, she says I'm gon' stay here to see [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P. Winter] get her a master's degree from this university. I think she died like two weeks later. She got up out of her sick bed. She had not had her feet on the floor. God is great, and God is good. Mother hadn't had her feet on the floor for about three or four months. And I got in her room that morning, and she was sitting on the side of the bed dressed. I said, "Mother, where are you going?" She says, "I'm going to your graduation." And that's the day I got my master's. And for some reason, chills just ran on my body. And I think a friend of mine had to take her downstairs on his back, and she went on. I don't consider myself successful. As I said, I'm cleaning out storage now. I got over five hundred plaques and awards and certificates. I've been in and out of special training programs at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and this school and that school. But none of that matters as much to me as when I see somebody who was down and out, didn't know where to turn, didn't have a place to stay, and now they're making it for themselves and their family. That's all I want. I gloat in that. I'll tell you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in a minute. I'll leave, I'll leave church in the middle of the sermon just to go over there to, to see a success story. I love success story. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 277287 Speaker 1: Do you have children of your own? Are you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about your family. Speaker 2: Well, I have one deceased son [Alan Winter], and then I have one son [Reginald Winter] who is a, I don't know, police officer. He works for the government. He's very (unclear) and a very good child. I have two grandchildren, both doing well. And I have a young lady who is actually my daughter-in-law, but she and my son was divorced, whom I call my daughter. And she's the closest thing to me in my life. And her, she's Daria Winter. So most of the people think that Daria is my daughter, so I never try to explain it 'cause it's too complicated (laughter) to explain. So I have a daughter, and, and I had two sons, and two living son--a daughter and a living son-- Story_ID: 277288 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you that needs to be addressed? Speaker 2: I think you've been over my life pretty thoroughly. And I never thought I'd sit and talk about myself. I can't even get a book written. I like doing. I'm just not a--my, my life is, is just full of action. Speaker 1: Okay, well, you get a copy of this, you know, so. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But tell me--the, the last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different--how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: There's a song, and I only just use two or three words, if I can help somebody, as I pass along, then my living would not have been in vain. That's the way I'd like to be remembered, and very frankly, I think that's the way I would be remembered. I know people who, oh, they don't wanna see me coming. They don't--but they, they'll say, [HistoryMaker] Nadine [P. Winter], you know, I agree with you on such and such 'cause you have been an asset; you've done--I'd rather be respected than loved. You know, you love snakes and all of that. I wanna, people to say well, you know. And if I'm wrong, say I'm wrong, and we'll go on and have coffee and enjoy. And I may come back and say you know, I thought about it. I think you did win one on me or something of that. I just want to be remembered as a person who tried to help others, who tried to be honest. And all of my public life I've never had anybody to question my integrity. I had when I left Hospitality House [Inc., Washington, D.C.], they must have spent six months going--we didn't have any money to get, begin with--going over the books and over the books and over the books. And I finally said to them, you're not gon' find one penny wrong, maybe out of place, and it may be on a receipt, maybe on a paper bag. But you not gon' find any fraud or anything of the nature that you're looking for, so you're wasting your time. I give rather than receive. I could earn a hundred and fifty dollars an hour going out doing what I'm supposed to be doing, training and motivation, but I chose to take this job. I have a contract, and I have ten workers, and they eat up the (laughter), the bulk of the contract. The contract is not for me. It's not that the money I'm looking for. I've taught my children how to work and earn a living, so I, I just don't feel as though I have not done what I feel Christianity is all about. I don't think you have to be chairman of the deacon board or the loudest voice on the choir for God to hear and see you. I, basically, I guess I'm deeper Christian than most people believe. I'm not a shouting churchgoer, but I'm one who can look back over my life and say that my priorities were with the people, not with the establishment. And that, that's the only thing I can think of. And, and I live it (laughter) every day. I, I get invitations to every kind of gala you can--but if I had a hundred and fifty dollars to go to see something or a movie or something, and if I met somebody on my way who really needed my help, I'd forego the movie in a minute. It's my priorities are not there. I enjoy my life now. If you were, if somebody want to say somebody gon' die happy, I have no money (laughter), but I will die with a smile on my face. I am happy. I'm happy every day I put my feet on the floor. And even the days I say I'm gon' rest in bed, I'm the first thing outta here. (Laughter) So, you know, I'm happy...