 Story_ID: 39413 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Juan Williams, J-U-A-N, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. My middle name's Antonio, A-N-T-O-N-I-O. Speaker 1: Is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: There is. I was born in Panama, Colon, Panama to Roger Williams and Alma Elias Williams in 1954. And in that time, in Panama, children had to have Spanish first names. This was an effort by the man who had been the president of Panama to try to create some ethnic unity, solidarity among the Panamanian people, given that Panama, the home of the Panama Canal was a center of international trade, and you had people there from throughout the world, specifically large populations of Asians and West Indians, but also a large number Americans, especially American military and European investors. So this fellow, Arnulfo Arias, who had been president, at some point decided that not only did he want all property and businesses to be owned by Panamanians, a way to try to push out the European and American financial interests, but he also wanted to take away the citizenship rights of people who were of West Indian descent and of Asian descent. And he also insisted that all newborns have a Spanish first name. And so if not for that, my first name I guess would be John. Speaker 1: So that's a, so this is an expression of Panamanian nationalism on some level to try to--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think, I don't know about the nationalism. I think this was a populous move by a guy who had been a Nazi [National Socialist German Workers' Party] supporter during World War II, a guy who was trying to cement his own popularity with the Panamanian people and do so by vilifying at times, people--you know, black people, Asian people, European and American businessmen. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: April 10, 1954. Speaker 1: All right, and in Colon-- Speaker 2: C-O-L-O-N, Panama. Speaker 1: Okay, Colon, Panama. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist, an author of books, television news commentator, political analyst. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: I'm also a speaker, I should say, and today's date is, I believe June 15th or 16th? I don't know. Speaker 1: Right, the 15th. Speaker 2: Okay, June 15th, 2000--2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're at my home on Whittier Street, Northwest in Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 39414 Speaker 1: Okay, and before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that only require a brief answer that we always ask as a warm up. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My wife makes great curry chicken which is something my mother also made. In fact, my mother gave my wife the recipe, and it remains--if I have a need for comfort food or a special occasion, I would ask for that. My wife makes great ribs. I like the ribs. I don't eat so much red meat any more. I had cancer, prostate cancer and so I've stopped doing that so much. But I used to really like ground meat and spaghetti type things. That's good and, I'm just trying to think what other foods I really like. I really love fruit. I'm a big fruit guy, and, you know, things like plums or watermelon, mangos, huge fan. And then I like oysters. I like fish, but, you know, especially fish that is like a stewed fish where you get lots of the tomato sauce and various vegetables swimming in the, around the fish. That's pretty good for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A lot of the West Indian foods. I, even in the West--even in the vegetables I like, they tend to be things like plantains and Yuccas and a lot of the kind of Caribbean root vegetables, sweet potatoes. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I like 'em all (laughter), but I--I don't know. I like red, I like blue, I like orange. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The outer banks of North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Check it out". Story_ID: 39415 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's [Alma Geraldine Williams] side of the family and your father's side, and then we'll put them together. But we'll ask about their sides separately, so we don't mix 'em up. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Alma Geraldine Williams, and her maiden name was Elias. Speaker 1: That's spelled, E-- Speaker 2: E-L-I-A-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth was 10/14/12 [October 12th, 1912], and she was born in a very small place outside, I believe, of Colon, Panama, and I don't know the exact name. It might have been Empire. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family and how far back can you trace her side and what were they doing? Speaker 2: This is interesting. I'm not--I'll give you what I know. And it's somewhat limited, but her father's name was Jonathan Elias. Now, what we know about him is that he is of Indian descent. If you see a picture of him, he looks Indian. Speaker 1: This is American Indian. Speaker 2: No, no, East Indian, like from India. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he had come to Panama from Trinidad [West Indies], and even today, there's a large Indian population in Trinidad. But he had come to Panama because, again, of the Panama Canal. I don't know what year he arrives in Panama, but he opens a restaurant. There was a separate racially segregated system for people working on the Panama Canal, and they called it the Gold and Silver System. So there was gold for the white people, silver for people of color, and my grandfather, my mother's father, opened a restaurant called the "Silver Diner," and it was for people of color. There was a restaurant for people of color in Colon [Panama]. And so he was a businessman. He was working at this, running this restaurant. And he married an African woman. And her name was Lillian, and from what I know, her maiden name was, I think, Carrington. And so they have--I'm not sure exactly the number of children they have, but I can think of, my mom is the youngest, I believe, and then they had my Aunt Annie. They had Aunt Lalill (ph.). They had Aunt Doris, they had Uncle Johnny. So that's at least five, and I think there was one other sister that died in a car accident, that according to family history, she was holding a baby when the car accident happened. And she died. Her neck snapped, but the baby survived. So that's at least six children that I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you say your grandmother was an African woman, do you mean it in the generic sense or that she was from, fresh from the continent or what? Speaker 2: I don't know the history. All I know is the family lore and the picture. I mean she clearly is a black, tall black woman, whereas, her husband, Jonathan, looks like a tall Indian man. Story_ID: 39416 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what did your mother [Alma Geraldine Williams] say about growing up in--I take it she grew up near Colon [Panama]? Speaker 2: In Colon, Panama. Speaker 1: Right, you know, about going to school and what things were like when she was growing up? Speaker 2: You know, I sense that it was a very tight-knit family. Their father [Jonathan Williams] was quite the stickler for discipline. She worked at the restaurant, and I've heard from my father about how my mother's father disapproved of him, that he was seen as far too much of a, kind of boy around town, who was up to no good and warned my mother about him. And my mother doesn't get married until she's in her thirties. And if you think back to that period, that would be quite old. She was the old maid of all the girls in the family, and she was very much sticking with her dad [Jonathan Williams] and cared for her dad until the end. And, but anyway, she was not seen as, you know, the hip young, happening child. And she spoke Spanish and English fluently, and she describes her mother as dying early in her life so that, I think that, to some extent she becomes an extension of her dad, you know, helping him, taking care of him. And maybe that's why he was so protective of her in terms of boys who would come a courting but in particular, my dad. Story_ID: 39417 Speaker 1: Okay, well, let me go to your father. And can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Roger, R-O-G-E-R, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. The middle name was Leigh, L-E-I-G-H. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His place of--his date of birth was 12-4-02 [December 4th, 1902]. And the place of birth was Jamaica, and I'm trying to remember the name. Is it--I always block on this. It's outside of Kingston [Jamaica]. It'll come to me. Speaker 1: Not Negril or-- Speaker 2: No, no, outside, Negril is outside of Montego Bay [Jamaica]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, this is the, an orange plantation. So they have farms, areas outside of Kingston, and he was born in one of them. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, what do you know about your father's side of the family in terms of what they were doing in his community. And how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: So, on my father's side, his father's name was Charles. And his mother's name was Theresa. And his father goes from Kingston, Jamaica to Panama to work on the Canal [Panama Canal]. And he dies there. You know, they had lots of Malaria and other kind of swamp diseases, mosquitoes, that kind of thing. And the family lore is that he was a timekeeper for the other blacks working on the Canal. And in order to try to keep his dignity or to suggest that he was of a higher status than some of the other manual workers, he would wear a suit coat and a shirt and shoes and socks, and these things would become soaked and he would get sick with pneumonia and other illnesses. And so he dies and when he dies, my father, Roger, and his mother, Theresa, get on a boat and go over to Panama, my grandmother, to help collect death benefits. And she and my father stay there for a little while in Panama. My mom--grandmother then goes back to Jamaica, while my father stays there. And I believe that he went to Panama when he was maybe not even a teenager yet, like around, you know, seven, eight, nine, ten years old. But he stays in Panama for the rest of his life until he leaves Panama, you know, when he's like close to sixty years old. Story_ID: 39418 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when he comes to Brooklyn, New York to be with my mom and his three children. Speaker 1: Okay, when did your--did your father talk about growing up and what it was like when he was growing up in Jamaica and in Panama? Speaker 2: You know, I did an interview with him that I have a copy of. But I don't remember all that he said about Kingston [Kingston], except that, you know, it was a rough place that--the story that he tells me about his family history is that, his family has the look of Mulattos and according to his telling of the tale, his father's father was a slave on one of these orange plantations, and that the, I believe it was a Scottish man who was the owner of the plantation dies. And then this slave then has a relationship with the slave owner's wife, and that's the--those are the parents of his father. And then that child grows up in this plantation area, but then moves to Kingston. And that's where he marries a woman who also looks on the face of her, like a Mulatto. And that would be, you know, Theresa. Story_ID: 39419 Speaker 1: Okay. So what did your father do for a living in Panama? Speaker 2: Well, he was, you know, my father [Roger Williams] and my mother [Alma Williams] both never went beyond the fourth grade. So they're not well educated people, but they were smart people, and in the case of my dad, he was pretty much living off the work that came with being near the Panama Canal. So, you know, he was hustling, doing whatever he could, small jobs, as a, you know, a delivery boy, a handyman. But one of the things that stands out in my mind is that he got involved with boxing at a very early age, putting on boxing matches, participating in boxing matches first and then putting on boxing matches for the white sailors in the Navy, you know, who wanted to see fights. And that led my father to become a boxing trainer. And, in fact, he had one champion during his time as a boxing trainer, and even today, I have pictures of my dad with Joe Louis because Joe Louis came through Panama on some tour, and there he is, you know, with my dad, my dad, a picture of my dad in the ring with a fighter named Finnegan. He had another fighter named Kid Chocolate, did very well with these guys. So he developed a reputation as a pretty good trainer. Speaker 1: So he, your dad trained Kid Chocolate? Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a pretty famous-- Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying. So he was pretty good at this. Of course, it didn't have the riches, the big purses that you see for athletes today. But he was doing pretty well for a guy whose boxers were in the Caribbean and only occasionally got to the United States. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, 'cause he was--yeah, that's, there's some money to be made doing that. Kid Chocolate was fairly successful. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So he stayed in Panama till he was sixty, is that right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I didn't ask you this question--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, actually--let me finish this. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But he didn't make enough money as a boxing trainer to sustain a family. So when he married my mother, and when they had their first child and the first child is born 1944, by that time he's working, sustaining himself by working for a shipping company that does business with the Canal. I think it was called Wilford and McKay. And I think that, by the way, the name of that orange plantation was Mandeville in Jamaica where my father was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he was working for Wilford and McKay, starts out doing, you know, simply notations and the like. Then he takes a mail order, accounting course from a school in London and moves up over time and becomes an accountant for that shipping company. And when he comes to the United States, he comes to work at Wilford and McKay in New York [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 39420 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I didn't ask you this, but is there a story about how your parents met, that they tell? Speaker 2: I think that he came into the restaurant, and then her sister, who was a very important person in my life, my Aunt Annie, was really quite social. And so she, I think, knew my father [Roger Williams] before my mother because there was a famous pianist that was her boyfriend, lover, and eventually her husband, by the name of Ray Cox. And so my father, as kind of this hustler, boxing, horse racing, you know, man-about-town character, knew Ray Cox and knew my Aunt Annie who was a very attractive, outgoing party person. And, but I think that the way my father met my mother was not through Aunt Annie, but because of the restaurant, the Silver Diner, going in there and seeing her working there. And my father had had a child with another woman out of wedlock. So he was quite, I mean that, you could understand why my mother's father would not have thought he was appropriate for her, but they then start seeing each other. Story_ID: 39421 Speaker 1: Okay, when you consider your parents' personalities, and their dispositions, their looks, their talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, I think I look more like my mom [Alma Williams], and, you know, I had sort of a, more of an inter-dependency with my mom because my mom brings three children to Brooklyn, New York [New York] when I'm four years old. So I'm just four. My sister is ten years older than I am, and my brother is seven, almost eight years older than I am. And so I was really the baby. I was almost like a tag-along. And, and I didn't have--and there was no dad. So as I'm, you know, really coming of consciousness, realizing who I am, where I am, you know, you're age four, I've suddenly shifted cultures and country, and I don't have a father. And my mom was starting work for the first time, and she had worked in the restaurant, as I mentioned, and she'd also done some work as a seamstress on the side. Her, one of her sisters, Aunt Lalill, was married to a man who was a very good tailor and owned a tailor shop in Colon [Panama]. And my mother would help to supplement her income by sewing dresses and the like and working with the tailors. And so suddenly, she was--but she was, never really had a job where she was working for anybody other than the family. She comes to this country and she has to get a job, and as I said, she has less than a fourth grade education. And what she does is she ends up working in the garment district in Lower Manhattan [New York, New York] in really what's a sweat shop. And it was awful for her, but one of the enduring images of my childhood, for me, is sitting on the stoop, waiting for my mom to come home because, you know, she was everything in the world to me. I had no dad. And so from, for me, it was a lot of identity, a lot of sense of the world, sense of right and wrong, all that, really attaches to her. Story_ID: 39422 Speaker 1: My father [Roger Williams], until he comes to this country, and he doesn't come for another five years or so, he--you know, it was like a fantasy as to what my father--who my father was, what he represented. I remember that in that time, the late '50s [1950s], there was a famous piano player by the name of Roger Williams, and I would think, hey, wonder if that's my dad, you know, it's just like a kid thing because, obviously, I knew that wasn't my dad if I ever stopped to think about it. But there's the same name. And, you know, so it was much more my mom and my Aunt Annie, and my mom had initially brought the three kids up. And we had stayed with my Aunt Annie for, I guess, I don't know if it was months or a year before we got a separate place because we didn't have any money. But when you ask about who I think I am more like in terms of--I think I look more like my mom. I think she played a bigger role in those formative years. I think the image of my dad is pretty much, has much more to do with the swash buckler, the hustler, the tough guy, the boxing, the boxer, himself, and then the boxing trainer, and the guy who, you know, was a man's man. Story_ID: 39423 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, what's the story of why your mother [Alma Williams], you know, moved to Bed Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, New York] from Panama? Speaker 2: Well, this is, again, back to a little bit of that history of Panama situation. When they tried to take away citizenship from West Indians, and when you have this guy Arnulfo Arias [President of Panama] taking property from people, I think that my father [Roger Williams] sensed that this guy was out of control. And he didn't know which way things were going, so that he begins thinking, you know what, this guy had been supporting the access during World War II. It looks like, you know, he could become a tyrant. And he was looking for a way out, and, of course, the U.S. [United States of America] presence in Panama was so large and a source of great economic activity, that my father was looking for opportunities, and thought that sending his wife and the children to New York would be a real opportunity. In fact, he puts his wife and children on a banana boat, you know, a boat carrying bananas from Panama and the Caribbean up to New York. We were added freight 'cause it was a cheap ticket for the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's 1958. Story_ID: 39424 Speaker 1: So, you arrived in New York in 1958, and so do you have an earliest childhood memory, by any chance? We always ask that question. It could be in Panama, maybe in New York. I don't know. Speaker 2: You know, I don't have any from Panama, so I would guess that it's Brooklyn, and I mentioned to you sitting on the stoop in the afternoon, waiting for my mom [Alma Williams]. I remember that, you know, my Aunt Annie's apartment, and there was a little shop that sold candies down the street. I remember that, that I used to--they sold these kind of hard, fruit-flavored candies that I thought were just terrific. And I remember my Uncle Johnny lived on the floor above us in the same apartment building, and--with his wife, Aunt Lola and their daughter, Lea. So I remember that, and I remember Uncle Johnny was the first person I knew who had a car and, of course, not having a father present, he was a male image for me. And here he was, he had a Ford, I think it was a ford Galaxy or something. And he was very proud of his car. So all these things, I remember it was a big deal when he would take our family on a little car ride or something like that. I remember one of the family jokes was we were once driving along near what is now Newark Airport [Newark, New Jersey]--you know, he took us on a long ride because obviously, Brooklyn [New York, New York] all the way to Newark [New Jersey]. And the plane was coming in, and I guess my mom was screaming, Johnny, Johnny, the plane is--because the plane was coming down, and it was, you know, as you are on the edge of the airport property, the plane is right over the top of the cars. So everybody laughed at her. I, and similarly, I remember just, you know, it's funny, given my love of history, remembered being in that car when Malcolm X was shot and hearing it over the radio. Speaker 1: Okay. You would have been five, I guess or about-- Speaker 2: Yeah, about--no, no, no. Speaker 1: No, no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Malcolm X was shot-- Speaker 1: Oh, no, you would have been much older then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That was '65 [1965], so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: So I was like eleven. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, right, and that same car? Speaker 2: That's what I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think he had the car when we first came. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think the car comes later. Story_ID: 39425 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in, and I think you grew up in Bedford-Stuyvesant [New York, New York], right? Speaker 2: Bed-Stuy, and then Crown Heights [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, well, describe the neighborhood you grew up in, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Gosh, you know, the big street in my--there were two big streets that come to mind. One is Eastern Parkway and it's funny, now, there's such a large immigrant, Caribbean community around Eastern Parkway that on Labor Day, there's a huge Caribbean Day Parade there. The other big street in my mind is Bedford Avenue, and Bedford Avenue stretches from Bed-Stuy and then crosses into Crown Heights when it goes across Eastern Parkway. So that's the big intersection. And the highlights of that community for me are things like, I remember being in the--if you go down--my Aunt Annie lived on St. John Street, and I'm forgetting the name of a street that had lots of small shops. But I remember on Saturdays and Saturdays I think were really special to me because I would have my mom, my brother and sister around, we'd be given chores, you know, and going to the grocery store or going to the markets. And I remember being with my mom, going in, especially in the meat market, you know, and you're just kind of at knee-high level and watching all these people and move around. But to me, that was the best of times because I had my mom and my sister and everybody was around me. And for the most part, because my sister and brother were so much older, they didn't have time for me. They were trying to make connections in this new world for themselves. They're young people who've come from one set of schools to a new set of schools. They've got new friends, and they're interested in boys and girls and all that, and, you know, I'm just this little added burden. So, but for me, that day was a very special day, to be able to go shopping with everybody and to be with everybody that day. So that was, I remember that street. I, that might have been North, North Strong (ph.) Avenue. It might be North Strong. And the other thing I remember about that neighborhood as I get older is that, well, two things. Sunday was church, and the church that we went to was St. Marks Episcopal Church, and they were such a strong and supportive community for these, you know, for us as an immigrant family, very much about helping us, I think especially helpful to my sister and my brother. My sister actually then marries a boy who was in that church, and my brother was an acolyte in the church. And then I was an acolyte in the church. And, you know, Friday night-type social activities as well as Sunday church services, we would be there. Story_ID: 39426 Speaker 1: The other thing I remember--and so that's farther down in Crown Heights [New York, New York]. But in the other direction, going up Eastern Parkway was the Brooklyn Botanical Gardens and the Brooklyn Public Library. And the Brooklyn Public Library, you know, on Sunday afternoons, I would just walk over, walk down Eastern Parkway and go to the public library. And that was a big deal for me, and started in the children's section. I remember that the librarians were just terrific. In fact, I was honored at that library several years ago. I don't remember how many years ago now, but as a Brooklyn [New York, New York] author. And I said to them at the time, you know, the librarians in that children's section were like, you know, angels for me, because they introduced me to everything from "Pippi Longstocking" to "Invisible Man." And, you know, I just found it a real refuge in a very confusing and at time, threatening neighborhood 'cause it was a, you know, it's a heavily populated, and a lot of poor people and a lot of crazy things going on, but that was a very quiet, wonderful place. And similarly, I became fascinated with the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. I mean the first job I would ever have later when we moved over to Crown Heights, the first job I ever had, summer job I ever had, was working as a junior gardener at the Brooklyn Botanical Garden. So, and then Prospect Park is not far from there as well. And so it was, it had a zoo. It had a merry-go-round. I played, you know, baseball in the parade grounds which are just across from Prospect Park [Brooklyn, New York, New York]. I went to elementary school right next to that area, Public School 241 [Public School 241 Emma L. Johnston]. My sister graduated as the Valedictorian of Prospect Heights High School. So that whole area was very significant in my youth. Story_ID: 39427 Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you all have a--you lived in an apartment, I would imagine, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, never had a house, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and now, how big was the-- Speaker 2: I don't know which apartment you're referring to. When we first came to Brooklyn [New York, New York], we were with my Aunt Annie in what is a two-bedroom apartment on St. Johns. And then I think it just, my mom [Alma Wiliams]--Aunt Annie could be, you know, a stickler, and I think she, you know, how sisters can be, you know, why'd you leave this here? And I think eventually, we were able to get out, and we got a, I think a one-bedroom on Bedford Avenue. And, you know, for three--it was for four people 'cause it's my mom and the three kids and my brother and I would sleep in, out in the, what was like the living room, and then my mom and my sister would have the bedroom. And then so that's, and then when we really got a break was we then moved to, further down Bedford Avenue. I think it was 1796 or something like that. I don't remember the exact address, maybe 1706. And that was Bedford and President, and that was a two-bedroom apartment. And that's where we were living when my father [Roger Williams] came. And so my brother and I shared a room, and then there was the room that my sister and mom shared, and then my sister had gone off to college. And then that was, when my dad came, that was where he and my mom had as their room. And then, and then another break came when we qualified for subsidized housing, and we moved into what was then a relatively new apartment complex called Ebbets Field [Ebbets Field Apartments], which is closer to Empire Boulevard and Bedford. So we keep moving down Bedford Avenue sort of, and that was a three-bedroom apartment on the 22nd floor, Apartment 22A-- Speaker 1: Now,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: At forty--47 McKeever Place, I just wanted to finish that thought. And Ebbets Field is built on the old baseball field where the old Brooklyn Dodgers played. Speaker 1: That's what I was gonna ask (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So we got it. Story_ID: 39428 Speaker 1: So, now, you started school at PS-241 [Public School 241 Emma L. Johnston, Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: Right, well, I didn't start school there. I went first to--this was when my Aunt Annie who worked at Chase Manhattan Bank, I believe, as an accountant or something--I don't know what she did exactly. But she worked there, and she had heard about some place called Junior Academy [Brooklyn Junior Academy, Brooklyn, New York] 'cause there was nobody to watch me as a little boy 'cause my mom had to go off and do some kind of work, and she was working in the Garment District [Manhattan, New York, New York] as I mentioned earlier. And Aunt Annie went to work, and so at first they left me with an old lady upstairs in my Aunt Annie's apartment building. But I couldn't stand the old lady. I just thought this, she smells like old people. There's nothing to do. It was boring. I was really upset. And I, my mom would come home, and I would just be in tears. And so eventually, they got me into a kindergarten program. It might have been a prekindergarten or a kindergarten--I don't remember exactly, at a school called Junior Academy. And this was for black parents. So almost all black kids, I think it was all black kids. And, but the idea was to help--it was sort of quasi-daycare, quasi-pre-K or kindergarten type education. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there until-- Speaker 2: Until I went to 241. I don't remember if I went to--I think I went to 241 as a first grader. Speaker 1: Okay, so this would be 1960, yeah. Speaker 2: I'm five years old in '59 [1960], six years old in '60 [1960], yeah. Story_ID: 39429 Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So 1960, so did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: I loved school. I don't remember that I had a favorite subject. I mean, it's funny, later when I'm in college or after college, I thought to myself, why didn't I major in political science or history 'cause that's really what I'm, what I've written, what I've studied and what I'm fascinated with. I also wondered why I didn't take Spanish. I, you know, took French for most of elementary and junior and high school. It would have made sense to take Spanish. But anyway, no, I don't remember that there was any one specific subject. I think I was always very good, always got great grades in what was then called Social Studies, but I believe should be called History and English. So that's a real good marker for what I do now. Story_ID: 39430 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, were there any special teachers or mentors in grade school? Speaker 2: You know, I remember some of the teachers. For some reason, the names that stand out are like, I believe I had a third-grade teacher named Ms. Ruth. I don't remember any others specifically. I remember that in seventh grade, there was a Ms. Feinberg who was an English teacher. I remember our typing teacher, and I guess I type a lot given what I do for a living. So it's pretty important. He was one of the few black, male teachers that I had, and he was a typing teacher. I think he was like a gay, black man, and so he was a real oddity, but he was a stickler for proper form, speed, and he just challenged us all the time. So he was a terrific teacher. I can't think of any others that stand out in particular in that way. Story_ID: 39431 Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you play--I know you like baseball, so you're a big--did you play little league baseball at all? Speaker 2: A little bit but not--now, basically, in Brooklyn [New York, New York], the big deal was one, stick ball, and I definitely played a lot of that. And then kind of sandlot, you know, like just on the streets. You know, like we would find a cinder-covered lot or a field or over in Prospect Park a lot of days playing baseball, especially in the summer. But the big sport was basketball. And so, you know, at the school, like I went to 241 [Public School 241 Emma L. Johnston], and we certainly played stick ball in the yard there. And subsequently, over by Lefferts Junior High School on Empire Boulevard where I went to junior high school. But I would say the biggest preoccupation sports wise was basketball, and I played basketball all the time. Speaker 1: Okay, so you just--now, I believe--well, I don't--who were some of the street ballplayers in those days? Were there legends in Brooklyn? Speaker 2: I don't remember any as legends. I remember having friends who were very good ball players. I remember, you know, one of the things about me was, so I was a skinny kid and I don't think I was particularly a good jumper. But I was a very good guard, and I was a very good shooter, and so a lot of tough guys in my neighborhood, people--and my mother didn't want me associating with them and always worried, especially about drugs and crime being done by these guys. You know, my mother checking my arms for needle tracks and the like because I, these are the people that I hung out with. But generally, the reason that I was popular with that crowd was there were a lot of people who were interested in basketball and in betting on basketball and the like. And I was a pretty good basketball player, even though I was skinny and shorter than a lot of these guys, but I could play ball. And so I was in demand as a guard on these teams and as a shooter on these teams. So even though these are guys who did drink a lot and did do drugs, they weren't pushing drugs or alcohol on me. But my mother, brother and others always thought, well, why are you with those people? But, in fact, those people were pretty protective of me, and in a tough neighborhood, often looked out for me 'cause (laughter), I had value to them when it came time to run and those games were being run for money. So. Story_ID: 39432 Speaker 1: So the observers, the people who were watching the games were beating on the games? Speaker 2: Yeah, these were money games. Speaker 1: Okay, did the players get paid? Speaker 2: Not paid, but they had bets on games too. This was, this was pretty (laughter), this, I mean it's an odd thing to say, but I mean, you know, it wasn't, you know, I have a very good friend, my best childhood friend. And I think he was even a better ballplayer than I, 'cause I think he, I remember he could jump much higher than I could jump. But the difference was that he, I don't think had the court sense about all the other people. And I didn't need to shoot. I'm glad to feed people, and I'm, you know, I could change my game to fit. And I think that's what they were looking for, and so--because on a street game, you never know who's on your side. So, you know, they were all--somehow this, as a skinny, little kid, I was getting picked early because we would win. Speaker 1: Okay, so you all played pick up basically with--did you ever play in a league or anything? Speaker 2: Sure, I played on my--and the same thing, I got onto my junior high school team, and nobody would ever have guessed that I would be on that team because everybody else was huge, and, you know, had a beard (laughter) and stuff, and I don't think I had anything on my face, you know. But, again, it was, you know, he can handle a ball and he can, I mean I was--I remember being embarrassed to be in shorts, my legs were so skinny. And these other guys just, are, you know, they look like men. And as I said, I think there were people who were better ball players. They just weren't better team players. Story_ID: 39433 Speaker 1: What other cultural things were you interested in, you know, you did sports and were there cultural activities, and I know you said you liked the Botanical Gardens [Brooklyn Botanical Gardens] and the library [Brooklyn Public Library]. Speaker 2: You know, I love music, but I don't make music. I never have had any musical training. No, for me, it was books. I remember also one summer I worked--and this came out of something that happened during junior high school, one of my shop classes was ceramics. And I was really fascinated by it, loved it, loved making the ashtrays, the cups, the bowls, and then the teacher liked my work and knew somebody who was running a ceramics shop in Brooklyn. And so I worked there one summer. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you involved in Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or anything of that-- Speaker 2: Cub Scouts, I went to Cub Scouts, never went to Boy Scouts. Speaker 1: Did the Episcopal church sponsor events that, for youth? Speaker 2: I don't remember that so much for me. As I say, I remember there was more social stuff for my sister and brother, and I say that's how my sister met her first husband. But I think I might have been too young. I think they were teenagers. By the time I was a teenager, I was pretty much gone. Story_ID: 39434 Speaker 1: Okay, you got sort of a big break as a high school freshman, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, in ninth grade, when I finished ninth grade, I had the chance to go off to one of the specialty high schools in New York, but also because of the fears my sister and brother had about me hanging out with the wrong crowd and all, they had both gone off to Quaker colleges, and they knew about the Quaker prep school network, and so they said to my mom that, you know, it'd be good to get him out of here and arranged for me to visit some of these schools. And then I got a scholarship from one of the schools, Oakwood Friends School in Poughkeepsie, New York. Speaker 1: And so that meant that you'd have to go and live on, at campus? Speaker 2: I did. And so I believe I was fourteen years old when I left home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I wasn't ready for, you know, church, teenage socials quite yet. If I had stayed there, maybe that would have happened, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, how did you feel about leaving Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, New York, New York] and going to-- Speaker 2: Well, I was leaving Crown Heights [New York, New York] at that point. Speaker 1: Crown Heights, okay. Speaker 2: I think I--I don't remember. I mean I guess I was anxious about it. I don't remember though. To me, it was like , you know, my brother and sister had gone away to college. And I always joke with people that, you know, I looked like a dandelion because I remember I, when I left Brooklyn for Oakwood, I had on like purple sneakers. I had a big Afro, and I'm skinny as all get out. And, you know, so I just looked like a dandelion, this skinny thing with this big puffy head. And, you know, clearly, never been in an environment like that before. I'd gone to--the thing about the schools I had gone to in Brooklyn, where they were integrated, a lot of Jewish people. Even where my church was located, St. Marks, was surrounded by Orthodox Jews. So I was accustomed to dealing with whites, but now I was going from a predominantly black and Jewish community to one filled with WASPs [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant]. And maybe not WASPs. I'm sure there were some Irish and Italians, and everybody was overwhelmingly white in Poughkeepsie, New York and at this prep school. And I'd never been in that kind of environment before. Story_ID: 39435 Speaker 1: How many other black students did--now, this is an all-male school, right? Speaker 2: No, it was coed. Speaker 1: It's not. Okay, all right. So my notes are wrong. But, okay, so it was coeducational. About how many students all together do you think? Speaker 2: I think Oakwood had maybe 300 people. Speaker 1: Okay, small, a very small school. And out of that 300, how many black students? Speaker 2: I would guess--you know, I don't know the exact number, but I would guess in the neighborhood of maybe fifteen. Speaker 1: Okay, and so did you feel comfortable there? Did you-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I fit in. I eventually, I became the editor of the paper. I became the school president. I became the--I was a senior class president, school president. So I definitely--and I was captain of the basketball team. I was captain of the cross country team, captain of the baseball team. Speaker 1: Okay, so you took a leadership role in all of these areas-- Speaker 2: You know, it's funny because I don't think of myself in that way, but that's true. Story_ID: 39436 Speaker 1: Okay, and this is 1969. I didn't ask you about--I always ask people about this because they usually can remember it. But do you remember what you were doing when you heard about the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '68 [1968]. It's the year before. Speaker 2: I think, this is just before I would go to prep school then, and I think I'm still in Brooklyn [New York, New York], and I think I was watching TV because I think that it comes--I hear about it over the TV. And whereas hearing about Malcolm X's assassination sticks out in my mind, this one doesn't stick out in that way, and I think it was--the difference was being in the car, hearing it on the radio, and I don't know if we were in Manhattan [New York, New York] in the car or where we were in the car. But I remember everybody in the car being shaken or like, oh, my God, you know, what happened? With the Dr. King thing, it was more like, the experience of watching TV and news reports and then reports, subsequent reports of rioting and things like that. Speaker 1: Was there any rioting in the area that you lived in? Speaker 2: Not that I recall, but I, I mean, you know, it was such an interesting area that I'm living in when I'm living at Ebbets Field [Ebbets Field Apartments, Brooklyn, New York] and going, you know, the, the big kind of commercial street. There was a street called Franklin Avenue that led back towards Eastern Parkway. That's where the subway was that we caught. There was another subway over to the Empire Boulevard side, but most often, we would for some reason walk up, I guess, to--the "D" train is over by Empire Boulevard. I can't remember the name of the train we were catching off Franklin Avenue, but in that area, the reason I mention it's so interesting is, I wrote a book about black religion in the United States, the History of Black Religion, and so much of it comes from that walk in terms of my interest in black religion because, you know, you had the Baptist churches, you had the Catholic churches. You had the Black Muslims, you know, selling bean pie and "Muhammad Speaks" on the street. You had all kinds of representations, Evangelicals in storefronts and the like, Pentecostals, just a range of expression there. And, but in particular, I remember the Black Panthers also being--the Black Muslims and the Black Panthers being present. And the kind of things that would be said to me was, you know, why aren't you joining us, why aren't you one of us? Remember, I'm a little boy. I'm not even really, as I say, I'm fourteen going on fifteen when I leave to go to prep school. So all this is happening before then. And, but I don't remember that riots devastated that area. I don't remember that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were eleven years old when Malcolm X was killed. Now, your father had--was there by that time, right? He was in, was with your family? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 39437 Speaker 1: And, now, first of all, how did that affect your life, having your father [Roger Williams] back in--I mean in New York [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I don't know how to answer that question. I mean, you know, so he's born 1902, and by the time he comes to Brooklyn [New York, New York], he's more than sixty years old. So he's going through an amazing experience. I mean I think of it now from my own perspective as I'm sitting here talking to you, I'm fifty-eight years old. So he's actually older than I am. And he was fifty-two when I was born. So I just can't imagine the sacrifice my mom made. She was in her forties when she came to this country. So she was, you know, like forty-five, forty-six or something. He comes and he's like sixty, sixty-one or something, I think. And--maybe sixty-two, and so he's having to start a new job in a new country, get used to things like not only the subway, and winter, but establish new relationships, new friendships, renew old relationships and now deal with having a family and living in this small apartment in this alien environment, Brooklyn, New York, New York City. So it wasn't like he was hanging out with me. But having fantasized about him and the image of a strong male figure, I think it meant the world to me, but I just--I don't know what it, you know, I don't know exactly how to describe it, I mean, but it, I think it was very important. But clearly, my mother [Alma Williams] was the dominant player in my little world. Story_ID: 39438 Speaker 1: All right, yeah, you mentioned the family's reaction to the murder of Malcolm X. Did your family discuss these political issues at home and did they have an affinity for the message of Malcolm X? Speaker 2: They definitely did, and I think Malcolm X was seen as radical by people in my family. And that, in large part, was shaped, I think, by the news coverage in the big papers of Malcolm X. But my uncle, Uncle Johnny's wife, Leola, worked at the "Amsterdam News." Uncle Johnny, by the way, worked in the print shop at "The New York Times." So these are people who were quite interested in the news, and, you know, my mom, as a treat for me, would bring me newspapers off the subway. Remember, you know, she's got no money, but, you know, she's working in a sweat shop in lower Manhattan, but the subway on the way back in the evenings, people would leave the newspaper. Businessmen would leave newspapers, not only from New York City [New York], from New Jersey and on all that. And I was a New York Mets fan 'cause the New York Mets were formed I think in 1960, and for us, this was significant because, especially for my Aunt Annie, who had been in Brooklyn [New York, New York] earlier, she had been a Brooklyn Dodger fan, and Jackie Robinson and all that represented in terms of breakthrough for black people in American society, was huge for her. And so I then became a Jackie Robinson, New York Mets fan. And so here's my mom, and she'd bring me all these newspapers. And I started reading the sports sections. But then you start reading the rest of the paper as well. But literally, my mom would bring me several newspapers. New York City in those days had like seven newspapers. So you could get the "Journal American," "The Herald," "The New York Post," as well as "The New York Daily News," "The New York Times," and, of course, as I mentioned, you know, my aunt was working at the "Amsterdam News." I'm seeing all these papers. Story_ID: 39439 Speaker 1: So I understand who Malcolm X is, and they know who Malcolm X--oh, no, and there's discussions. You know, one of the great things about my family was that we would eat together, and especially on Sundays. Sunday dinner was a big deal. I recall it in particular at 47 McKeever Place because it was, you know, on the twenty second floor, and high over Brooklyn, and you'd have the windows open. You could hear the street sounds, and you could smell people cooking throughout the building and all kinds of things and noise from kids playing below and the Mr. Softee truck with the chimes and all that. And, you know, it just, it was life. And then at the dinner table would be these intense, loud, political conversations focused on black politics of the day. That was what it was about. And so Malcolm X was a frequent topic at that dinner table conversation. And there's, you know, it's so different than the life I lead now because, you know, we had cousins from the other aunts who lived here, and the cousins, their children would be coming in and out. And the numbers guy would be coming in and out, guys who would bring trunks of clothes that I think were stolen off of ships and railroad cars. Everybody's coming in and out of this place. And my mind jumps to this thought that I have a cousin, now dead, named Syril (ph.), and once I started doing work in TV, Surreal says to me one day when he was visiting me or I was visiting him--I don't know. But he said to me, I saw you on TV talking politics. He says I never knew you had anything to say because I, I mean I was young. And the people who were shouting and cursing at each other across--I mean seriously. This was like a loud, rank, call-you-out type situation at the Sunday dinner table. They were all older people, and I was like the kid. But, boy, there was no shortage of opinions and ideas about Civil Rights, American politics, Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the whole thing. Speaker 2: What did they think about Malcolm? Speaker 1: Oh, as I say, given the portrayal in the papers, the whole idea was he was a loud-mouth radical, militant, you know, famous for sayings like, you know, "chickens come home to roost," after the Kennedy assassination, particularly. I remember that one as being, you know--because John F. Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] was revered in the family, much like Dr. King was revered in the family. So, but the idea was, especially among the younger cohort that Malcolm X was the real deal, that white people would respond to Malcolm X, that, you know, Dr. King can get you so far. But if people, especially in New York City, and especially in relationship to the cops in New York City in getting and fair treatment in New York City, that Malcolm X in Harlem [New York, New York] really had become a guiding light. And what's funny to me, again, is that I later wrote a book about Thurgood Marshall. And I don't think I ever heard much about Thurgood Marshall at that dinner table. Story_ID: 39440 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did they think about Dr. King? Did you have strong opinions about him? Speaker 2: I don't think, I don't know what you mean by strong opinions, but he was another constant topic of conversation, a regular visitor, if you will, to this wild, gathering. And the idea was that he was almost saintly. And then there were people, it's--you know, I think it was generational differences. The question about effectiveness was more among the young people who were more likely to be the Malcolm X fans, and while the older folks were much more about, I think turned off by the Nation of Islam and the idea of the criminal involvement and all that kind of stuff, turned on, the older--what turned on the younger folks about his more kind of out outcast, outlier, separatist views, turned off the older folks. Speaker 1: Okay, were any of the members of your family--your family members of any political organizations or Civil Rights organizations? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: Okay, no NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or anything like that? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Story_ID: 39441 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Now, you mentioned going to the library [Brooklyn Public Library, New York, New York]. Did you ever go to any of the black bookstores growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. But, you know, the black bookstores were downtown Brooklyn. They weren't in our neighborhood. And I don't know that they were defined as black bookstores, by the way. It was more like it would be like incense and black memorabilia posters and things. And then you'd also have black books, yeah, that kind of thing. I don't remember the, I don't remember, per se, that it advertised itself as a "black bookstore." Like I remember, it was a big deal when--I'm trying to think of the name of the filmmaker, but it was the first time that I, you know, other than Sidney Poitier, and I saw Sidney Poitier, in, I think it was "Lilies of the Field" or something at a movie theater on Bedford Avenue. And that was a big deal 'cause it was a black star. But I'm trying to think of the name of the man who made this movie, and he and his son are both film producers. Speaker 1: Melvin Van Peebles. Speaker 2: Exactly. When Melvin Van Peebles made a movie, and I'm trying to think, he was some kind of outlaw-- Speaker 1: Oh, "Sweet, Sweetback". Speaker 2: "Sweet, Sweetback", man, that was huge, and that was downtown Brooklyn. And that was a real cultural breakthrough, and black people were like, you know, there's a movie about black guy as a hero, and an outlaw, and he's going to get it, you know, and all this. And the reason that I think of it in this connection was downtown Brooklyn was where these kind of black culture, black stories was, and, you know, that's where you could get "Muhammad Speaks" or that's where you would see--I think that's the first time I ever saw a copy, not just of the "Amsterdam News," but of the "Pittsburgh Courier," you know. That, so, it was kind of like just black things of black sensibility in these stores, not identified as a black bookstore. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, at any rate so you-- Speaker 2: Posters of Marcus Garvey and stuff like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was gonna ask you at one point if your parents were or anybody in your family was a Garveyite, you know, coming from Panama. Speaker 2: Panama, Jamaica, you know, I don't know. Speaker 1: I know a lot of the West Indians--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: A lot, lot of it. Speaker 1: --have a Garveyite heritage, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, again, I don't know. Story_ID: 39442 Speaker 1: Okay, so here you are. You're making good grades in school. You're, you get a chance to go--now, did you have to take a test to go to Oakwood Friends School [Poughkeepsie, New York]? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, but you did well there, according to what you're saying? Speaker 2: I guess. I don't think I was Valedictorian. And I didn't get into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and they had suggested I apply there, but I think I did well enough. I think if my brother hadn't gone to Haverford [Haverford College, Haverford, Pennsylvania], I'm don't--I'm not sure I would have gotten into Haverford, but my brother had done well at Haverford--or well enough, and the man who had admitted him was still the admissions director, and I think he--and the fact that I had gone to a Quaker prep school and all that, that's why they admitted me there. Story_ID: 39443 Speaker 1: So I would think that, just listening to your story, that your brother and your sister would have been really important in your development (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Tremendously, I mean, you know, part of the story that we didn't touch on was I told you about, I think, the political environment that prompted my father [Roger Williams] to say to my mother [Alma Williams], you know, it's important to get out of here and that they would risk their marriage and relationship because they were separated for those years. And then my mother, gosh, you know, never had a real job, and she makes this effort. But a lot of it also was about the education, that neither of them had more than a fourth grade education. And my father, in particular, was just in love with my sister, his first child, and wanted for her an American education. So when she is fourteen and ready for high school, we come in time for her to start school in September in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. And she graduates as the Valedictorian from Prospect Heights High School. And she goes on to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania], and then goes on to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So she's a really bright girl and really driven, and that was for my father, what he wanted. He wanted an education for her. So my brother, Swarthmore is a Quaker school. My brother goes off to college, and again, because of her success at Swarthmore, she knows about Haverford, which is like a brother school to Swarthmore, and was all male. And he applies and get into Haverford. He had gone to Erasmus Hall, public school in Brooklyn. And so I'm coming up, and then they're concerned for me. They've gone out into the larger world. They've gone, they've seen more of the United States. I'm still a kid in Brooklyn. I'm growing up in Brooklyn. I don't speak Spanish. I only speak English, and I'm hanging out with people they don't like and think are dangerous and drug use and alcoholics, and criminals. But the fact that they knew of the world through their academic success is then what they offer me as a role model, as an example that I could go off to these schools, and that I could succeed. And I think without their example, I wouldn't have had any idea that that was a possibility. I think my horizons would have been circumscribed. I think, you know, even today when I meet kids, I'm surprised at how many in my church here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], when you talk to 'em about going away to school, it's like, what's that about? They don't know anybody who's gone away to school and hasn't gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or Bowie State [Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] or the local community college. To go away to them seems like threatening or risky, and for me, it was, oh, that's what my brother and sister did. I should go away to school, even though my parents had, didn't have high school or college. I had, my brother and sister were the role models. Story_ID: 39444 Speaker 1: Now, who were your mentors and role models at Haverford [Haverford College, Haverford, Pennsylvania], if you had any there? Speaker 2: I had a couple. The first one that comes to mind is a man named Greg Kannerstein, and Greg was, later Greg becomes the dean of the college. And he's also a mentor to my son who went to the same school, my youngest child. Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell his name? Speaker 2: K-A-N-N-E-R-S-T-E-I-N, first name, Greg. Speaker 1: Kannerstein? Speaker 2: Kannerstein. Speaker 1: Kannerstein, okay. Speaker 2: And Greg was a baseball guy, and he had gone to Haverford, and he just did a bunch of jobs around there after graduating, and, you know, he just, he was just terrific for me, just somebody who was like a father figure almost, in that environment because I wasn't, I don't think I was, could have made the baseball team there. I wasn't that good. I was good enough, but I mean, you know, they really are working at it, and I was much more interested in basketball at that point and also working at the newspaper. But nonetheless, he and I developed a real friendship, and he was someone I could rely on for counsel and guidance and a mentor. Then in terms of academics, there was an English teacher named Jim Ransom who was just a tremendous support for me, especially with regard to writing. And then at the "Philadelphia Evening Bulletin" in Philadelphia, which is where I got--I got an internship after my freshmen year at Haverford. Kannerstein had suggested I apply for this internship, and I got the internship. And he knew people at the "Bulletin" and all the like, because he'd been involved with newspapers somehow. I don't, I'm not sure exactly how. Anyway, I got that internship, and there was a man there who was the managing editor by the name of Sam Boyle, and he initially thought I shouldn't even be there. I was too young. I hadn't put my picture and my age on the application. It was supposed to be for people who were juniors, seniors and graduates students. And here I was coming in after my freshman year. And so he said, I remember he said to me, this is not a babysitting operation and all this. And I had--and sent me home, like it was over. And I had come back and spoke to Greg 'cause I had made arrangements to live at Haverford that summer while I was working. And then it was Greg and other people at Haverford who called down and got Sam Boyle to change his mind and say he can come for two weeks, but we're not having him here for the whole summer. But at the end of the two weeks, they never said anything, and I just kept coming, and I worked there the whole summer, and not only that, by the end of the summer, Sam Boyle was the one who said to me, do you wanna work here two days a week during the school year? So he really turned around, and he became a big friend. And I always remember that Sam Boyle, the next summer asked me if I wanted to live with his family. And I was like, you know, I don't think I can do that. And I always thought, I wonder if I'm offending him by saying, I don't wanna live with your family, you know. But, no, I mean, but Sam Boyle then became a real--and, you know, Sam Boyle had this kind of look, I think if you ever met him, you would never guess that he would be so supportive of me 'cause he looked like a Marine. He had a crew cut. He always--his fingers were literally stained from cigarettes. He smoked cigarettes one after the other. And he was just a hard-boiled, old Irish guy, and slim and hard like a Marine. So you wouldn't think, oh, he's a big mentor to this young black kid. But he was. Story_ID: 39445 Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you remember the first thing that you wrote that you thought was good? Speaker 2: Well, there're all kinds of different standards for "good," but I remember the first thing I wrote that got on the front page, and it was in a big way. There was a Mummer's Day parade. I--there probably still is in Philadelphia. And for some reason, I did a piece about this Mummer's Day parade, and on the--in those days, the only edition of the paper that came out in color was the front page of the Sunday paper, and, you know, the Mummers get dressed up in these fabulous costumes and the like, so they created this fabulous photo of the Mummers, you know. And I don't know what time of year it was, but I did this story, and it ended up as the cover of the Sunday paper with the big color picture. And I thought, "Wow," 'cause you know, you can--in those days, I used to come through 30th Street station, and I remember coming through 30th Street station on a Saturday, and there were, you know, these stacks of "Evening Bulletins," the Sunday Bulletin with this color picture, like a line down the middle of all the stacks, and that was my story. Speaker 1: Had you--when did you start writing as a, you know, just a--and become interested in being a writer? Speaker 2: Oh, I think I was interested in being a writer from the time I was a little kid, and taken with newspapers. Again, my mom bringing the newspapers, going to the library. And I remember writing an essay that won a contest, bonds. But it was an essay contest on the fire department. This was when I was at 241 [Public School 241 Emma L. Johnston], I think. And I remember that the teacher and the principal were at the front of the room, and I heard my name called. And I thought, oh, my gosh, what's going on? And then the principal asked me to come outside in the hallway and said, "You won the citywide essay contest on the fire department," and I was like, are you--you know, what are you talking about? I didn't even remember doing it. And, you know, I think it was like a one-page thing that some, that you did in third or fourth grade or something. And I remember, you know, telling my mom [Alma Williams], with great pride that I had won this savings bond. I guess it was for seventy five bucks or fifty bucks or something. And, you know, she was a pretty hard driver, and never satisfied, but she was very proud of that. And then I remember in junior high school, I was on the newspaper, and then in high school, I was the editor of the high school paper. I think I was editor of the junior high school paper. But anyway, I was editor for sure of the high school paper. And then, as I say, by the summer after my freshman year in college, I was writing for the big city paper in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And while I was at Oakwood Friends [Oakwood Friends Prep School, Poughkeepsie, New York], I even did some articles that ended up in the Poughkeepsie [New York] paper because they weren't covering black people. And I would cover things like NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meetings or black community things, and, you know, what, it got a lot of attention because no one had ever seen this before. Story_ID: 39446 Speaker 1: Okay, so you would--did you just take the initiative yourself for writing (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I didn't get that. Speaker 1: Write the articles and just--did you just take the initiative and write the articles and then deliver them to the papers or did they ask you to write them or-- Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember the details about how it came about, but as I say, I was the editor of the school paper. And I don't know--if that's how I met somebody who was a reporter at the paper, and then they said to me, you know, hey, you should--you know, we don't have anybody who covers--if you want it and something's happening. I think that was--I don't think there was any big event or something that happened. I think it was just covering sort of community and organizational meetings in black Poughkeepsie [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, so by the time you were a senior on the verge of graduation-- Speaker 2: From-- Speaker 1: From high school. Speaker 2: Oh, high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, did you know what you were gonna do with your life? Did you have a sense of it at that time? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean going back to Brooklyn [New York], I always knew I always wanted to be a newspaper writer, and I think, you know, it was like too much of a dream to think I would write books, that I would have a book in the Brooklyn Public Library. But, you know, the newspapers, I just thought--you know, you think about the sports writers that I was reading back then. I was reading sports writers for all the different papers that my mom would bring me. And I always thought, boy, I'd love to be one of these writers, you know. And that was my window on the world. That's how I knew the world, was through the newspapers. And the way that young people today, I think, learn about the world through TV or the Internet, for me, it was learning about an experience in the world, and seeing the world defined by people who were writers for newspapers. And that's what I wanted to do. I wanted to be a newspaper writer. So that's from the time I was a little boy. And I think that's what led me then to work for the junior high school paper, the high school paper, all that. I wanted to be a newspaper writer. The question, the only question was, you know, outside of the "Amsterdam News," I never saw any black writers. There were no black sports writers. There was one black news writer, I think, at the "New York Post." And that was it. And then, you know, like you would occasionally see--I'm trying to think of his name. He recently died. It was a black man who was on ABC in New York who had like a Sunday community affairs program, but, you know, other than that, you just wouldn't see black people in the news business as writers or TV personalities. That was very unusual. Story_ID: 39447 Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: So the question in my mind was, you know, is that possible? But that's what I wanted to do from the time I was a little kid. Speaker 1: Is that Carl Rowan you're talking about? Speaker 2: No. No, no, it'll come to me. It might have been Gil Noble. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, "Like It Is." Speaker 2: "Like It Is," Gil Noble, and then-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he passed away. Speaker 2: He just recently passed away, so it's Gil Noble, and then later on PBS was Brown-- Speaker 1: Tony Brown. Speaker 2: --Tony Brown. But, again, that's the exception, you know. Later when I'm in high school and college, like I would see more black people, especially after the riots, see more black reporters and things like that. But until--you know, for most of my growing up period, there--you didn't see black reporters. Speaker 1: Right. And they started to emerge after the riots. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's when they started to emerge, Tony Brown, Gil Noble, and the shows-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Gil Noble might have been a little before. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Before-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 39448 Speaker 1: Okay. So, so Haverford College [Haverford College], so is your--your brother had graduated. He's ten years ahead of you, right? Speaker 2: Eight. Speaker 1: Eight years, okay. So, he's not there, but you're at Haverford, and you'd been to the campus before? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I must have when he graduated. I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, well, how was Haverford College? Speaker 2: It was like 700 men. I think--now, they had gone through an interesting phase where after Dr. King's [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination, they had made a big effort to bring in more people of color. That had not worked out all that well. And there had been student demonstrations and strikes, and high drop-out rate of the black men. And by the time my class comes, you know, we--I start in '72 [1972], I believe there were just six of us in that class. So they went from having more like classes of, you know, thirty and forty after the '68 [1968] assassination riots and now they're down to a class of six because I think they had the sense that this isn't working as well. And what they're doing is they've got people like me coming out of a prep school, and they had a bunch of African princes and (laughter) and wealthy people. And, I mean, it was wild, you know. I think they decided that they needed people who were, had been better trained to handle the Haverford level of academics, but also better trained to handle the Haverford social life and to feel comfortable in that environment. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. You say some African princes? From what countries? Do you remember? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember what countries, but they were from--they were African princes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In fact, later when I wrote the "Thurgood Marshall" biography, Marshall had gone to Lincoln and he had been there with Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah], and I think one of the young people was related to Nkrumah. Story_ID: 39449 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now were there any--you ended up graduating with a degree in philosophy, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But did you start off majoring in journalism or-- Speaker 2: There was no journalism department. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I don't remember--I think I was at first thinking, maybe I'll do medicine but I had no idea. But I didn't pursue the sciences. At Haverford, that's really tough. But, no, I think I--by the time I was into my sophomore year, I was all about philosophy. Speaker 1: Okay, now, that seems like a switch from what you were focused on in high school? You know, you seemed to be-- Speaker 2: No, I thought-- Speaker 1: --on track to be a newspaper person. Speaker 2: But I was still--I mean, there it was clear as I mentioned to you earlier that my strengths were in Social Studies, History and English, and now I'm in college, and those are the courses that I'm taking anyway. And I did, I think the one thing that is evident in both environments is, I'm kind of searching on a personal level, and it's almost like there would have--if I had been around a seminary, there would have been a chance that I would have gone to the seminary. But that wasn't the model that I had in mind. The models were my brother and sister at these academic institutions. And I think I was searching for the good life and understanding about how people live. Maybe this is part of the story that comes from not having had the dad during some of those formative years, still trying to figure out what's, what's a good person about and how do you properly live, and how can I be successful? And on that very elemental level, curious about different lines of thinking about philosophical concepts, and that leads me then into wanting to read philosophy. Story_ID: 39450 Speaker 1: All right, Haverford College. Now, who were some of the people there that influenced you, students or faculty? Speaker 2: Well, I mentioned this to you before, Greg Kannerstein, Jim Ranson. And then I had a circle of friends around me, a guy named Fritz Beck, whose now a doctor, he's a surgeon. I'm blocking on a name here. This guy's from Maine, Nat Gradell (ph.) and Fritz' mom was a librarian. Nat Gradell came from a very rich, sort of aristocratic, New England family. You know, it's an odd group of people, I remember there was one black guy who was much older than me. He had been in the military. But I always thought he was quite, you know, manly and strong. And, you know, my girlfriend was a black woman from Britain named Lucille Blair, and her father was a professor. And, of course, the people at the newspaper because I was working there several days a week. So it became part of my college experience. Story_ID: 39451 Speaker 1: So, now, in terms of philosophy, what philosophy did you focus on, and who was your-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, several years ago, in the basement of this house, I was down there and saw my college thesis. And I couldn't understand it. And it's largely about the mathematics of logic, of language. And the thesis on a man named Wittgenstein who's a German philosopher, a linguist. And it's about logic, but there's so much math involved, and I don't think of myself as a math person at all. My wife is a math person much more than I am. But I think I was straining to prove a point that I could compete at that level of academics is what it's--I think was going on there. I think it's almost like I was trying to defy some stereotype or prove I was as good as the whites or something. I don't know what was going on 'cause I don't, I don't know why I would be writing about something as abstract as that, that really doesn't interest me. Speaker 1: Okay, did you find philosophy useful, I mean, when you look back on it, was it useful to what you're doing in --(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, yes. Here's the thing about philos--being a philosophy major that I value to this day that, the ability to think critically, to hear arguments, to deduce, base assumptions and to understand how you debate and how you see through constructions, very important. And the extension of that is the ability to write, to build arguments, presentations, to make those presentations. So much of that comes from the training that you get as a philosophy major in college. And, of course, for me, it was a perfect complement to my interests in writing, so English, and a perfect complement to understanding political arguments that would come through history. Story_ID: 39452 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, when you were--were there any philosophy professors in earlier that stood out--(unclear) or did I ask you this already and-- Speaker 2: No. There was an older philosophy professor named Paul Desjardins, who I think was really, just terrific. And he was a character. And, again, I just think the world of him, and more than anyone else in the philosophy department, took time with me. Then there was kind of like the guy who was kind of the dean of philosophy department, a man named Richard Bernstein, and I think he's the one who I was doing the kind of more abstract work for. I was never gonna be one of his golden boys, but I was on the edge of that circle, and I think that's why I got involved in writing about things like, you know, the mathematics of logic. Story_ID: 39453 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I have a note here that says in 1976, you became an intern at the Washington Post. Speaker 2: I graduated from Haverford [Haverford College, Haverford, Pennsylvania] in '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do--let me just say, just for the record that, while I was at Haverford, so that summer after my freshman year, I work at the Evening Bulletin, and I'm working there two days a week during my sophomore year. Then I worked there again during my, the summer after my sophomore year, back at the Bulletin [Evening Bulletin] a few days a week during that junior year, and then between my junior and senior years, I got an internship, something called the Dow Jones Newspaper Fund. Dow-Jones used to own "The Wall Street Journal," and that internship took me up to Providence, Rhode Island, and I worked that summer at the "Providence Journal." Then I came back to the "Bulletin" two days a week during my senior year, and I wanted them to hire me, and they wouldn't hire me. This was right after Watergate had happened. Everybody wanted to be Woodward [Bob Woodward] and Bernstein [Carl Bernstein] or as I joke, everybody wanted to be Redford [Robert Redford] and Hoffman [Dustin Hoffman]. So journalism was hot for young people, and suddenly, you know, it's ironic because journalism had always been kind of the business that people without education got into 'cause you don't need a license. You--there's no standards for journalism, no test to get into the profession. And you had all kinds of wild-eyed characters in journalism, but all of a sudden now, people from the Ivy Leagues, everybody wanted to be a journalist. And the "Bulletin" said to me, we like you, we like your work, but we think you should go to a smaller newspaper. We want to hire people who are mid-career. And so the suggestion was, like I'd go out to a, you know, a small paper in the Midwest to work, and that they would look at me after a few years. But at the same time, I applied for internships at the, what was then the smaller paper in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], "The Philadelphia Inquirer," and at "The Washington Post," and I got both of them. And, of course, getting "The Washington Post" internship, my idea was if I'm gonna be out of work in three months, I don't wanna go back to Brooklyn [New York, New York]. I don't wanna go back to my mom's apartment and, you know, she didn't have any money. And it scared me a little bit, but anyway, so I was gonna--if I--I thought it would be to my advantage to get "The Washington Post" on my resume. So I came here to Washington. I had a duffle bag, and that was it, me and a duffle bag on the Amtrak. And, you know, found a news--found an apartment in the newspaper classifieds. It was a studio, right off of, Lo--yeah, right off Logan Circle. Speaker 1: In 1976? Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 39454 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so did you get a chance to meet Woodward and Bernstein when you got here? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. They worked in the same newsroom. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So who were some of the black reporters who were there that you met? Speaker 2: Well, the one, the one that's on my mind at the moment is Bill Raspberry because Bill is ill, and we're having a roast for him later this month, and I'm gonna be the M.C. and, you know, Bill was from a previous generation. I think he, Dorothy Gilliam, were kind of the, among the first black reporters at "The Post" [the Washington Post]. And then shortly before I had come, much like what I describe about Haverford where they had had, they had taken on more black people and then had some strikes and problems, at "The Post," in the course of the riots and so forth, they had found that they needed black people to go in the black neighborhoods and report the news, and they started to not just phone it into the rewrite man, but actually get bylines. People like Leon Dash and others, and what happened there was, that there was then, I think something called the "Something Seven," but they were black reports who were suing "The Washington Post" for discrimination and unfair treatment. And so some of them then start to leave the paper, some of them are angry at the editors and so forth. And I'm the new generation coming into the picture, after the "Something Seven," I can't remember what they called themselves. Speaker 1: What was their issue? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I think it was the, I think it was the feeling that they weren't getting opportunities at the paper, that black people weren't being given opportunities, black reporters, black writers. Story_ID: 39455 Speaker 1: All right, so your stay there was fairly successful, I take it, so it developed into a full-time job. Well, what were some of the milestones along the way for you, you know, achieving a full-time job there. Speaker 2: Well, in '76 [1976], when I came, I was a summer intern, and I remember, you know, there was a large class. I would guess there were 14 or more of us as summer interns, and all of us hungry to get a job at the great "Washington Post." I think, I remember, I think, I remember stories like, a lot of police stories that I did that caught Edgar's attention. And I also worked like a crazy person. So, you know, like I was, I think, on the late shift, you know, for cops. So I was supposed to come in at seven o'clock, but I'd be in there at ten o'clock in the morning. I'd get off at three o'clock and be back by ten o'clock AM. And I remember doing stories about babies being stolen at the hospital or, you know, there was one story about a place that was like a whorehouse downtown and some guys went in and tried to rob it, and people end up out on the street naked, and, you know, I'd get these stories. And they would end up in the paper, in some cases, on the front page. And even stories about, I remember a woman getting crushed by a bus on K Street, and the whole scene, and the editors just liked the writing. They started to think, oh, he can write. And then I got this, I was one of two interns that they kept after the summer. And then there was one editor in particular, Herb Denton, who was a black, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate and close to the son of the publisher, who took a strong interest. He had not been part of the lawsuit, I guess because of his relationship with the Graham family and all that. And he took a real strong interest in me and my career and I think acted as a mentor to me. That was Herb Denton and Herb Denton was from Little Rock, Arkansas, and his dad had been a school principal, and Herb was just a brilliant guy and quirky guy. And, but, you know, I think he--the newsroom was his schoolroom. He was the principal of that newsroom, and I was his student. Story_ID: 39456 Speaker 1: Okay, so that's--what were some of the stories you were working on then? Speaker 2: Things that stand out in my mind is the closest I ever come to winning a Pulitzer was for a series I did on a high school called Eastern High School. And I remember the lead story in that series was about a guy named Roger who was about to graduate. He was a senior at Eastern, but he couldn't read. He couldn't read the sign on the front of the bus to know which bus to take to go home at three o'clock, and it was telling about the failures of public education on so many levels. And the series--I still have a copy of it upstairs, the print, the way it was printed. And it just got the attention of everybody, and in fact, it was on the front page. Every day the series was on the front page and it was with--on the front page with, you know, some of the great names of the "Washington Post," people like Woodward [Bob Woodward]. Speaker 1: Okay, and they hired you in 1979 as a full-time reporter, is that true? Speaker 2: Yeah, in other words, so I came on as an intern, and then a two-year intern. And, so, you know, starting in like '77 [1977], I'm supposed to be a two-year intern. And by, I guess '78 [1978], '79 [1979], I'm a full-time reporter. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is--is this typical of how people progress in, you know, at "The Post" basically or-- Speaker 2: I think I was a little faster than most. I think it was unusual then for someone to come in as an intern, stay as an intern and then, I'll tell you, you know, it was a pretty rapid rise because by 1980, I'm on the Editorial Board, and writing editorials. So I had a pretty fast rise there. Story_ID: 39457 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were hired as a report--now, you covered Marion Barry, didn't you as mayor-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --of the City of Washington [Washington, D.C.]. And what was that like? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, it was a mess. You know, I was covering--when I was young--when I had, first was working on the City Staff, I was covering the School Board, and then went from the School Board to covering some of City Hall, the district building is what we call it here in the District of Columbia. And Barry was a character in both settings for me. And Barry's history with the paper, remember "The Washington Post" is the big white newspaper in town, had always been problematic. They had fallen in love with his image as kind of the Dashiki-clad, civil rights activist, and the reality on the ground is that Barry was oftentimes involved in all kinds of political shenanigans and questionable activities from way back in his days with "PRIDE" and all that. But he had the kind of dashing, charismatic energy, absent from the people who were the pioneers of what we call in the District of Columbia, "Home Rule," and these were older, more bureaucratic, administrative-type black men. I'm thinking here of Walter Washington. I'm thinking here of Sterling Tucker. These are suit and tie type guys, but they were at the cutting edge of making deals that led to Home Rule for the District of Columbia, that allowed control of budgetary authority for the District of Columbia to come to local hands, established the whole notion of the right to vote and proper representation for the people of the District of Columbia as opposed to having Congress control it. Barry comes from a different tradition, if you will. Whereas you had Walter Washington, Sterling Tucker, Walter Fauntroy, as kind of establishment, political and church leadership in the black community, Barry comes in as someone who'd been in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], someone who then comes to town with the Civil Rights Movement, comes from Mississippi, comes to D.C., and gets involved with these job training organizations that are taking advantage of federal grants. And he is much more kind of the voice of young, impatient and challenging to whites, black America. And, you know, the paper fell in love with Barry, especially, the editorial board and all that. And so when I start writing about Barry, writing editorials about Barry and the like and being critical of him, the newspaper is like whoa, you know, why are you writing critically about Marion Barry? But Barry was always up to tricks, and I was always critical of some of Barry's activities and willing to write in that way. And then Barry, of course, has his own issues, once he gets into elected office on the City Council and as the Mayor. And writing about him, and writing about his deals and his missteps, and the like, I think it was very difficult for lots of people to see those stories in "The Washington Post," and I remember being castigated and criticized, you know, why are you writing, why are you writing critically about a black leader in a white newspaper and those kind of things. Story_ID: 39458 Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, yeah, 'cause I remember Marion Barry was beloved here and people, black people around the country, some were puzzled as to why-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, when you hear him on national public radio or anywhere, and he gives a talk about the city, you know, we wondered what was going on? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Speaker 1: But, so what is your assessment, I mean--it's all been played out now. What were his strengths and what did he do for the city? Why was he loved so much and what was his really, his downfall? Speaker 2: Well, I think that he was loved so much because I think for people, especially poor black people in the city, and a lot of people in Washington, D.C., to this day. And the city has a history, you know, of being very racially divided. It's not segregated in the way I'd say Chicago [Illinois] is or Newark [New Jersey] or, you know, some of the other cities, especially, the big industrial cities, Detroit [Michigan]. You know, I mean the reason that black people came here was because they were seeking protection of the federal government after the Civil War. So there's a long history of a black community here. This is the home of Howard University, which is, you know, federally funded initially--and still is to some degree, university for black people, and has produced, I think, still the most black doctors and lawyers of any--maybe Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in New Orleans has got more black doctors. But this, I mean Howard has produced so many elements of the black middle class in the United States, and that definitely created a presence here in Washington, D.C. But anyway, there's a tremendous reservoir though of poor black people who didn't have good education here as well. So this was chocolate city, especially during the '60s [1960s], large percentage of the population, black. Story_ID: 39459 Speaker 1: I think it was eighty percent at one time? Speaker 2: Was it eighty percent? Something like that. I remember in the high '70s anyway. And you had divisions between different parts of the city. First and foremost, of course, the divisions between white and black, and, you know, there's such great history, "U" Street, which is near Howard where the whole "U" Street corridor was kind of a home to black Washington, but also just to black America, people from Duke Ellington, you know, to--I'm trying to think of a famous singer that's a Washington--Marvin Gaye, all those people, Roberta Flack, but also black newspaper, right there "U" Street, you know, black barbershop, black clubs, black restaurants. I mean Washington had that kind of established feel to it in terms of the black community. But at the same time, you had this tremendous and sad poverty, and people who weren't getting anywhere, and it was hard to get jobs and all the rest. And Barry [Mayor Marion Barry], as I said, starting out with PRIDE and job training and all that, he found a way into that environment. And he came to represent, not the educated, established blacks, even though he, himself was an educated man. I think he has a chemistry degree. He came to represent the discontent of poor, black people in Washington, and he became the face of that in a way that the churches, you know, the Walter Fauntroy, who had been a direct aide to Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], never could establish the kind of connection that Barry, with his personality had. And so Barry, when I'm covering Barry and saying, you know, exactly what is he delivering? What is, what is the good and the bad of Barry, I think the whole notion of taking a critical look at Marion Barry was almost in the way that people would be taken aback if you said, well, let's take a critical look at Justin Bieber, you know, like a celebrity, you know. He's a star, you know. But in a way, coming here from Brooklyn [New York, New York] and from Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was just treating him like another politician. And then Barry, not only goes from City Council--from school board to City Council, he becomes Mayor, and he defeats Sterling Tucker to become Mayor. Tucker never becomes the Mayor. He had been City Council chair. Barry launches what is kind of a, you know, outsider campaign to defeat the black establishment, and he becomes the mayor and is quite celebrated and seen as the rise of the Civil Rights generation, a new, younger generation come to power. And it's gonna transform this city and black Washington. And then it just, you know, he was a charmer and, you know, he's welcome in every salon from the white side of the town to the bankers and everybody just--and he brought in people like Ivanhoe Donaldson, who was also involved, very much in the Civil Rights community. So some of the people who are in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] then become his top aides. Story_ID: 39460 Speaker 1: There's that whole Civil Rights patina feel to this new administration and great hope. But almost from the start, you just get the sense, it was very ingrown, and they're trying to satisfy sort of these larger ends that are not about working-class and poor people, but about sort of these larger aims, you know, making deals to get bond deals for blacks, get black bankers and black business people in on the bond deals that had been dominated by the white community, to get liaisons with different sectors that had public contracts, to get black people in those positions. And oftentimes, some of this would lead to cronyism and scandal and would end up in the papers and questions about, well, what are you doing? And is this political or is this really about trying to deliver services to people and then, and the difficulty for me was, as a black reporter was, I was just caught between whites who were, one, enchanted and thrilled with Barry and who thought, you know, this is the hip, happening, Dashiki-clad mayor, and people on the street who were like, well, exactly, what is he doing? And, you know, and he would get into situations--I remember he got into a situation with another correspondent where it had snowed, and he said something to the effect of, they said, well, why aren't the streets plowed? And he said, well, they can just stay home or they don't have to drive down the street, you know, rather than I'm gonna try to get the snow out of the streets. And I think then people started to pick up that he wasn't about delivering services. He didn't see himself in that way. He saw himself in some grander role. And, of course, it really then started to unravel with stories about him hanging out and the drugs and the women and ultimately, led to a sting in which he was caught in a hotel room smoking crack with a woman that wasn't his wife, stuff like that. Story_ID: 39461 Speaker 1: And what was the--is there a first story or a first problem that you detected that you focused in on? What was the first thing that you--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You know, I mean there were lots of stories like that with Barry. But I mean part of it was, just the political philosophy. I mean, you know, very early on, when he had trouble, he understood that he could run as the black candidate. I think Ivanhoe Donaldson, I was writing a political notes column, and Ivanhoe Donaldson said to me, you know, well, he'll run as the white candidate--and he was running against the black guy. But he was gonna make the white guy much like Mohammad Ali made Joe Frazier into, you know, the white guy in the ring, he made the other guy--he was gonna make the other guy the white guy, and, you know, say to black people, vote for me and vote for the real black man who's running. And that's what he did. And I wrote that in the paper, and, of course, that was like, whoa, you know, you--he's playing pure racial politics. And, you know, even here, in this house--because we moved into this house in '84 [1984], you know, Barry and his people just didn't like what I was doing, and, you know, we had break-ins, very suspicious, nothing taken, rifled through all my stuff, you know. People stopping me and telling me, you know, they knew where my kids go to school, you know, so the break-in's, the threats, the phone calls, you know, "Why are you writing about Barry like that?" I think that it was upsetting to people who saw him as their shining star, their hero, and really hoped that he was going to deliver. I mean, I remember, you know, looking at housing, especially in Southeast [Washington, D.C.], which is the poorer section of town, and he had made all these promises, and again, the housing is just not there. Improvements in public housing never came about, jobs, programs. His most celebrated achievement in the minds of lots of people was, oh, he promised a summer job to all the kids. And the jobs were either nonexistent or do nothing jobs. And then you write that story, and everybody's like, "Well, why are you writing about that? Don't, don't say that." And it was just too upsetting to people. I remember one guy saying to me once, you know, people all over the world read "The Washington Post," and you're just writing critically about a black man, and this white newspaper is being read all over the world. And I say, you know, if he's not delivering for the black community, why is it that we're celebrating him? What's going on here? Story_ID: 39462 Speaker 1: Okay, now, were saying during the break, I'll be saying in the record, a lot of people here used to seem amazed that they thought Marion Barry was delivering, you know, on the public sector jobs in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] with the city and that sort of thing. What was it about that dynamic that didn't work for you in terms of looking at that? Speaker 2: No, I think that what he was about was patronage, and it's political patronage, and, of course, that would lead to the questions about cronyism, about an inefficient government that wasn't delivering on public services. So in just the way that I was describing to you, their interests in making sure that things like the bond business or city properties and rentals and relationships with the business community, that they would bring in their friends in the--black people in the business community, white people in the business community. I think sometimes people don't understand that Barry's top echelon backers were white businessmen because they wanted to be sure they got that city business. And similarly, in that model, people who were in his company or friends or colleagues at some level, they were getting city jobs. And he would make sure that top people who were in the community or organizers got city jobs and therefore became Barry backers, Barry supporters. And so it became like a Barry Machine, if you will, but the machine was all about--and I, this is ironic, it was all about the patronage, the contracts, the relationships for that Barry cohort. It wasn't about delivering services to the people, and, you know, on every level from things like infant mortality to crime to housing, to public employment, you know, jobs, getting the private sector energized and to let them know that they could build here and thrive here in the District [Washington, D.C.] and didn't have to invest outside of the city in Montgomery County [Maryland], Prince George's County [Maryland], Fairfax County [Virginia]. During that period, that's where the wealth was going, and the District was being hollowed out. And it's not just when I say "hollowed out," hollowed out in terms of white capital investment. It was being hollowed out in terms of middle-class black people who said, "Wait a second. The schools aren't working for my kids here, schools are terrible. Jobs, opportunities are being limited here, housing opportunities limited." So you see black people moving, especially black, middle class moving en masse to Prince George's County. I mean just leaving the city, and what got left behind were poor people. And that drove down the tax base, and that meant the tax rate had to go up for people who stayed in the city. And it meant that, you know, there was tremendous pressure on everything from police to social services. The city was just coming apart, but Barry would always blame somebody, and he'd always, he was quite the char--he still is a charismatic guy. He's still on the City Council here, despite all the trouble and personal failings that have become so apparent over the years. Speaker 1: I know when he got in--after he got in trouble, they appointed a commission to run the city. Speaker 2: They did. We, I mean can you imagine, I mean the most precious thing, historically, here was establishing self government, self rule, home rule. And Barry's tenure led to the, you know, having to give up some of that authority over the money, over the--you know, what counts. That's how bad things got. Story_ID: 39463 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about the--what did you write about the public schools? I mean that was the, I think that was--you said, that led into the stories about Barry [Marion Barry]? Speaker 2: Well, that's how I got to know Barry and his coterie. But I was writing about the problems in Eastern High School at first, but I was writing about the School Board, in general, and about why things weren't working in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] public schools. And, you know, I mean it's a high rate of per-public spending. Why is it that we weren't producing the young people who used to come out of Dunbar High [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.], the, you know, the scholars, the scientists, the great writers. What had happened to that D.C. [Washington, D.C.], black public school tradition? And I had wrote--written about that. You know, I'd covered the cops, all this kind of stuff. Story_ID: 39464 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 1980, you wrote about a Clarence Thomas, and this was at a time when the country was not quite as polarized as it is today. But you made some complimentary remarks about him, and your first impression was fairly favorable, right? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know how I would judge it as favorable or unfavorable, but he was clearly a dynamic, different voice for black America. I ran him, I was working as an editorial writer, and had gone out to San Francisco to something called the Fairmont Conference 'cause it was being held at the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco [California]. And it was a meeting of black conservatives. And I went out there with the idea being to write a piece about black people who were associated with Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Reagan]. Now, you know, this is an interesting group because black America had not voted for Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Reagan]. They'd voted for Jimmy Carter [President Jimmy Carter]. But here were black conservatives, black Reaganites, and the person I wanted to focus on was a man named Thomas Soul who was then very well known as a black conservative academic. But Thomas Sowell really didn't have much time for me as a young, black person in that setting. I mean he was flying high. He was well known, and they were trying to get him to be a cabinet secretary. But the guy that caught my attention, and when I heard him speak, that I thought, you know, he, he speaks with a fervor of the Civil Rights era and the black revolutionary. He has some Malcolm X in his voice, was this young guy, at--then at the Education Department, whose name was Clarence Thomas. I don't know if he was then at the Education, he was might have been on his way to Education. He'd worked for Jack Danforth in his Senate office, and I think he was considering a job at that time. And he made the point--and I think this was the point that appeared in this column that I wrote in "The Washington Post." He said, you know, any--if I take any job in the Reagan administration, and it has to do with race, it'll be like a monkey on my back. Everybody will think the only reason he has this job is because he's black. And so he didn't wanna take any job that had to do specifically with race. And then I think he ends up in the Education Department, but ironically, the next jump for him is to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission as chairman. Story_ID: 39465 Speaker 1: Okay, so, did--when you look back on it, did your--I mean were you right or (laughter), and did you think he, had he lived up to what you thought he was? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I mean that was the first time I met him. Gosh, I wrote about in major ways thereafter. I mean I remember after I wrote that first column, he wouldn't talk to me. And the reason was, there was an example in there. He was talking about welfare dependency, and he said that his sister was waiting for the mailman to come with the welfare check, and he thought this was debilitating and wrong. And, apparently, he got a backlash from people who said, man, you would hold your sister up to scorn telling people that she's on welfare waiting for the mailman. And he thought I had embarrassed him. So he, for a long time, he wouldn't even talk to me. But that article caught the attention of a lot of people about this young, black conservative, and I think contributed to his rise in the Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] administration. Anyway, you were asking me though to look back on Clarence Thomas. I think Clarence Thomas--I had no idea Clarence Thomas would become a Supreme Court Justice, none at all. I thought he was a dynamic--you know, later, I wrote a big piece for him when he was nominated to the Supreme Court. Everybody was calling me up because I had written a piece about him for the "Atlantic Monthly," and it was a very long piece, talking about the young, black conservative in the Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] administration who was, who held views that the president might find troubling if he ever knew about 'em because this guy was an acolyte of Malcolm X. This guy could recite Malcolm X backward and forward. This guy had been involved, you know, with breakfast programs when he was in school at Holy Cross. You know, he's held real bitter anger at Yale Law School [yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] for the way he was treated there. He said they treated him like they had done him a favor at letting him into Yale, when, in fact, he didn't want anything from them. He just wanted to be left alone, you know, and they hadn't done him any favor. He deserved to get into Yale. And he was angry that, you know, coming out of Yale, the white kids all went off to these fancy firms. He couldn't get a job. Story_ID: 39466 Speaker 1: So I think, you know, this was not the kind of black person that you would immediately associate with [President] Ronald Reagan, but here he was working for Reagan, and in fact, rising up in the Reagan years. And then under Bush [President George H. W. Bush], then going on to the courts, onto the bench, and then onto the Supreme Court. So it was a total shock and a surprise and for me, you know, I remember thinking to myself, especially when he was nominated to the Court, and all the attacks came, the Anita Hill situation, you know, who is he? I mean the left wing in the country, especially, black liberals who had, who knew Clarence Thomas and who initially were so supportive of Clarence Thomas because they had done business with him at EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], and they didn't like Reagan, and they didn't like the idea that he was working for Reagan. But they had done business with Clarence Thomas and initially had been supportive. Then once the feminists got involved and were concerned that he was going to be a fifth vote against abortion in this country, as a black--as a conservative on the Court, then came the Anita Hill attacks, then came the questions, questions to me, as a journalist who knew him, you know, what do you know about Clarence Thomas? Is it true he beat his wife? He had been divorced and all this. Is it true that--I mean this stuff's unbelievable, the most scurrilous stuff. And I would say, well, you know, that's not what I know, it's not what I know about the guy. But they were digging for anything, and then came the Anita Hill allegation that he, you know, the stuff about the sexual harassment and pornographic movies and comments and all this kind of stuff. And it just struck me as so awful that they would just try and drag him down and dirty up his name any way they could. I just thought it was one of the saddest episodes I'd ever seen. And I tell you what really bothered me about it was, there was a suggestion that he's just not that smart. And I remember, you know, when it, from just reading it. At that time, I hadn't started my book on Thurgood Marshall, reading that when Marshall was up for confirmation, that the same line of attack on him had emerged. He's a black guy. He's just not that smart. He really shouldn't be considered of the elite legal thinkers or minds that deserve a seat on the Supreme Court. And I, and I thought to myself, that's wild. They've put people on the Supreme Court who are members of the Ku Klux Klan. I mean they've put people on the Court who were, you know, never had a day of practicing private law or being anyone's counsel, you know, people who were pure politicians. But now, when it comes to this black man, they're gonna change the game. You know, you gotta have the--I just thought--it became a pure political hatchet job on Clarence Thomas. And I don't think he's ever been able to change that image of himself. And I think partly, he may not care. I just think he, at this point, figures he's his own man, and to hell with people who wanna buy into the caricature. Story_ID: 39467 Speaker 1: So you really think that there's a--he's attacked for not being so smart in the same vein that people attacked Thurgood Marshall to that? Speaker 2: I don't about, I don't know what you mean by the same "vein", but if you-- Speaker 1: Well, what I mean is that Thurgood Marshall was the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Team-- Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: And he was a powerful man conducting, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --filing these lawsuits and dealing with these cases all over the United States for over 25 years, I guess. Speaker 2: Amazing. Speaker 1: So I mean, so his reputation in the black community was a genius, a man of-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --and there's no question that we thought he was smart. But Clarence Thomas, I don't think he had--he did not have that kind of reputation in the black community. Speaker 2: No, totally different generation. Speaker 1: Nothing close to that. Speaker 2: Well, no, remember, you know, I think one of the oddities of my life is I'm close to both these men. I know them both very well. And in the Thurgood Marshall case, this was an effort that was launched by what was then called "Dixiecrats," people like James Eastland, a Senator from Mississippi and others who were intent on keeping Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] off the Supreme Court. And the, I mean they wanted to make it out to be the case that he was a token appoint--a nominee from the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration at a time of racial turbulence, that he was being put up there to symbolize, one, that justice could be equal, that there could be a black person on the Court, but, secondly, that it was a matter of Lyndon Johnson, President Johnson's vanity that he wanted to be the first to put a black person the Court, but that Thurgood Marshall really wasn't that smart. And that argument, by the way, was even advanced by people when Johnson was considering Marshall. They said, well, you know, if you really wanna get the best of black lawyers, you would consider "x," "y," "z," you know, people like Bill Hastie, and, you know, to some degree, Bill Coleman. But Bill Coleman was too young back then, I guess. And the people had to say to them, you don't understand. Thurgood Marshall is "the" lawyer in black America. There's no getting away from that. But again, what's striking and what is comparable is that in both cases when you had black men rising to that high level of American life and having to be confirmed, the same line of attack was, "you know, they're really not that smart." Now, I think that you're saying there's different lines of that coming from different directions. Story_ID: 39468 Speaker 1: Right, but where once it came from the white segregationist, and it came with the case of Thurgood Marshall, the irony is that it was coming from white liberals and then some in the black community in the case of Justice Thomas [Justice Clarence Thomas]. Speaker 2: Yeah, there're quite a few black people that kind of felt that way, 'cause I mean--and didn't feel--I don't think they criticized him so much as not being smart, but not being the same, of the same accomplishment as a Thurgood Marshall. Speaker 1: A different generation, and I mean, and different attitudes on so many critical issues, and everything from affirmative action, you know, to gosh, death penalty, I mean, you know, they're opposite. They have different points of view. And there's just no getting away from that. One is a hard-line conservative. Speaker 2: Right, right, and to a lot of black people, he represents thinking that's not necessarily the--represents the majority thinking in the black community. So that's-- Speaker 1: You know, I mean, that's--you can argue that back and forth as to what it is. I mean clearly, black people are very socially conservative. Death penalty is, for example, most black people support the death penalty in this country. But Thurgood Marshall was no advocate for the death penalty. You know, Clarence Thomas is old-line, Southern, black conservative people in so many ways. Thurgood Marshall was the personification of the Civil Rights era in my mind. I think he, more than anyone else, arguably, changed the laws in this country to achieve racial equality. And so it's just different generations, different times, different molds. But the idea that, you know,--and obviously different political perspectives. One is put on the Court by a Democrat, Lyndon Johnson, and one is put on by a Republican, George Herbert Walker Bush, and I guess one is put on the Court in the late '60s [1960s]. One is put on the Court in the early '90s [1990s], and that thirty-year difference is a huge difference in terms of the experience of black people in this country. I mean you think of those thirty years and you have the emergence of a huge black, middle class, people like Thomas being able to go to Holy Cross and Yale Law School [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and then to come out and to work for a Senator and to work--he worked--not only did he work for Danforth [John Danforth], but he was working for, you know, corporations and things. I mean I just don't think that his experience was--his experience was totally different than the experience of a Thurgood Marshall. Story_ID: 39469 Speaker 1: Now, you're a biographer for Thurgood Marshall. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Do you think that--what do you think about, I guess, the kind of position, I think the country has taken where we could only have one Supreme Court Justice (laughter) out of nine. I mean it may represent the population in some ways. I think we're at eleven percent of the population of the United States. Speaker 2: A little more. Speaker 1: Maybe a little more, but in there somewhere, but, you know, we only get one Justice though it seems, you know, and I mean people, the perception in the black community, I think, and I think I'm right about this, is that they, when Thurgood Marshall passed away that, you know--and even Republicans thought, you know, we have to replace him, you know. They put another black person on, but it's a person very unlike--he's only like Thurgood Marshall in color. I mean does that bother you at all that that's the perception that-- Speaker 2: I think you're making two points there, quite separate. One is, that there's only one seat for black people on the Court-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --and where I've heard this is when President Obama [President Barack Obama] had the opportunity to appoint people to the Court, there was the line of thought, "Well, why not appoint a black person who could be the anti-Clarence Thomas, who could be a liberal black person on the Court?" And clearly that thought didn't occur to President Obama. He wasn't doing that. Now, he does appoint the first Hispanic person to the Court, in Sotomayor. And he does appoint a white woman to the Court, Kagan, who was his Solicitor General. But he didn't feel any pressure, I think, to look at blacks in specific. I don't remember that there were, I don't remember that there were any blacks on his list of final people, the final list that he was looking at. So that wasn't in his mind, but I've heard that line of argument. But it just, it would never have emerged as a major theme for President Obama. The--do I find it odd that there's only one black person on the Court. Well, obviously, in my lifetime, either there's been none or one (laughter), you know. And then now, the big change in my lifetime on the Court is there were no women, even when Thurgood Marshall went on the Court, there were no women. And Sandra Day O'Connor comes on the Court, and, you know, I remember interviewing O'Connor for my book on Thurgood Marshall, and she said, you know what a role model he was for her and what help he was. And when Thurgood Marshall first goes on the Court, he sees himself as representing, not just black people, but women that, you know, somebody who's had experience and knows what women go through in this country and talks about abortion and having represented people who've had abortions, abortion doctors and the like. Thurgood Marshall brings all that to the Court. So and now we have not just one woman on the Court, I think now we have Kagan, Sotomayor that I mentioned and then Justice Green--I'm blocking on her name, Ginsberg, Justice Ginsberg. So that's three women on the Court right now. That's the big change in my lifetime, and I suspect, you know, that there're more women to come before there're more blacks to come. Story_ID: 39470 Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's move on from that, but, now, during the '80s [1980s], you're like--what are some of the, I guess, the milestones that had you rising at "The Washington Post," leading up to, I'm trying to get to '86 [1986] when you start working on "Eyes on the Prize" [Public Broadcasting Service] What happened before '86 [1986]? Speaker 2: So, I was on the Editorial Board by 1980 when Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] comes around, writing editorials and writing columns, like the column about Clarence Thomas that you mentioned, and then I went back to the White House to cover Reagan. So I must have been on the Editorial Board by about '79 [1979], '80 [1980] and stayed there for about two years, plus, and then by '82 [1982], '81 [1981], '82 [1982], I'm covering Reagan, and then I'm covering Vice President Bush in the '84 [1984] election, all that. And so I'm, you know, I'm covering the White House and National politics and doing pieces for our Sunday news and review section called "Outlook" and writing political pieces about politics, political pieces. But anyway--I'm looking for the right word, but I'm writing political analysis for the paper, and writing magazine pieces for the Sunday magazine. And some of those magazine pieces are about boxers, about black history, yeah, so I'm writing magazine pieces as well as news pieces. And then what came out of that is, I don't know, I mean, yeah, I give up (laughter). Speaker 1: So, well, 1986, you meet Henry Hampton. Is that when you met him or--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --when did you meet Henry Hampton? Speaker 2: Oh, I see what you're after. I forgot the question, I think. Speaker 1: The lead up to "Eyes on the Prize." Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'm doing--then I left the White House. I left the White House beat at around '85 [1985], I guess, yeah, after Reagan is reelected and all that. And I'm doing pieces for the Sundays News and Review section, the Outlook section, and I'm writing magazine pieces. And then I just, I'm pretty much doing magazine pieces almost full time as well as being the lead writer for "Outlook," and, you know, so I'm--it's a, it's almost like a Sunday column, plus the magazine stuff. And then the man who is running a magazine here called "Washingtonian"--well, gosh, I'm forgetting the name of the magazine. But his name's Charlie Peters, and Charlie Peters had been quite impressed by my work on Marion Barry in the "Post," and the fact that I took so much flack for people who say, "Oh, how can you be critical of Barry," and all that. Anyway, Charlie Peters was contacted by an agent representing Henry Hampton and said, we hear about Juan Williams, but we don't know him. Do you know him? And Charlie Peters called me up and said, this guy's been working on a project about Civil Rights history. He's looking for somebody who can write a book that would accompany it. Would you be interested? And I said, oh, let me talk to him, Charlie. So he put me in touch with the woman who had called him, and I'm blocking on her name. But she was an agent for Henry Hampton, and then I went up to visit Henry in Boston at Blackside [Blackside Film & Media, Inc.] and met Henry. And he had already--you know, I mean it's a wonderful, amazing story where Henry had been involved in, you know, working for the Unitarian Church. Story_ID: 39471 Speaker 1: Henry's [Henry Hampton] a kid from St. Louis [Missouri]. His dad wanted him to be a doctor, you know, he's, he never lived up to the father's expectations and all the rest. And then he gets involved with being a spokesman for the Unitarian Church. He sees the Unitarian Church has a minister killed in Selma [Alabama], Jim Reeve, and he goes down there as a spokesman to explain why this white minister is involved with the Civil Rights Movements, and he's just taken by the power of the Movement, and then thinks, you know, some day he'd like to make a movie about it or something. But then Henry goes on to be quite successful in business and, you know, sort of Boston black politics and ends up owning a percentage of TV stations, radio stations. And then, as his kind of burning desire, harbors that is still the notion to make this movie about the Civil Rights Movement. And it's initially after the success of "Roots", Alex Haley's book on TV, the idea is to go to ABC--and as I said, he had an interest in an ABC station. So he had an entree to that world. But they'd wanted, I think he told me Sammy Davis as a singing Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and all the rest of it. And he was like, are you crazy? I'm not doing that. And so that's when it became much more of a documentary project, and he struggled to get financing for this project in a big way. And then based on the model of the very successful PBS series on Vietnam, he realized, I think it was Stanley Karnow was the author of the book that accompanied the "Vietnam" series. And Karnow had made millions. And so, Henry, as a very savvy businessman realized the book could be a separate revenue stream that would help to support the film, the documentary. But he needed somebody with a name, and who could write and do it well. And so that's--when I went up to visit him, I must tell you, he had already--because he had already had these starts and stops and trying to get the financing, he had a group of young people there who were documentary makers. Some of them just quite excellent, and he was already having what he called, "school". You know, he'd bring in people who were Civil Rights activists or academics on the Civil Rights Movement, and they would be talking to these film producers and the like. And he talks to me about, well, how would you tell this story? And he's, you know, telling me what they've already done, who they've already interviewed and the like. And I told him, you know, Henry, to me, what we should be doing here is just telling the story straight. We don't need to gild the lily. There are heroes and there are villains and there's such drama inherent in the story. We just need to step away from all this kind of political ranting and, you know, condemning racists and all that. We just need to tell the story. It's just a great story. Story_ID: 39472 Speaker 1: Okay, 1986 "Eyes on the Prize," now, how long did it take you write the book [Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years: 1954-1965]? Speaker 2: Well, so I went up to Boston--I'm trying to remember the name of the street that Henry [Henry Hampton] had Blackside on. But, so I ended up writing "Eyes on the Prize," and we had a great--I think it's a very good book (laughter). And so I was with Henry, you know, I think the book comes out in late '88 [1988] or early or late--I can't remember the exact date that the book is published. And then the film comes out. Is it January of '88 [1988]? Do you know? Speaker 1: I believe so, I don't--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Something like that. Speaker 1: I'm looking at (unclear)-- Speaker 2: So the book comes out, and it becomes a best seller and all that. And I think people just hadn't seen it. Speaker 1: Yeah, '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: '87 [1987], okay. And the book sells very well, and the film comes out and it's a huge hit. A lot of people are watching "Eyes on the Prize." And it's a six-part TV series and, you know, I was able to--because of my writing, I was able to influence the film, and, you know, clearly you can't have everything in the film because cameras weren't there for everything. But you do have people and so my interviewers with people, my narrative thread picks up--it gets into the film as well as into the book. And we had tremendous success. It was just a, you know, I think for me, one of the highlights of my career as a writer. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting to me that the Civil Right year started in '54 [1954], the year you were born. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, for me it's always been a curious, a curiosity. I represent something different in that sense, you know, 'cause an immigrant, a black immigrant kid, born in '54 [1954], so literally my life starts in the modern Civil Rights era, you know. I don't, I don't cross those lines. And so many of the people who participated in the Civil Rights Movement obviously are ten to twenty years older than I am, and so they were born at a different time and different educational experiences, different social experiences than the ones that I was privy to growing up, even in Brooklyn [New York], but certainly then as a kid who got to go off to prep school and to an elite college. Story_ID: 39473 Speaker 1: What do you remember the most about writing the book for "Eyes on the Prize"? Speaker 2: You know what I remember most was what an intense group we were because remember, this is all happening in a townhouse basically in Boston, right off Sharman (ph.) Avenue. And where Henry's [Henry Hampton]--it was like, you know, it was like Henry's home almost, but it wasn't Henry's home, but it was like a townhouse. He had his office there. The film people are there, the writing team, me, Bob Lavelle, we're in a basement. And we just--it was like, you know, the kind of camaraderie that you would almost associate with the Civil Rights Movement because are just, have a sense, we're doing something very special. And you just hope it's gonna be a big hit and a big success. But we all believed in the project, and we all feel that kind of Civil Rights ethos and ethic. You know, we become fans of it. You know, people are showing you, look at this film. I remember just being thrilled at watching the piece of Dave Dennis who was a SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] activist at a funeral, and, you know, the rage in his face and how--you know, and then, you know, I have the opportunity to be digging through clips and files and talking to people, and coming back and saying, you know, we should do something with this person. I don't know if we can get this person in here. You know, we need to change the story. It's, to me it was one of the more creative environments I've ever been in in my life. And, you know, and Henry, Henry, to me, just a brilliant businessman. I mean I always thought, man, Henry, knew how to do business. Clearly, he, it wouldn't--"Eyes on the Prize" would not have been possible unless Henry knew how to play the business game in America, and he had put himself in position to make this happen. And then Henry, the businessman, had the wisdom and the acumen to bring in really talented, smart people. I think he got us cheap, but, you know what, he didn't cheat anybody but he got us in a place where he created, and he was the father of this amazing creative team. I think there's a lot to be said for Henry Hampton. I'm just a big fan. Speaker 1: Okay, now, in--of course, the series was a big success (unclear). You sold a lot of books. Story_ID: 39474 Speaker 1: In 1992, you left "The Washington Post"? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened? Speaker 2: I didn't leave "The Washington Post" in '92 [1992], but-- Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: I think in '92 [1992] is when I start working on the Thurgood Marshall book which comes out in '98 [1998]. But in the course of the Clarence Thomas hearings--remember Thomas was charged with--Anita Hill said, oh, he's, he's sexual harassment and all that stuff had emerged. And in the course of those hearings, then at the paper, people said, well, Juan Williams tells dirty jokes, and Juan Williams flirts with women. And all of a sudden they would say oh, well, should we be investigating Juan Williams, you know? And, you know, they--I remember the editors at the "Post" [the Washington Post], I think fearing for lawsuits against the "Post" said, well, you should be going on TV. You shouldn't be talking about this. And I had been writing about Clarence Thomas for, as we've discussed for some time. But it was so painful to me that this institution which I regarded as my home, would suddenly turn on me. In other words, they hadn't turned on me, although they had been very skeptical about my critical writings about Marion Barry. And that was highly politically charged in this black majority town. They hadn't turned on me in that situation, but in this situation where I was involved in a controversy about Clarence Thomas because I said I thought what was going on there was really unfair to him, the human being, the woman in the newsroom clearly said, "You're either with us or against us on this issue," and anybody who's writing anything favorable about Clarence Thomas is out of bounds. And so I became part of the story. And it was again, to me, just the wildest thing, I mean just--you know, they came. They had me sit through interviews with people. Did you say this? Did you do this? And it ultimately came down to write an apology and let's get over with this thing. But it was very painful to me, and I don't think, I don't think my relationship with the Post was ever the same after that. It was searing for me, and it was very public. It was all over. So- Story_ID: 39475 Speaker 1: So they accused you of saying (unclear) [cracking noise, paper in background], Clarence Thomas was accused of. Speaker 2: Well, no, and never, nobody accused me of, you know, discussing pornography or any of those kind of things. I mean clearly, what happened to Clarence Thomas was even more of an attempt to drag his name through the dirt and to disqualify him. We're talking about the Supreme Court. I'm a, you know, I was a journalist. I was a pretty well-known journalist, but I'm a journalist, and the idea here was to, I think, disqualify me as a voice who was saying, I don't that people are being fair to Clarence Thomas because I thought that they were being, in much the way that we think about, let's say, Joe McCarthy, and, you know, false allegations. He's a Communist or of Communist affiliations and ties, in order to damage people and damage their careers. I think that there was an attempt to disqualify Clarence Thomas and to do it by any way possible, and the suggestion was that, I guess the suggestion was that he had offended Anita Hill with some words that he had said to her. I mean I don't think that there was ever a charge that he had touched her or had sex with her against her desire or any of that. There wasn't that. But in the case, in my case at the "Post," it was, again, all these, well, you know, did you say this girl had red fingernails that looked like cherries? Yes. And was she offended? How would I know? I was joking with the girl. Stuff like that, and then it ended up with me writing an apology, and--but as I said, it felt to me like so unfair, so patently intended to intimidate me, to shut me up, to tell that what I was saying was not acceptable, that nobody should ever stand up and say anything positive about Clarence Thomas, that if you did that, you were a tool of the Right Wing, and of racists. I mean just madness, given my interests in Civil Rights (laughter) and, you know, who I am, it just--it made no sense. But that's, that was the, you know--and I just thought, "You know what? This is awful." Anyway, I love "The Washington Post" to this day, but that was a really awful experience for me. Story_ID: 39476 Speaker 1: Okay, so you sort of went on hiatus or something or did you--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, I was--when--I was in Japan on a fellowship with The Japan Society when Justice Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] announced his retirement. And at that point, I had already written what is, I think, still the longest magazine article ever to appear in the "the Washington Post" magazine, and it was a piece about Justice Thomas--Justice Marshall. And that had come about--and this is a fascinating story. When I was doing "Eyes on the Prize," I realized I would love to talk to Thurgood Marshall. He is an essential part of the modern Civil Rights era in America. But he never talks to anybody. So I had written letters to his chambers and to friends, people who knew him well, saying, I'm doing this book about the Civil Rights Movements. It's also gonna be a great documentary. It's called "Eyes on the Prize," and I would love to talk to Thurgood Marshall. And I got nothing back, zero. Everybody said, you know, he had a bad experience with one of your colleagues at the "Post," Bob Woodward, Woodward and a guy named Scott Armstrong had written a book called "The Brethren." In that book, Justice Marshall was portrayed as not smart, a buffoon, not hardworking, comes in late, leaves early, only put on the Court [the Supreme Court] because he was black, and President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] wanted a black on the--I mean just that kind of stuff. And he was so turned off by it, 'cause he, you know, had been through health challenges. He felt he was staying on the Court as a voice for people who had no, had never been given a voice on the Court. And here comes this bestselling book, and he was also suspicious that other members of the Court were trying to put him down and had given this kind of dreg to Woodward. So he was hurt. And he didn't wanna deal with any young, hot-shot reporter from "The Washington Post," who is, you know, supposedly doing this Civil Rights. So I got nothing. So after I finished, "Eyes on the Prize," I come back, and I come back to my job working as a magazine writer, an "Outlook" writer for the "Washington Post," and I write notes every now and then up to Justice Marshall's chambers asking for an interview. And I never get anything back. And then one day a call comes to my desk, and this is in the late 1980s. We didn't have voice mail. We had, you know, if the phone rang, then it--after, I guess it rang four or five times, it would ring over to the receptionist, who would pick up your calls. And the person who picked up was a friend of mine, and the voice on the other end said, "This is Justice Marshall of the Supreme Court. Can I talk to Juan Williams?" Well, the young woman knew that I had been--you know, everybody knew I was trying to get an interview with Thurgood Marshall and never getting anything. So she says to him, literally, "Yes, sure, I bet this is Thurgood Marshall." And he says, no, no, no, it really is Thurgood Marshall. And she said, I don't know who you are, but stop playing. He's not here and hung up on him. And he then gets his secretary to call the woman who was then the publisher of the "Washington Post," Catherine Graham. And Katherine Graham takes his call. He's Thurgood Marshall, and then they get Ben Bradley, and then Ben Bradley finds me, and then I get on the phone. I say, Oh, Justice Marshall, so sorry, you know, everybody knows I've been trying to get to you. And he says, I want you to come up here at four o'clock. I want you to have tea. And I said, oh, what's that about, sir? And he hung up on me (laughter). Story_ID: 39477 Speaker 1: So I had no idea what was going on. I start calling everybody and say, hey, what, why would Thurgood Marshall wanna talk to me all of a sudden? And everybody pointed out to me that he had been doing a book with Carl Rowan, and that book had fallen through because he didn't like what Rowan was doing, and I think that, you know, I was never able to pin it down for sure, but my impression was that his family, people who were his clerks had said to him, you know, you should talk to somebody, somebody should hear your story. Otherwise, everybody else will try to tell your story in the way they want to. You need to be on the record about your own story. And he just--because I guess I had been pestering him, he finally responded to my request for an interview. So I went up there. And I started interviewing him. And I would do it, I think every Tuesday for nearly six months. And that's what resulted in the magazine piece. The magazine piece then leads people to suggest why don't you do a book? But when I say to him, let's do a book, his wife was so uptight about the idea that, well, somebody's gonna do a sensational book that will involve his drinking or women or, don't do that? You don't want that. And I didn't have any intention of doing that kind of book, but she, I think, was discouraging to him about whether or not I would do the book. So he stayed in touch, and he even told me, here are the archives you should go to, here are the people you should be talking to. But he didn't wanna get in trouble with his wife. So after this whole episode surrounding Clarence Thomas succeeding him, and then his retirement from the Court, that's when I remember getting the contract--this all happens at the same time. I get the contract to do the Marshall book. I'm in Japan--I remember the auction took place, my lawyer was here in Washington [Washington, D.C.]. I was in Japan. I listened in on the phone as these different publishing houses competed for the contract. And then I came back, and when I come back is when the whole Clarence Thomas thing is blowing up, and people are saying, you know, you wrote about Clarence Thomas. You know Clarence Thomas? You got any dirt on Clarence Thomas? And then, of course, the sexual harassment stuff with him, and then in the smaller blow-up with me at the paper, all that happens in a very small window, actually, now that I think about it. And so I'm still at the paper, but I had the book contract, and it was time to do the book. So for me, it presented an opportunity to take a break from what had become a very tense and difficult environment for me, in the place that had been my home, you know, since 1976, "The Washington Post." Story_ID: 39478 Speaker 1: Oh, so, when I met Thurgood Marshall was when he finally answered the call, placed the call to the receptionist and said he wanted-- and then told, said to me, he wanted to have tea at four o'clock, and had me come up to the Supreme Court. So I would guess that is 1988, '87 [1987], '88 [1988], something like that. Speaker 2: Okay, that's like after "Eyes on the Prize" came out? Speaker 1: "Eyes on the Prize," I believe is '88 [1988]-- Speaker 2: '87 [1987], yeah. Speaker 1: '87 [1987], '88 [1988], so it's in that period. And the magazine article comes out in '89' [1989]. So it's probably late '88 [1988] that I am dealing with Thurgood Marshall directly. Speaker 2: All right, okay, I just wanna make sure we had that. Okay. So you worked on the book for, you say, eight months? Speaker 1: You know, I think I start really working on the book in about '92 [1992]. I've had these interviews with him for the magazine piece in the late '80s [1980s]. Then I've gone off and done all these other things, including the trip to Japan. And then I'm working full time on the book, I would guess, you know, I can't say for sure, but in that period, '92 [1992]. The book comes out in late '98 [1998], I believe. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I'm doing pieces for the "Post" [The Washing Post] in between to supplement my income. I'm doing TV work. During that time, I'm working for CNN [The Cable News Network], and-- Speaker 2: You're doing "America's Black Forum" too-- Speaker 1: I'm doing "America's Black Forum," doing CNN, and then doing some work here at the local NPR [National Public Radio] affiliate, WAMU. And then I, yeah. So that was a busy period in my life, yeah. Story_ID: 39479 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, tell us about "America's Black Forum," right? I used to watch it. Speaker 2: Ah, I loved that show. Speaker 1: Five-thirty in the morning, I think where I was (laughter). Speaker 2: Where you were. You know, people would always tell me they would see it at the oddest times because some places would play it at a decent hour, but more often than not, they would play it either on Saturday morning or Sunday morning in the community service, you know, when there was--when the broadcasters had community service slots on their schedule. They don't have that anymore. That's been done away with. But, so people would say, you know, Saturday morning, you're always in my house with "America's Black Forum" or Sunday morning with the Sunday morning talk shows. People would play it in conjunction with those. But anyway, Byron Lewis, Sr. had bought "America's Black Forum" and I guess this would have been in the '90s [1990s], and he got James Brown, who's now famous for being the host of NFL football, and me to be the co-host of the programs. It wasn't that, it was unusual if you ever see James and I together. It was more like, James would do a week. I would do a week, James would do a week, I would do a week. If James had football responsibilities, he might miss two or three weeks. Then he would do two or three, it was that kind of thing. It was that, so it would bring--he was more for the sports and the celebrity-type people, and I was more for the political and the academic type--the intelligensia-type people. And it was, to me, and it remains to this day, a unique, media product. I don't think you see that level of discussion about black America, about minority issues anywhere in the media to this day, that James Brown and I brought to "American's Black Forum" under the guidance of Byron Lewis, Sr., and his son Byron Lewis, Jr., who was the executive producer here in Washington. Byron Lewis, Sr. runs UniWorld, which is, you know, the largest black PR company in the world. I think they have been bought, so I don't wanna speak to who owns what right now. Story_ID: 39480 Speaker 1: So Byron Lewis, Sr. had a vision of taking what was an entertainment show and making it into a forum for black debate about critical issues in black America and having black voices speak to those issues in a way that was different than anything that was going on with Tony Brown, or I had mentioned to you earlier, Gil Noble, that the idea here was that it would be current, and as we would tape the show during the week, it would be on that weekend. So it was immediate--there was some sense of immediacy to it, and that the level of conversation could go deeper than anything you had seen anywhere else, that people, smart people could talk--smart, black people could talk to other smart black people, and people in positions of power could be questioned about what they were doing. And that's what we tried to do. And, you know, it was one of the more satisfying experiences I had in my career. The downside was that it was not owned by any of the networks, so they never had a kind of proprietary interest in promoting the show. So to get commercials, advertising that we were on the air was very difficult. To get good time slots, very difficult. In other words, PBS had an interest in Tony Brown's Show. That was their show. ABC had an interest in Gil Noble's Show. That was their show in New York City [New York]. And some of the local network affiliates or local channels would have somebody that would do something like that, and they would advertise, and they'd try to give 'em a good slot. But for us, we were an independently-owned show, owned by Byron Lewis, Sr. and Uniworld, and here we are now, we'd have to go to a syndicate and try to get the syndicate to position us to get advertisers and all the rest. And, you know, we'd win awards. People would say, that's a unique show or I love this show, but then people would say, they'd never seen the show because it would come at early in the morning or on, or late at night, was the other thing--and not just late--not just early Saturday morning or Sunday morning, but sometimes late Saturday night. People would say, oh, I saw it after "Soul Train" (laughter), you know, or I saw it early Monday morning, you know, one AM on Monday morning, just odd times all over the dial. And then eventually, it was sold to someone who made it into much more of a celebrity, hip-hop vehicle and, you know, kind of infotainment type thing and got away from the in-depth discussions that would match a Sunday morning news and review show. Story_ID: 39481 Speaker 1: Okay, what was the reception of the book like in '98 [1998]? Speaker 2: Of the Thurgood Marshall book? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Boy, that was terrific. You know, to me, that's the best book I ever wrote. It's the one that means the most to me. It got on several best seller lists. You know, it's an intriguing thing. So many people said to me, they had no idea about Thurgood Marshall. And I think that's the most satisfying part of the whole experience for me, was to help people see Thurgood Marshall for who he was, to understand that so much of the world we live in was shaped by his understanding of the law as the critical change element in American society, that, you know, Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], could give great speeches, but in the mind of Thurgood Marshall, you would go home still to segregation, limited job opportunities, your children would still be going to segregated schools, that Malcolm X could give wonderful speeches, speak defiantly, capture the spirit of a strong, independent, self-sufficient black man in the black community. But Thurgood Marshall said you had to get the change written into the bedrock of American law to have it there, not only for you when you go home, but for future generations. And in that sense, to change America, I think Thurgood Marshall stands apart as one of the greats. But anyway, that is so different than a lot of people who in the Civil Rights generations viewed Thurgood Marshall, even during the '60s [1960s] as old hat, you know, kind of this overweight guy in the thick black robes of the Supreme Court Justice, the establishment black man, and didn't appreciate all that he had done to transform American society. And so the subtitle of the book--the title of the book "Thurgood Marshall," subtitle "American Revolutionary", and so many people were like, Marshall as a revolutionary. I see him as, you know, milk toast or moderate. And I'm saying, well, let's look at what he did. Look at all the laws that he changed, everything from, you know, it was Thurgood Marshall who represents Rosa Parks in the Supreme Court, the end of the Montgomery Bus Boycott. It's Thurgood Marshall who's standing up there in terms of ending segregation in public pools and parks. It's Thurgood Marshall who's fighting against segregation in the military, you know, with General MacArthur [General Douglas MacArthur]. It's Thurgood Marshall--I could go on, and, of course, Thurgood Marshall on school segregation, you know, stop and think. And so, for me, the great joy always comes in the, you know, young people will occasionally now call up--more than when the first book first came out, but even now, I'll get a call from somebody who'll say, you know, they didn't know Thurgood Marshall, and they don't understand Thurgood Marshall. They didn't know Thurgood Marshall had done all these things, and they'd heard of Thurgood Marshall, and they loved Thurgood Marshall. He's an icon, but they didn't understand who he was until they read the book. And so to me that's, you know, tremendous. So it had its moment. Now, the downside was Mrs. Marshall [Cecilia Suyat], who was worried that, you know, about the sensationalism, that I would write about his drinking or whatever, she never liked the book because in the book, it's, you know, discussed, you know, he, his first wife dies of cancer. He's involved with her before the first wife's death. Their first child is born, you know, only a few months after they're married, and she didn't like this. So she didn't understand why that had to be in the book. And she's never been a fan of the book. So that's always been a frustration to me, but the overwhelming public response has been so wonderful, you know. As I say for me, that's the--that book is sort of the height of my power. Story_ID: 39482 Speaker 1: Let me just mention, you know, Thurgood Marshall was dead when the book came out. But he was alive, very much alive when the magazine piece came out, that I believe is '88 [1988], '89 [1989] at the "Washington Post," and he was just thrilled. And he was surrounded by people who were bringing him copies of the magazine to have him sign the cover. And just loved it, I mean, just felt that he was--you know, I think in so many ways, he was someone who felt that he was never properly appreciated. You know, he felt that there was, you know, Stevie Wonder's making songs and there's a federal holiday for Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and Malcolm X is a folk hero and a legend, and he just felt like, you know, people didn't understand him and didn't appreciate him. And I think whenever he had a moment where he felt that kind of affirmation, like the magazine cover, he really liked it. Now, I think, as I said, his wife was always leery about too much attention. But I think he enjoyed it, certainly didn't wanna be in any crowds or have people bothering him. He could be cantankerous in that way, but he liked being loved (laughter), he liked feeling the love, big time. And that was evident when the magazine piece came out. Story_ID: 39483 Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned Carl Rowan working with him on a book at the time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I remember Carl Rowan produced a book about Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Ralph Abernathy at some juncture, which was just--I could not--it was, a lot of people were really revolted by it, you know. And I don't--was this, did you have any idea what the conflict was between-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, what happened was, Rowan--that book, I believe, is what eventually came of what started as a Thurgood Marshall biography. And what happened was Marshall wanted to tell his story. Rowan though started the interviews by asking him about a case he had lost. And I think Rowan's idea, a very legitimate idea for a writer, is to try to capture the tension and the difficulty that Thurgood Marshall faced in a lot of Southern courtrooms, and the odds against him, and the discrimination he would face from all-white juries and all that. But by starting with a case he lost and focusing on it, Thurgood Marshall got turned off because Thurgood Marshall had saw his life in terms of the successes, the victories that he had won. And if you go even to the Supreme Court to this day, Thurgood Marshall's won more cases before the Supreme Court than any other lawyer. He has the, and he is the Babe Ruth, he's the Hank Aaron of Supreme Court lawyers. And so the idea that you're gonna start with a case he lost, and then, you know, Rowan was intent on a lot of the ugliness, I think, in order to build the dramatic story. And Thurgood Marshall just decided he didn't want any part of it. And I often joke, you know, Thurgood Marshall had been given a big check to participate in this book with Rowan, and he sent the check back, which is definitely a no-no for writers (laughter). Story_ID: 39484 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, Fox News, this is 1996, just before the book came out, and you started an association with Fox News. Speaker 2: Well, what we're missing here is that all along I was doing work for CNN [Cable News Network]. I had signed a contract--the "Washington Post" owned a show called "Inside Washington." And when I was doing the White House and then subsequently doing work for "Outlook" in the magazine, they began to use me regularly as one of the people on this show "Inside Washington." The "Washington Post" owned five TV stations, and on these five TV stations on Saturday night would be this show called "Inside Washington" hosted by Gordon Peterson, who's now a local anchor here in Washington. But he would have people like James J. Kilpatrick, Carl Rowan, and others, other major journalists, and they would have me on. And it was a tremendous boost for my career, but also I think gave the show sort of a younger voice. And so I did that show, signed a contract. They wanted to lock me up, and then CNN saw me there and offered me a contract then to come over and work with them. So I started working with CNN. This would have been in the early '90s [1990s]. All through the whole Clarence Thomas thing, I was working for CNN doing a show called "Crossfire" and then "Capitol Gang," and then there was a "Capitol Gang Sunday" and all these type shows. And then I substituting a, I was doing like regular substitution for "Crossfire" and then a regular guest--a regular commentator or "Capitol Gang." And now I became a host of a show that ran for a few years called "Capitol Gang Sunday." Anyway, then in '96 [1996], Roger Ailes, who I knew from political contacts in the Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] and Bush [President George H. W. Bush] years, starts Fox News as a cable channel to compete with CNN. And I remember so many people said to me, why would you even be bothered, you know. CNN is the brand name in cable news. What is Fox thing about? And I liked Roger, but I said, nah, I don't think so. And then it just occurred to me, you know, it would be good to get in on the ground floor of something that's building. And, you know, CNN had not made me the host of any particular show. I was always the Number two guy here and there and there. And so I hoped--and Roger said I could have a seat on a broadcast Sunday show, which would be called "Fox News Sunday." So in addition to working for the cable side, I'd also be on the broadcast side on a regular basis. So I said, that's okay, so I'll do that. So he starts in '96 [1996]. I don't have a contract with him until '97' [1997], but I'd been there almost from the day the doors opened, part time, you know, in and out, and then full time pretty much since '97 [1997]. And then while I--then I was working at the "Washington Post," I then--still at the "Washington Post," while I was doing CNN, at the "Washington Post," while I'm doing Fox. And then in '99 [1999], after I had published the Thurgood Marshall book, NPR came to me and said that their afternoon talk show host, Ray Suarez, was leaving and would I like to come and just sit in for a few days. They're trying out different people. And after I sat in for a day and a half, they offered me a contract to be the host of that show called "Talk of the Nation." And so I started that show in 2000 and did it until mid-2000--a little longer than that, about 18 months, from January of 2000 to 2001. Story_ID: 39485 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so I don't know, where should be--there's a--you wanna talk about the NPR [National Public Radio] story first 'cause that was a kind of a controversial-- Speaker 2: Oh, so let me just say. So then after I stopped doing, stopped being the host of "Talk of the Nation," then I became the senior correspondent for the network for NPR. Then I became like a news analyst for the station and so I was doing different, playing different roles. But then in 2010, got fired in what was a huge rowel where I had been on Fox, being interviewed by Fox's top show host, Bill O'Reilly, about Bill's opposition to having a mosque placed at Ground Zero. And he had been in the, a little bit of a set too (unclear) with people on a show called "The View," and then had me on to say, you know, where did he go wrong by saying that there, that Muslims had killed on 9/11 [September 11th, 2001]. And I said, Bill, you know, in all honesty, you didn't go wrong. The people who were in those planes and who directed them into the buildings were Muslims. And I said, and, you know, to be just totally honest with you, even to this day, when I'm getting on a plane, if I see people dressed in Muslim garb, I have some anxiety. It causes me some fear. And then I went on to say to him, but don't forget the people who bombed Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], the Atlanta [Georgia] bomber, they were Christians, they were white people and we don't make judgments about all Christians or all whites based on what happened in Oklahoma City or Atlanta and that we should be careful about how we speak. And so he didn't--he's sick of being careful, you know. They were all Muslims, terrorism is coming from Muslim countries. And I said, well, you know, you just have to understand the negative impact that can have on law-abiding people, etc. So that was the conversation. But the NPR people, especially one person at NPR, said that my saying that, seeing people dressed in Muslim garbs at airports made me nervous was evidence of bigotry on my part and disqualified me as a journalist that could be trusted by the NPR audience and fired me. Story_ID: 39486 Speaker 1: So, when this got out, it was unbelievable to me. My face was on the front page of papers all over, on nightly news programs all over. And, and people, you know, the idea that I'd worked there ten years, that they wouldn't even have me come in to discuss it, 'cause I had said, did you see the entirety of this interview? Do you understand what happened here? And they said, we don't wanna see you. You know, the woman said, this decision has been made at the very highest levels. Don't come back and all that. I think a lot of people got turned off. And I realized too at that moment that it was about far more than me and my little comment, that it was really about the American people feeling like they were being told what you can say and what you can't say on so many issues, and that this had somehow been the straw that broke the camel's back, and that a lot of people reacted in support of me, especially conservatives, I found, by saying that they had always felt like they can't speak their mind without being told that they're bigots or bad people or ignorant. But I must say, it was across all ideological lines. I mean Jon Stewart, Whoopi Goldberg, Jesse Jackson, they all said, you know, that's wrong. You can't be doing that. You can't fire the guy 'cause he said it makes him nervous. So, you know, the--it, again, you know, that was a second instance in my journalistic career where I felt like the institution had really turned on me, and it was painful because I loved both institutions. But, yeah, it was a lesson for me, you know, about how I can get caught in political winds, much like any politician, and I don't think of myself as a politician. I think of myself as a journalist. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I even heard--I didn't hear the whole rounded show, but I heard the quote, you know, and-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --it didn't seem like--I mean you, a lot of people (laughter) (unclear) felt the same way. Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: But even though they wouldn't, as you did, say that the people didn't bomb the World Trade Center because they were Muslims. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: They bombed it because they were terrorists. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Not, you know-- Speaker 1: And I said at the time, you know, we have to be careful, we shouldn't--I mean it's all there. It's not like you wake up--I've said to people subsequently, in giving speeches about this, it's not like I woke up the next day or woke up in the middle of the night and said, oh, if I'd only said this, then I wouldn't have been misunderstood, or I was in the shower and, you know, how you're in the shower and you think, oh, I should have said it this way. I never had that moment because everything is there. I said, that we have to be careful not to stigmatize, discriminate against people. I said this all there. And, you know, it's why I wrote a book about this called "Muzzle," and I said right then and there in the book, I think that, you know, they had trouble with me and my journalism. They certainly didn't have any other black men on the staff. And I think that, you know, they had problems. Story_ID: 39487 Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, that was--yeah, that's 2010. Now, what has your, you have a, you catch a lot of bullets on Fox News, you know, you're a person whose opinions usually go contrary to the commentators on Fox News. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: They employ you but they shoot at you (laughter), and you have to fire back, and it's a lot of--tell us about that experience. Speaker 2: About what experience? Speaker 1: The experience of Fox News having you hold a position against people like Michelle Markhams-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and Sean Hannity. They have an opposite opinion of the ones that you express and some of the battles that you have-- Speaker 2: Oh, I have battles with them regularly. I mean it's important, I--this is, what I get from so many people, people in the airports, people who write and email, is, you know, thank God you're willing to take on some people who have strident and stridently right-wing opinions, and present a different point of view. In 2012, in the midst of the GOP [Republican Party] primaries, I was in the news again because I was one of the Fox Hosts for a GOP debate in South Carolina. And there I am questioning Newt Gingrich about calling President Obama the food stamp president, saying that there's a poor work ethic among young, black people. And I'm saying, you know, aren't you playing to racial antagonizing--antagonisms, aren't you belittling black people? And the audience is hooting and hollering at me. But that fact that I'm asking the question, the fact that I'm putting the Republican, a conservative Republican on the spot and making him respond, drew a tremendous response. And people say, you know, thank God, you're there in that environment and call people on racially incendiary remarks and insensitive remarks. And I get that all the time. I mean in the airports especially, or at the ballgame. You know, people, even hard right-wingers will come up to me and say, you know, I don't agree with all you say, but I'm glad you're there, and I value listening to you. And so that's very gratifying for me. Story_ID: 39488 Speaker 1: Okay, how would you describe your professional philosophy as a journalist? Speaker 2: You know we, earlier in this talked about being the philosophy major and learning critical thinking skills and I think that, you know, especially as compared to the prior generation of black journalists who were in a position where black journalists weren't in the papers. There were no black writers to give voice to the black community. And I think that generation as the pioneers, the people who broke through those barriers, oftentimes were in a position where they were the first to give voice to the black perspective and to the black interests, political interests, social interests, whatever. And I think I represent the next generation, the next generation that says, you know what? I wanna see by critical standards what the black politicians are doing. We talked about Marion Barry. I wanna challenge some of the conventional thinking in the black community and make people question or see things a little differently, where are we getting results? Why is it that we still have bad schools, and so many especially are big-city schools? Why are we struggling in terms of family breakdown. I wrote a book that I think captures some of this way of thinking, and the book is called "Enough", the phony leaders, dead-end movements and cultural failure that's undermining black America and what we can do about it. That's the subtitle, but the title is "Enough." And it's basically a book about Billy Cosby, and Bill Cosby coming out of the 50th anniversary of "Brown" [Brown v. Board of Education, 1954 Supreme Court decision] and saying before a black-tie audience here in Washington, "you know, there's, what are we celebrating? Fifty years later, there's so many black kids who aren't graduating from high school. There's so many black kids who, if you ask them about an education, have no idea that black people had to turn the world upside down to get into schools. Why is it that we don't talk about the high out-of-wedlock birth rate? Why don't we talk about the high poverty rate? What are celebrating?" And I picked on that because I related to that, that Cosby was challenging the black community to not just simply be pointing fingers at the white community but to look at our own strengths, to look at our own weaknesses, and to say, here's what we need to do to make for a better world for our black people in the United States. I mean he was seeing black people as, black Americans, as the richest black people in the world. And I related to that. You know, we have strengths, we have so much to be proud of. Why don't we focus on what we have done right and what we can do to help our families grow even stronger and help young people to succeed rather than making excuses for our failures. And so, you know, that way of thinking, I think, represents the kind of journalist that I am. I can be contrary and I can be a critical thinker, but one that always, I think, deeply tied into--and I think this is evidenced in the body of my work, the history of black America, the struggles, the successes, the ability to say we stand, I think, astride American history in terms of making sure that America lives up to its promise, and that we have broken barriers for women, for Hispanics, for the disabled. I could go on in terms of press freedoms and rights. So much of that is modeled on what the black community is able to do in terms of what I consider to be the crowning social movement of American history, the American Civil Rights Movement. But as I say, I think we move on, and you have to ask critical questions, and you have to continue to grow, and you have to view it as a continuing evolving movement. You can't simply sit on what was the past. But I've told the stories of the past, and I now find myself especially as a journalist wanting to challenge and push growth in the black community. Story_ID: 39489 Speaker 1: Okay, now one of the criticisms of the book "Enough" was that there was, you criticized the efforts of a lot of Civil Rights leaders and black politicians. So, but you didn't offer enough in terms of what are your solutions to these problems. Speaker 2: It's totally bogus because in the book itself, and one of the--again, in the book it says, you know, when you come back to it. Here's what we need to do in every chapter that--you know, there's a chapter about crime and acceptance of crime and criminality and excuses and so many people who have come to allow jail to become a rite of passage for young, black men. It's just terrible. And, you know, I'm saying well, why is it that, you know, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is headquartered in Baltimore, Baltimore where the crack people and the heroin dealers dominate. A woman gets burned out of her house, a black woman for trying to complain about crack dealers on her street, why isn't the NAACP marching in support of that woman? Where is the church community in support of that woman? And saying that we have to understand the negative impact that crime has, not only on business in the black community, but on local property values in the black community, we wonder why the black middle-class is moving out to the suburbs and not staying in the community, people living behind bars, the seniors, unable to feel comfortable on the streets in their own black community. I think these are challenges, and saying we need to speak out against it. But on a global level, the solutions are in the book, saying if you don't wanna live in poverty, we know how to do it. We know that if you finish high school, even if it's the worst high school, if you, in fact, get a job, don't think you're gonna be the next NBA [National Basketball Association] star or the next wrap star, but get a job, develop references and contacts in some business world, even if it's flipping burgers, but know about the franchise business. If you then get married before you have children, but after cementing your education and professional career and what you're trying to do, get married then, and only then have children. But there's almost no chance you'll live in poverty. Well, what an important message I think, and it's in the book, to say to black people at a time when we have a twenty five percent poverty rate, when one of every four black people is living in poverty, when we have in excess of a fifteen percent unemployment rate, when we have close to forty percent of our children, black children living in poverty, when we have a seventy percent, out-of-wedlock birth rate. It seems to me that these are critical messages that are not being delivered, and it's in the book. So I find that criticism totally bogus and vacant, but I think it tells you something about people who are stuck and reluctant to say, well, you know, we do have to move on here. We have to deal with these modern problems that can be more difficult in some ways, but I don't see that it was more difficult than, you know, what Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Rosa Parks faced, you know, being told to go sit in the back of the bus. Story_ID: 39490 Speaker 1: Well, what do you envision as the organizational effort it would take to deliver that message that you just gave to-- Speaker 2: I don't think there's any mystery here. I think the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] remains the premier Civil Rights organization in America. The question is whether or not they're willing to deliver that message. It's just like recently on gay marriage, it was only after President Obama spoke out that they then felt the need to speak to this issue. They should be way in advance. I mean they should be in the ramparts of all social and civil rights issues. They shouldn't be caught in a position where they're bringing up the rear, and, you know, people don't expect them to be able to pull people together and lead. And that's what we've come to. They, it's become like, you know, fragile china that your mom left and you, you know, you keep it, but do you use it? No. Is the NAACP being used to advance the cause of equality, justice, to advance economic interests in the black community, to help with the educational crisis in our black community? I don't see them in the forefront of any of this. But they're there. The same can be said about so many of the Civil Rights organizations. You know, I think Urban League does a better job because they're very clear about their purpose in terms of the training and relationships with the business community to get people opportunities, internships and the like. But, again, where is that social message? I don't know that they consider that part of their mandate, but, again, they are so respected and they have that pulpit. The black church is another institution. I mean they're the richest institution in the black community. Are they using that wealth and their power in such a way as to push the community forward or are they--and, you know, you go in the black church today, you can see it's, it's a very old, it's a very elderly crowd. They're not bringing in the young people and especially the young black men in the way that they should be. These are challenges that exist, but you have to be willing to confront it as a journalist, as a writer and take the blow-back from people who don't wanna hear any critical comment in order to try to prod them, and I think that's what good journalists should be. You know the old slogan, "A good journalist, you know, should comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable." And some of these older institutions that were at the forefront in years past, I think have become comfortable, and in that regard, my job is to be the skunk at the garden party. It is to ask the hard questions. It is to make people who have power, they may be black, they may be Hispanic, they may be female, but you know what, if you're not delivering for people, if you're not using that to actually service people in need, to help people up, then, you know, what are you doing? And somebody has to ask that question. And oftentimes, it falls to me as a journalist. Story_ID: 39491 Speaker 1: Okay, what project are you working on or thinking about now for the future, you know, in terms of a book or media project? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I'm working on now at Fox [News], is we're developing something called "Fox News Latino" and the idea is that you would reach out to this emerging and large part of the minority community in the United States with strong political interviews and journalistic content. So Fox News Latino is something that I'm very involved with that's just, you know, emerging now. And similarly, I'm writing a book about people who've changed America over the course of the last 50 years, since World War II, and many of those people are people like Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], people who've been involved in transforming race relations in the country, bringing women into the mix, immigrants into the mix, changing the America that we know today. So I'm interested in telling that story effectively so that people come to understand the transformation of America that's going--ongoing right now. Story_ID: 39492 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your life, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's a journalistic legacy, but it's also an author's legacy. And, you know, you asked me what I think. Ironically, most people know me from TV or radio. Some people even know me from the columns, although I, you know, I write a column now for the "Hill Newspaper" here in Washington, D.C., and I write columns that appear on foxnews.com, so I think of myself as a writer and a critical thinker about race in America at the end of the twentieth, start of the twenty-first century. And I think people--I've created, I've created a body of journalistic work that people can look back on and have a sense of what was going on inside black politics, Hispanic politics, minority politics in this period, and I feel very comfortable, feel very proud of that body of work. I think people can look at it and have a sense of the issues and the currents, the trends, the forces and counter-forces at play. But I've also written books, "Eyes on the Prize," "This Far By Faith--A History of Black Religion in the United States," "I'll Find A Way or Make One," a history of black higher education in America, black colleges, "This Far by Faith," you know, kind of inspirational stories about people, largely unknowns who were, nonetheless, game changers in terms of civil and social rights history and gay rights, disability rights, women's rights, black rights. And then "Enough," again, talking about the failure of the black community to deal with some compelling issues in this day and age, and then the "Muzzled" book in talking about how difficult it is to have honest conversation. I think that body of work really stands, will stand up for a long time. But, you know, the reality is most people who know me, sometimes people say, really, you're the guy who wrote "Eyes on the Prize"? I know you as the Fox guy, or I know you from NPR and that NPR controversy. I didn't know you wrote "Enough." And it's like, well, whose name is on the book (laughter), you know. How many Juan Williamses are there? But it takes them a while to pick that up, and, you know, the same thing with the Thurgood Marshall book, you know. I'll be on the road and somebody'll say to me, did you write "Thurgood--I saw the name Juan Williams on that book. Is that you? And I'm like, well, yeah. What did you think? Story_ID: 39493 Speaker 1: There's a question I have, you talked about during the break. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sir, do you really think Fox News is fair and balanced? Speaker 2: It's not the question that I think invites a straight answer because you have to understand that we're in a moment in terms of American media where there's, the media landscape is now divided into fragments or niches. And Fox has a strong, conservative voice. That dominates. The top host in prime time are Bill O'Reilly, Sean Hannity. These are strong, conservative voices in my opinion. And even in the course of the star of the day, "Fox and Friends", all those shows that have lots of opinions, they tend to have conservative opinions. Now, the thing about it is, during the day, I think you can get pretty good reporting on Fox from the reporters, people like, you know, Ed Henry at the White House, Wendell Goler at the White House or State Department, Carl Cameron on a campaign trail. They'll tell you the news. You'll get the picture. But overwhelmingly, what you're getting from the people who voice opinion on Fox [Fox News], is that's the franchise. It's conservative, news from a conservative perspective and a perspective that you don't often hear on the other stations. And now what you've seen is, it's been so successful, it's the number one cable channel in the country, that MSNBC is basically trying to be the Fox of the Left, that they wanna be known for giving voice to liberal opinions and liberal points of view. So you have Fox as more conservative, MSNBC as more liberal. CNN has sort of lost identity in this niche market 'cause they're just the news here and there, and it's like, well, why am I watching? What's going on? So they didn't--so their ratings have sunk as a result in this new media landscape. And the other thing I would say to you about this is, you know, I work for Fox, and I've worked for Fox since '96 [1996], but have been under contract with them since '97 [1997], and here we are in 2012. And nobody's ever told me, hey, you can't say that. Or you're not allowed to say that. We're not, you're not allowed back here because you said that. I think I fit in as a foil sometimes for their large personalities, arguing with them. But they value the idea that there's another point of view and that somebody will stand up and challenge, and they're, you know, they may have a conservative host and a conservative guest, and then only get to me. And sometimes I think I have the worst seat, you know, the worst lighting, and I speak last. But I get to speak, and I get to say what I wanna say. And I oftentimes am like the lightening rod or what, what did Reggie Jackson say when his time with the Yankees, he was the straw that stirred the drink. You know, I set them off, you know, and they have to respond and we argue. But, you know, when I watch MSNBC, I don't see anybody coming from the conservative side who's challenging their verities, you know, on the liberal side. And, again, given my mindset, the kind of journalist that I want to be, which is somewhat contrarian, someone who's the critical thinker, someone who will challenge assumptions and make people understand that they need to get off their butt and help people. I find I can live with that role. I find it sometimes a burden to bear. I mean I get beat up from both sides. I find, you know, I'm not always celebrated because people say, especially black people say, well, you must be a black conservative. You're over at Fox. Or white liberals, you know, especially at the big papers will say, oh, my gosh, you know, supported Clarence Thomas. How can you do that? That's not acceptable. That's not cool. But for me I find that, you know, I can sleep at night, and I think I have a sense of fulfilling what is my role as a black journalist in this time who is calling attention to needs and arguments that are required if we are to progress, that if we really care about making sure that we are expanding opportunity and protecting the interests of the most vulnerable in our society. Story_ID: 39494 Speaker 1: Okay, now, a little while ago, I asked you what you considered to be your legacy. When you look back at everything, you know, the same way, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: Well, obviously, there were, you know, painful moments. I mean obviously getting fired in that very public and humiliating way by NPR and making me out to be like I'm a bad guy, I'm a bigot, I'm a bad journalist, and it's, you know, would I do it differently? I don't know what I could have done differently. I didn't--it's not like I made anything up or I said anything to appeal to a specific audience. I, I've always been the guy that I'd say the same thing on Fox that I would say on NPR, that I would write in the "Washington Post", that I would write in the "Wall Street Journal". It was just, you know--but I know now that there's a price to be paid. You know, would I have dragged my family through some of the things, you know, where people vilify me and, you know, in difficult times, it's not, no question or that thing with Clarence Thomas. There's a price to be paid to this day for being someone who admires Clarence Thomas. So, no, I understand that now. I'm not sure that I would have--I'm not sure what I could have done differently in either of those cases and had some sense of my own personal integrity 'cause then I would have had to say, well, you know, the price is just too high to tell the truth. You know, so, I don't know what I could have done differently there. Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us something about your family? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, one thing, maybe I wouldn't have put myself in the position where people could say, oh, well, you know, he's so loosey-goosey, he's telling dirty jokes in the newsroom. I wouldn't have, I think I would not have felt at the "Post" in specific and with regard to that Clarence Thomas sexual harassment situation, I would not have felt like, you know what? I should feel at home in a corporate setting, and that I should think that my colleagues are my friends. I think that was a mistake. Maybe I would, maybe I would be very clear about lines and I wasn't clear about lines. And I'm sorry, what was your question? Story_ID: 39495 Speaker 1: Oh, the question was, and we always ask this, tell us about your family? You have children, right? Speaker 2: Yes, so I am married to Delese West Williams, and she is the daughter of Arthur West, who was a doctor here in Washington. And I believe she's like a fifth or something generation Washingtonian. So her father was born here, and her grandmother, I think ran a bakery here. So generations for Washingtonians, deep roots in this city. And the father went to, I think USC, undergrad, and then was in the Navy and faced terrible kinds of segregation and then went to medical school here at Howard [University], part of that black middle class that was generated by Howard University and then set up a very successful private practice, had some government positions, but generally was a private physician here in Washington. And her mother was from Baltimore and part of a very distinguished black family in Baltimore. And she, too, went to Howard, so part of that Howard tradition of the black establishment in Washington, D.C. And her brother is a doctor in the tradition of the father, now, here in Washington as well. So she comes from a pretty distinguished family. And then we have three children. The first is a son, Antonio Mason Williams. His middle name is her, is my wife's father's--it comes from my wife's father. And his initials are my wife's father's initials. And he is a graduate of college--I'm trying to think of the name of the college, Macalester College in Minnesota. And then he got his graduate degree in communications from American [University], and he now works--he ran for City Council as a Republican in the District of Columbia where it's 10 to 1 Democrat, raised the most money any Republican's ever raised in the District of Columbia, and he now works as an executive at Comcast in Philadelphia. And so, he's quite successful, and we're very proud of him. So that's our oldest child. He's now 32. Then our daughter is 30, and she's a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and Georgetown Law. And she is at a major law firm here in the city, but she's on a personal level, the mother of our grandson, Eli, and pregnant with twins as we speak here in 2012. And then our third child, our last child, our baby, who is 24, he was born in 1988. I think that's 24. He is a graduate of Haverford College, the same college I attended. And he is now working in politics, and he's working on a Congressional campaign in Michigan as a communications director for an incumbent seeking reelection. And he's a very interesting young man. He spent two summers in China, one working for the China daily newspaper, and the other working for an American public relations firm, came back here, thought he might wanna do PR, but decides he really wants to do politics. And so he's out there, I think, developing a career as a political strategist, political thinker. I think he's the kind of person who would run political campaigns in the future. Story_ID: 39496 Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything you wanna tell us before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Remembered? As, you know, one of the top journalist of my generation, black, white, Hispanic, male, female, that, you know, when people are looking at critical issues and concerns of this time, that they would say, you know, let me check Juan Williams on this, let me see what he had to say about this issue. And let me see how he was writing, commenting about it, that anybody who's a reader, anybody who's a listener to radio or viewer of TV, a newspaper reader, or book reader would say, it's valuable--it's time well spent to spend time reading, watching, listening to this journalist. Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you very much. Story_ID: 39497 Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead and tell us about this one. Speaker 2: Oh, you don't have to focus in on it or something? There you go. Speaker 1: That's in focus. That's right, okay, this is just recording your voice. I'm gonna get a close up with the other camera. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us about this photo, please? Speaker 2: Okay, so this picture was taken at my brother's home in Potomac, Maryland. My brother, Roger, who is a lawyer and a banker and worked at, his last job was at the Andy Casey Foundation doing housing. And my family was there. I believe this was for Thanksgiving, and so this is my oldest son, Tony [Tony Williams], who was born in 1980, and my daughter, Regan [Regan Williams], who was born in 1981, and my youngest, Ralphie [Ralph Williams], was born in 1988. And I'm on the left there, and on the right is my wife, Delese [Delese West Williams], and I won't tell you when she was born, but she's a graduate of Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts], and what's the name of the graduate school you went to? Speaker 1: Simmons. Speaker 2: And Simmons College in Boston and had a long career as a leading social worker, clinical social worker. Speaker 1: Now, this is a picture taken, I'm not sure where-- Speaker 2: In the back of our old house on Second Street. Speaker 1: Okay, back of the first house that Delese and I owned on Second Street NW in D.C. in LeDroit Park which is right next to Howard University. And this is my father, Roger Williams and this is my loved aunt, Aunt Annie. And this is my mom, Alma Williams. This is Tony, our first son, born in 1980, and this is, I guess, Rae-Rae-- (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE): Yeah. Speaker 2: --born 1981. Speaker 1: This is another family picture but this one is some extended family. This is my mother here on the right. This is my brother, Roger. He's holding his daughter, Ashley. This is our daughter, Rae-Rae. This is my cousin-- Speaker 2: He's holding Christopher. Speaker 1: He's holding Christopher? Okay, he could be holding his son, Christopher. This is my cousin's son, Jonathan. This is my sister, Alaina's son, Jonathan. This is my dad. And who's this Delese? Speaker 2: Antonio. Speaker 1: And this is Tony. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Of course, you're in the center in the black. I'm sorry you do have to point out yourself because whoever's typing up-- Speaker 1: Oh, and I'm in the center in the black shirt. Speaker 2: Yeah, because we're not the (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, this is the day I graduated from college in 1976. And I'm there. My father is on the left, I'm in the middle, and my mother, Alma Williams, on the right. My dad is holding my diploma. Speaker 2: Okay, so here I am with my dad and I think this was at my dad's apartment in Brooklyn, and that's my dad on the left, my daughter, Rae-Rae, next to my dad. That's me in the middle in the black. That's Raffie[Ralph Williams], our youngest child in the blue, and Tony, our son in the white tee-shirt. Speaker 1: Now, I know where this is. Do you remember where this is, Delese? Speaker 2: It's at the zoo, National Zoo. Speaker 1: Okay, at the National Zoo. There I am with my oldest child, Tony. And so he looks to be about what, Delese, five? Speaker 2: About what year is this? Speaker 1: So I would guess--he was born in 1980-- Speaker 2: There should be a year on the back. Speaker 1: So he was born in 1980 so this would be around 1985 or so. Speaker 2: Okay, don't forget the years. Speaker 1: Okay, so here I am with my daughter, Rae-Rae, and she looks to be about three, so she was born in 1981, so this could be about '84' [1984], '85' [1985]. Speaker 2: Here I am with Muhammad Ali, and we were at a--I can't remember what event it was, but he was being honored here in Washington, and he invited me to come over. Speaker 1: Here we are in the back of my house on Whittier Street, and I'm not sure what year this would be, but Raffie looks to be about five, so this would have been in the early '90's [1990s], Delese? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, early '90's [1990s], and so this is Raffi, our youngest. This is my mom, Alma Williams, my aunt, Aunt Annie, our oldest child, Tony, me in the middle, my lovely wife, Delese, and our daughter, Rae-Rae. Speaker 2: This is a picture that was taken on the day that our youngest child was baptized and he is in Delese, his mother's arm. That's Rafael Lee Williams who has his grandfather's initials. And this is me on the right, and Delese in the middle, Raffi in her arms, Tony under her right arm, and Rae-Rae standing in front of Tony. Speaker 1: That was in 1989. Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989]. Speaker 1: Here I am with Bill Cosby. This is, I think, just before the book I wrote on Bill Cosby and his stand on, you know, challenging the black community to do better came out, and we were together. He invited us, Delese and I, to come to a performance he was doing at the Kennedy Center. Is that, was that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Here I am at Fox News Bureau in Washington, D.C. with Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, and my Fox News colleague, Britt Hume. Speaker 1: Here I am on stage at the Connecticut forum with three Nobel Prize winners. I was asked to come and interview them. You might recognize Elie Wiesel [1986 Noble Prize Winner] in the middle, and I'm trying to think. This is the president of Costa Rica, I think, and I can't remember the name of the woman. Speaker 2: About what year is this? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Is it on the back of the picture. Speaker 1: What's it say? Speaker 2: Nothing (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, it's nothing. Okay, I have no idea. Speaker 2: Okay. So this is a picture of me on Air Force Two with then Vice President, George Herbert Walker Bush when I was the White House correspondent for the "Washington Post". So I would guess that this would be around '84' [1984]. Speaker 1: Well, this has a date on it, June, 1966, and I'm graduating from the sixth grade. And as you can see, I went to a school that was integrated in Brooklyn. Speaker 2: Point to where you are. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Point to where you are. Speaker 1: I will--in Brooklyn, New York. And here I am in the middle. That's me, and here's my best friend, James. We were in the same sixth grade class. Speaker 2: Here I am with President Bush, after doing an interview with him in the Oval Office. Speaker 1: Here I am with Hillary Clinton after doing an interview with her for National Public Radio. Speaker 2: Here I am with Vice President Cheney and my lovely wife, Delese, after one of their Christmas parties. Okay, and the woman in red? Speaker 1: Oh, and that's Lynne Cheney, the Vice President--Vice President Cheney's wife, Lynne. Speaker 2: Here I am with my dad, and I think I'm at-- Speaker 1: Reagan. Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: That's with Reagan. Speaker 2: Right, right, right, but I think that I'm with my dad at my brother's wedding in 1981, maybe '82' [1982] at the-- Speaker 1: The hotel, the Park-- Speaker 2: The famous hotel in New York, right by Central Park. Speaker 1: The Plaza. Speaker 2: The Plaza, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Here I am playing softball on the mall [Washington Mall], when I used to, when I was--I guess this would have been like 1980, '81 [1981] when I was working at the "Washington Post." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Here I am with Colin Powell. I don't know--I think I had just done an interview with the General when he was the Secretary of State, and this was at the State Department. Speaker 1: Is that the original painting behind you? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Here I am with Tom Brokaw at the Kennedy Library in Boston, and this was after we had done, I think we had done an interview about the Kennedy legacy, and talking about journalists and the Kennedy's. Speaker 2: Here I am getting an honorary degree--no, I think it's a, I don't remember what it's called, but it's what Haverford College gives to their most distinguished graduates, and so I'm being honored that day at my alma mater. Speaker 1: Oh, here I am talking with Brokaw at the Kennedy Library in Boston. Speaker 2: I think this is a high graduation photo. Do you think that? Huh? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And I think this is another high school or-- Speaker 1: No, this is when you were in college. Speaker 2: College? How do you know? Speaker 1: Because you have the beard and you have the hair? Speaker 2: I have a beard? Speaker 1: I mean your mustache, and scruffy at the bottom. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is college. So this is between '72 [1972] and '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: And I think this is a college photo, right? Speaker 2: I'm not sure where this is. Do you? Speaker 1: Do you know where this is? Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: I think this is at a federal government--this is a banking agency. But anyway, I had given their Black History Month speech, and so here I am with the head of the agency. Speaker 2: Here I am with Condi Rice after I did a TV interview with her at Fox News, when she was Secretary of State. Speaker 1: Here I am with President George W. Bush after I'd done an interview with him for NPR News. Speaker 2: This is an interview for The HistoryMakers that I did with Colin Powell. Speaker 1: Here I am with FBI director, Mueller after interviewing him. Speaker 2: I think this is me at around the time, I could have been in elementary or junior high school in Brooklyn with my brother at a, I think it's a Thanksgiving Day football game. Okay, your brother's name? Speaker 1: Roger. Speaker 2: Okay, and I think this picture was taken-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think this is the picture that was taken when I became a naturalized citizen with my mother, Alma Williams. Speaker 2: About 1960 or so? Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that, '59 [1959] or '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: Here's a family picture taken just before my father died, and so we're in Brooklyn, I think in my brother's old home, and that's me, my sister, Alaina, who now lives in Switzerland, in the middle, my brother, Roger, who lives in Potomac, Maryland, my father, Roger Williams is on the lower left-hand corner, and my mother, Alma Williams, in the lower right-hand corner. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is my father standing in a locker room in Panama with Joe Louis. Here he is after his fighter has won a fight. This is my dad here right behind the fighter, and here's my father in the ring with his fighter. Speaker 2: And this is a picture that was taken of my family, 1958, I believe just before we leave Panama. This is the last family photo we took together. So on the left here is my dad, Roger Williams, next to him is my mom, Alma Williams. Behind them is my sister, Alaina, ten years older than I am, my brother, Roger, is on the far right, eight years older than I, and here I am at about four years old. Speaker 1: I believe there's one more, yeah, this is the last one. Speaker 2: So here I am. I'm on the far left. Next to Michelle Obama, President Obama [President Barack Obama] is in the middle, and my lovely wife, Delese, on the right at a Christmas party at the White House. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you...