 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University Library. Today is Friday, January 21, 2010. I am in McLoud, Oklahoma interviewing Sandy Ingraham. This interview is being conducted as part of the Inductees of the Oklahoma Women s Hall of Fame Oral History Project. Sandy was inducted into the Oklahoma Women s Hall of Fame in 1996. Thank you for joining us today. Glad to be here. Let s begin by learning a little bit more about you. Could you tell us where you grew up and give us a glimpse into your early life? I didn t grow up any one place. I m an Air Force brat. I was born in California. I m actually a Valley Girl, from the northern valley of California. We moved every year; I went to eight different high schools. I graduated from high school in North Africa and I ve just never really stayed in one place. Every time I moved I could change myself if I wanted because nobody knew me. So if you didn t like what you were or who you were or what you were doing, you just did something different the next time you landed. So growing up, what was your favorite place? Your favorite city, country I really enjoyed every place I was. I did my early high school years in southern California, did a lot of surfing. Moved to upstate New York and did a lot of skiing and ice-skating. When I went to North Africa, Tripoli, Libya, I did a lot of scuba diving in the Mediterranean, played bridge with Gadaffi at the time. I was in the last wave of civilians to be booted out of the country. Just everything was fascinating. My dad was in Air Rescue and so he had a nice job. He could fly around and save people. He was a pilot. 5 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Did you have a large family? A brother. He is two years older. So by the time I was in Libya, he had already gone to college University of Nebraska. Big rivals because I m OU. (Laughs) Not very orange; very red. That s okay. Very crimson and cr me. (Laughs) Well when you were going through your different high school experiences, did you gravitate towards any subjects that you just really liked and took to? Sports. I really liked sports. In fact, when I eventually started college, I was a physical education major. Played a lot of tennis. I loved tennis. I had a two handed backhand before Christy Everett was even born. (Laughs) For some reason, every time I moved in high school, we ended up in soccer season, so I was in soccer a lot. I played a lot of basketball. I just loved sports. And when you were growing up, did you have any aspirations? Did you say, When I grow up, I want to be this? No, not specific aspirations. I just knew I could be anything. My parents were big into education. I think I would more refer to the way I lived as kind of a gentile poverty as a child, but it seemed pretty flush to me at the time. We were officers. I was an officer s child in the military. We lived in good homes. My dad made good money, didn t want for anything. Never doubted I would go to college, never even thought twice about it. We valued education. That was where the resources were put and that was where I went. I ended up paying for my own college after awhile. We kind of split in my early college years, but the childhood was wonderful. How did you make your way to Oklahoma? I kind of ran out of money here. I was in North Africa. I was sort of heading toward California. I stopped here because this is where my mother was born actually, Pauls Valley. She didn t stay here, but had a lot of maternal family in this area. Kind of hung around. Started at Oklahoma City University. Had a small tennis scholarship and they accepted it. They forgot to tell me that there wasn t a tennis team at the time (laughs), but we got over that. And while you were going through school you started working? 6 Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Yes. Well, I worked kind of from the outset. I worked at Beef and Bun hamburgers and things like that; just always worked. In fact, I had a key to the dorm because I worked so late, I d have to let myself in. Then, that was in the mid 60s and politically I kind of split from the world, Oklahoma and my family because of the Vietnam war. I was not real fond of it and I said so (laughs) and my brother was in Vietnam and my aunt in Oklahoma City would cut out the articles about what I said and send it to him and he got all the attention and I love him to death. We got over this a long time ago. He s just a wonderful brother. But as a result, I ended up paying for the rest of my education myself, going through school. I did some CPA work and some different things and ended up going back to school at Central State University. I guess it was Central State College at that time and now it s University of Central Oklahoma and I graduated from there twice and from OU twice. Just to go back for a second, was there a lot of political unrest, lots of protesting with the war? Not a whole lot at the time. That was kind of at the beginning of it. I think that s why it caught so much attention. The fact that my dad was in Air Rescue in Europe and my brother was in Vietnam was why the press would pay attention to anything I said at the time. Not that I was important in and of myself, but it became newsworthy. It was at the beginning of the protests and people who were opposed to the war then, as I think the whole world knows now, we were right, but then we were seen as being wrong and ostracized and it wasn t very pleasant. The university didn t like it either. I get the feeling that you would definitely stand out in Oklahoma if you opposed the war. Definitely. People would definitely take notice. Yes, yes. Definitely. And I probably stayed on sort of the left side of the political world my entire career and everything I do is kind of on the left side, kind of progressive. I do work that I want to do. I don t do work that I don t want to do. Being my own boss, I get to choose where I put my time and my efforts and as a result, I ve kind of ended up living parallel to the society in Oklahoma, instead of in it. Well jumping back to college, you received your degree in I received a degree in English Literature. I received a degree in Philosophy and then I got a master s in Social Work and a Juris 7 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Doctorate. Now did you go straight through for your first master s degree? Not really. Well, yeah, through the master s program, I did two years in a row. About seven years in undergraduate school, two years and then a long gap. I was middle forties before I went to law school. Your first master s degree is in Social Work, correct? Yes. What steered you in that direction? The kind of work I thought I was going to be a counselor. I thought I was going to mess with people s heads, help them deal with stuff. When I actually started in school and I was like a new duck, because all my undergraduate work was English Literature and kind of esoteric and I loved it. In fact, my philosophy degree is probably the one thing that puts me in the best stead for anything I do. But I didn t have a background in social sciences and sociology and social work at all so when I went to graduate school, I just loved it. Everybody else that I went to school with was kind of sick of it because (laughs) they had gone and gotten their bachelor s in that, but it was all new stuff to me and I just loved it. I got interested in social policy and community organization and social change and became a big fan of Saul Alinsky and did the kind of work of community capacity building, which President Obama did a lot of when he was a practitioner. In fact, that was pretty interesting listening to him try to explain what he did because nobody ever understood what I did. (Laughs) So I switched to policy and when I got out of school, I went into legislative advocacy lobbying. Tell me about some of your first experiences down at the Capitol as a lobbyist. They were pretty interesting. I arrived at the Capitol as a student practicum under the School of Social Work. It was the second year it was a block practicum and I had a difficult time finding an agency that would house this practicum because nobody had ever done it before. I ended up at Neighborhood Services Organization in Oklahoma City. The guy that ran the agency at the time is now a City Council person in Oklahoma City, Sam Bowman. Just a wonderful fellow; I learned a lot from him. My immediate supervisor was Ben Brown who eventually became a state senator also. But they just let me go up to the Capitol and see if there was a way to impact policy that affected clients and providers of social work, social services, and I did that. They had a 8 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham health issue, for example, and I organized a bunch of people that had been turned away from Oklahoma City hospitals to go and talk to the legislators and I would get the media involved so that people would show up, one thing and another. I ran quickly into the conservative right wing faction, at the time; mostly public, not legislators. The legislature was actually fairly progressive at that time, especially compared to now. I was trying to get a bill passed that allowed young people to self consent for mental health care. The idea was if a child was thinking about suicide, for example, and their parents were the problem, they had trouble getting help because the parents had to consent, so I wanted an exception. Of course, the way the bill was drafted, you could drive a truck through it and it also threatened to give kids the right to self consent to birth control, to abortion, to a bunch of things that people didn t like. And so one of the conservative senators called the school and told them I was a hippy and wore jeans to the Capitol, which wasn t true. From that day on I never wore anything except hose and heels when I went in that building and that was forty-five years ago (laughs), so it s been a long time to change your dress. But you just don t let them pick on the easy stuff. You don t let them discount the work you re doing or your ideas for something stupid, that doesn t matter, that isn t going to change anything. So we did that kind of stuff and I eventually got lots of contracts with different organizations where I kept track of legislation. I didn t do that much lobbying for these different groups, but I would track the legislation and report to their boards and their members about what was going on and advise them if they wanted to do anything about it. And so I put that together as a business and did it for twenty, twenty-five years, and probably made more money than most social workers, but I never had to worry about it. There were people who couldn t pay me and I would just work for them, and other people that overpaid me and I would work for them and it all came out in the wash. What were some of the key issues that were really close to your heart that you championed? One of my favorites was the good faith donor bill, which allows people to donate food that might be mislabeled or have the labels on upside down or something. Back in the old days, food companies that had a product that was perfectly good wouldn t donate it to a food closet or a church that served poor people because the chain of liability carried it. So if the recipient got sick because of drinking the milk or whatever they got, then they could sue the original donor. So I helped write and pass a bill that cut off that chain of liability. If somebody donated it and it was in good condition and it was hurt later, then the chain of liability got cut 9 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham off and we used that bill to generate extra donations from very generous corporations that gave lots of food. It helped the food bank and it helped the small church food closets. That was fun. That was fun. I also did a bill on allowing non-profit organizations to be able to rent HUD foreclosed homes for a dollar a year provided they house homeless people in them. Ran into a lot of opposition with that one. There was Jim Lange, back in his days with the political cartoons, it s hanging out there in the office, you can see it if you d like. It s a political cartoon where there is a hobo leaning over the fence talking to a guy in a hot tub and he says, Hi, I m your new neighbor. There is this unnecessary fear that homeless people were going to move into rich neighborhoods and ruin the character, you know. That wasn t what it was about. So those were the kinds of things that I worked on and I loved it. It was a great way to change policy. I wouldn t have run for office on a bet; still not interested in that because from the position I was in I could do more than any single legislator. So I wouldn t have done that even if I thought I could. And I wouldn t want to. Were the legislators always open to meet with you, especially in those early years? Yeah, yeah. And they still are. Oklahoma politicians are very populist oriented where they understand that their power comes from people and they are responsive to people; you can get an audience with just about anybody. Very few of them have that kind of elitist attitude that you might expect them to have. It s not very common in Oklahoma. Were there any favorite legislators that you liked working with through the years? Oh, lots of them. Too many to name? Too many to name, but I will tell you that David Riggs is probably one of my most favorite. He s been out of office for a long time now. He s an attorney in Tulsa, has Riggs Law Firm, a pretty big law firm; he s got an Oklahoma City office and a Tulsa office. But he had so much integrity, and that was pretty rare down there. People would do one thing and they would say another thing, but David Riggs never did and I didn t agree with him on everything, but you could always bank on what he said, and that was a nice commodity. I worked with people like Bernest Cain, who got term limited and he s out of the legislature now, but he was always in charge of the Human Services Committee and did the issues that I cared most about and so we worked together on several 10 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham things and he was a good man. Lots of people, I mean I would be remiss if I started trying to name them all, including current ones. Did you ever have any run-ins with the governor? Which one? (Laughs) There were lots of governors during that time span. Did they ever turn around, see you coming, and go the other way? Well, I ve had people do that, but it wasn t a governor. But it was someone pretty close to a governor and pretty recent and we won t even go into that one. (Laughter) But I will tell you, he walked into a closet to avoid me, and I just wanted to stand outside the closet so when he came out, he d be embarrassed, but I just went on. (Laughs) But at any rate, yes, one of the groups that I worked with was the Oklahoma Conference of Churches. We did work on poverty and social policy that affected poor people in Oklahoma. One time we got funded by the Hands Across America project to look at what budget cuts we were doing for poor people. So I would write studies on poverty in Oklahoma and we did several of them under the Conference of Churches and then the Conference of Churches would have ceremonies where they would hand them to the governors and things like that. I ll never forget, the first time we did it, the governor just wouldn t take it. (Laughs) I won t name him. He didn t want to know there was any poverty. He later took them and they got to be quite notable in the state of Oklahoma, setting the issues and framing the issues and kind of counting how much of our population needed assistance, but it s not a thing that politicians like to hear about their state, so sometimes we had some problems. Then sometimes state agencies and I would get crosswise and the governors often times had appointed the directors for the agencies. I was called in the governor s office with an agency head one time and the governor pulled the curtain and screamed at me, so yes, I ve had a few run-ins, but mostly I ve survived it. My favorite governor was actually Henry Bellmon, which was not even my own political party, but I just adored that man. He was a good, good person and I really hate his passing. My parents were here one time visiting and I took them to a show at the Omniplex, which was a photographic exhibit of the homeless. I didn t know Governor Bellmon and his wife were going to be there. He saw me and so I took my parents over to introduce them to him and my father and he, they looked like that old cartoon where the two kids are standing there with their thumbs in their jeans going You been farming long? (Laughter) Henry Bellmon had always put me in my mind of my own father and to see them in the same place of course, my mother just stood at attention beside both of them. (Laughs) 11 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham I really liked him, and I like the current governor and I ve liked all of them all along. They re all different, but they re pretty cool. We have a very weak governor system. This isn t a comment on the governor, but we have a weak governor system in the state of Oklahoma, so except for the publicity, the pulpit kind of, the governor really doesn t have a lot to say about policy. So from your standpoint, looking at policy and making change in Oklahoma, who has the power? People. People have the power. I think if people get organized and want something, they can probably get it. In my many year career, there was always somebody that was up and the most powerful at the time; it would change from the House to the Senate. Periodically the governor would seem to have the public s ear more than anyone else, but it would rotate a lot. But the House and the Senate tend to have more of the structural power. They can get things done. Governor Keating, when he was governor, he very effectively used the veto. And he passed many bills. He would veto bills and the legislature, as it gained Republican membership, would uphold his vetoes and he set a lot of policy with that method. But it was up to the Legislature to back him up. Brad Henry is kind of in the same situation with it reversed, with the numbers reversed, and he hasn t done quite as much as Frank Keating did on that same issue. I still do a lot of legislative training. I don t go to the Legislature anymore. I stopped that; it ll be two years in June. I stopped having a client that took me down to the Capitol to effect policy, but I do a lot of training and I train people with disabilities and partners in policy making and older advocates with the aging leadership organization. Do you miss going down there? No, no. I m perfectly happy to not anymore. And there will be a time out there in the future where my training won t be any good anymore because I m not there, but right now it s still relevant. I ll just stop doing it whenever it loses its relevancy. So you received your law degree later in life. What motivated you to go to law school? All the time that I spent at the Capitol, I actually fell in love with the law. I knew nothing about it when I started. I was interested in policy and law is policy and I learned about it and I learned about statutory law. I had no concept of case law or any of that kind of stuff that lawyers mess with. And when I stopped lobbying full time, when I just decided 12 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn that I had had enough of that, I wondered what to do and I thought, Well, I like the law. I ll go to law school and learn more about it. And I loved it. I just couldn t wait till I could go to school. (Laughs) This is kind of silly. A lot of people hate it, but I have always been into education and never expected to practice law. Never have advertised. I ve got a huge client load and a lot of them are people that I ve worked with over the years. It s just that networking thing that goes on. I specialize in those kinds of things where the law and social policy seem to overlap, so estate planning and adoptions and I do special needs trusts and things like that. I started practicing law because people that were friends needed stuff and it s been nice to be able to help them. So, I ve done that. And I do both now. I still do social policy and I do legal work. What s your favorite thing about being a lawyer? Being able to help people. It s very much the same as social work. In fact, I don t think I practiced as much direct social work until I became a lawyer. It was like, now people will come in and sit down and tell me their troubles and I never had that kind of social work practice being in the policy arena. People have a lot of needs and when you are an attorney, people will sometimes listen to you more. People will return your calls, all kinds of things. Being an attorney scares people quite honestly and I don t like to scare people, but I do like to be able to help people get what they need. I m now sixty-two years old and I have a lot of friends that are older and a lot of friends that are sick and a lot of clients. Because I practice estate planning and I deal with a lot of elderly people, a lot of them die. I go to a lot of funerals and it s very comforting to me to be able to say, Do you need help? and to be able to actually do something for somebody when a loved one dies. Being a lawyer and being able to tell them what they need to do or not need to do, whether they hire me or not, that s not even the important thing, but just being able to provide some tangible help to somebody at a time like that, that s my favorite part of law. And you ve stayed in Oklahoma all these years? Yes. I have to drive to the ocean periodically to get a fix (laughs), but I have stayed here and I ve done that for a lot of reasons. I really like Oklahoma. I like the people. It s a very affordable place to live. I kind of hit the ground running when I got out of school and I have a lot of contacts. Like for example, I couldn t take my law practice, uproot it and move it to California because I wouldn t have the contacts, I wouldn t have the clients, I wouldn t be able to afford to be there, so Oklahoma and I fit. I m an Oklahoman by choice. So I ve stayed here. And how long have you been in this part of Oklahoma? 13 Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham I bought forty acres out here in 1975 or 76. Time flies when you re having fun. I built a home on it and built this office in 1998, I think. I have a geodesic dome and when it got too full to office out of, I built this office. Started remodeling the dome, trying to get it ready for retirement, ramps and fixing it up some. I ll show it to you soon. You re kind of far away, but not so far away. You re kind of isolated, but not isolated. Is that how you like it? Yes, people have to want to be there. They have to want to come. I mean I don t get any accidental visitors. I don t get any traffic that isn t trying to get here. I actually had a death threat once. It was in an adoption case. It was kind of interesting. The guy that threatened me threatened me and the judge. (Laughs) And I thought, Well now, that s interesting. I didn t worry about it too much because in order to get here, he would have had to call and ask for directions. (Laughs) So I didn t worry too much. It s a great location because GPS, let me tell you, it s not going to pick up. (Laughter) No, it doesn t get here at all. In fact, people who try to go online and get directions end up someplace way south of McLoud. I m not actually in McLoud, I m north of it. I m even in a different county. I m actually in Lincoln County, not even in the same county as McLoud is. The mail goes through there and that s why it s my address. That s outstanding. Well, throughout your career, can you go into detail about some key moments that you consider your biggest career highlights? I don t know if you could call them moments. They ve been more like years or activities. One of the things that I liked the best is being able to write and shape issues and explain to people how good or bad something is. So I ve done a lot of assessments and kind of looking at the scheme of things. I write Kids Count. I don t know if you re familiar with that, but it s the Annie E. Casey funded child advocacy effort and in the state of Oklahoma. It goes through the Institute for Child Advocacy and it s a once a year data book on children. I get to write it. Every state does one and that s fun. One of the most fun things, but it s been thirteen or fifteen years, so I don t know if it s a moment. I remember the one that I did right after the bombing in Oklahoma City. I did the lead essay on the children that were killed in the bombing and that one page of writing is probably the best I ve ever done. That was a highlight within the Kids Count stuff. 14 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham SoonerStart, special education for infants and toddlers, I was doing some work for the State Health Department and the Commission on Children and Youth when it became an opportunity to set up special education for infants and toddlers in Oklahoma. That was back in 89, 90. And because I had done a lot of work already and we convened a lot and got a lot of ideas on how a system like that ought to run, we were third in the nation to we may have even been first because three states were the first to be awarded and Oklahoma was one of them, so we were kind of on the forefront on that. I did that and dealt with the funding of it and the policy and implementation of it since 1990 until about a year and a half ago when I retired from that. That was a highlight. Special education I mean, if you think about being able to help somebody, looking at providing early intervention services for little tiny kids from birth to age three, just to get them off to a good start; therapies. It s a free program and it s wonderful. That s a highlight. What about some defeats? I didn t have any until I became a lawyer. Really? (Laughs) Yeah, it s kind of interesting. When you practice law you have to learn how to lose and I don t like that much. In the policy work, I never really had a defeat because I had time to deal with it. If you don t get something through one year, you come back the next year. You do a different strategy. If you do it thoughtfully and if you know what you re doing and if you understand how the system works, you can pretty much get something through. In law, you present your best case in front of a judge and the judge makes a ruling or the jury makes a ruling and you take what you get. People aren t always right. Sometimes people come and they want something, you advocate for them and they re just not on the right side of the way it works. And I also am not sure that the system is always just. In fact, I believed in justice a whole lot more before I became an attorney and now I see a lot of people losing when they shouldn t, whether I m representing them or not. Of course, when I m representing them, they shouldn t. (Laughs) But it doesn t always work out. It s scary. And I would advocate for people staying out of the court system if they can mediation, try to settle, try to work it out. Why is that? Because you keep more control over what happens to you. You get to decide what to do and the fixes stay together longer. If you have a very adversarial relationship with somebody and you go to court and you fight and you turn over the decision to some judge and they say this is 15 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham the way it is, nobody is going to be happy with that and it ll become unraveled. If you sit down with the other person and you actually work out a solution and you both agree to it and you both commit to it, it s going to last a lot longer. And it s probably going to be less painful and if there are children involved or other vulnerable populations, then they re going to be less harmed. So it s a better deal. You have to be careful you don t go to the lowest common denominator and not fix things. You have to do it well, but it is a better way to live. I m an attorney that says, Don t go to court. So it s probably not real. (Laughter) When you were notified that you were going to be inducted into the Oklahoma Women s Hall of Fame, and I know it was a long time ago, 1996, what was going through your mind at the time? Oh, I didn t believe it. I had never been much for awards, although that one seems pretty cool. You re in great company. Oh, I know and at the time I was on the faculty of the School of Social Work and I taught some policy classes and I used stories and biographies and stuff from the Women s Hall of Fame. I taught people about Clara Luper and Angie Debo and all of those wonderful people that had been inducted and when they called me, well, my friend Claudia Tarrington was running it at the time, she called me and sent me a letter and it s got a personal note on it congratulating me. And I just couldn t believe it. The company was just like way up there and there were people that I talked about and I would follow around and try to learn stuff from and I would bend down and kiss their feet, to even be put on the same list as most of the women in that organization is just mind boggling. Well what s great is that you have a good mix of people who have done varying things for their community and their state. Yes. In some cases, you have people you feel are just ordinary women who happened to do extraordinary work. So you re in great company. Do you remember who nominated you? Oh yes, I do. My sister-in-law, Victoria. Victoria married my brother and became more like a sister to me than probably she thought she was going to be; it was really cool. She s a very, very neat person. They live in Southern California now and I don t get to see them quite as often, but 16 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham I just adore them. They lived here in Oklahoma City at the time and I think she worked for AP. She was a photographer and a newsperson and she knew about the Women s Hall of Fame and she knew about the work I did and believed that I deserved to be in it. So she started this process and she got letters of recommendation from people like Frosty Troy, like Anne Roberts at the Institute, Stratton Taylor who was President Pro Tempore of the Senate at the time, Tom Kemper who was head of the Commission on Children and Youth, Ann Taylor who used to be mayor of Nichols Hills. Probably somebody else that I m forgetting, but they all are wonderful people and I ve worked fairly closely with them over the years and they wrote such wonderful things. Of course, I was a shoe in after getting blessings from all of those people. And did you attend the ceremony? Oh, yes. I paid a lot of money for the dress. (Laughs) Now the ceremonies have changed quite a bit. Yes, they have. Can you describe it for me? I mean we re talking Oh, it was at the Gilcrease in Tulsa and I mean, it was extremely formal. It was a dinner and they had a master of ceremonies, it was George Nigh. I remember just some of the most important people in the state of Oklahoma were in the audience. They would call us up there; I gave a speech and a friend of mine hired a bar and we all went and partied afterwards and it was great fun. We stayed over there in a motel suite and had a great time. It was very formal, very classy. And I have had friends get inducted into the Women s Hall of Fame of late and they don t get treated nearly as nicely as we did back then. The ceremony has definitely changed. Yes, yes. The honor is still great and the people are still wonderful people and do great things, but they don t get quite the treatment that we did back then. You ve touched many lives. You ve taught graduate school for many years. How do you feel that now people look at you and they see you as that role model? I ve told people for years, people that know me well, it s kind of like there s this myth over there. There s this myth of Sandy Ingraham. I 17 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn don t even sometimes feel like I m that person. I ve had a wonderful time. I ve been able to choose the work I do. I m the beneficiary of the kind of work I do. I mean I ve made good money. I ve lived a good life. I ve done the kind of work I wanted to. I ve received a lot of notoriety, a lot of accolades. I ve got an ego wall in my office that s got plaques all over it. People know my name and I can talk to governors, I can walk into anybody s office and it s never bothered me anyway. I call them by their first name (it s the way to kind of equalize things). (Laughter) And I know that there are people that think there is something special about all of that and it is a role model. What I try to do with that I m just a person. I ve got some skills and they re very achievable skills. You can learn how to do the stuff I do and you can do it. And you can be just as successful. That s one of the things I like about teaching and training is that I try to impart that, because anybody can do this if they just think about it and they care about it. Well if you could give advice to Oklahomans today, what would you tell them? They need to get back to caring about each other. It s like everybody s gotten mad and hateful and prejudiced and selfish in the past few years and this state had the nicest people in the world people that would do anything for anyone, and I don t see that now. Everybody is always blaming somebody. Blaming government, blaming the president, blaming the governor, blaming the legislature, blaming their neighbors, blaming somebody that s not like them moving into their community and you know, people need to get past that. That s not what Oklahomans are about and it doesn t work well. It doesn t set well. And it hurts a lot of people. I envision a time when we flip that over and we go back to being the kind of Oklahoma that we were in the bombing, for example, when everybody came to help. Everybody gave everything. Poor people in this state give more stuff than they have to other people. Politicians will help somebody, will vote right just because it s right, even if they don t want anybody to know it because they think that there s people that wouldn t want them to be nice and be helpful and I think we just need to get back to all that. That s what I would say. And we will. It ll cycle back. Everything seems to. Yes. And that statement is true, If you don t remember history, you ll be condemned to relive it. I think as we cycle, we can improve things as we go through this process, if we remember. If we have a sense of history. Well for women especially, and for men, for those who would like to 18 Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham follow in your footsteps, maybe enter social policy or even law, do you have some advice to share with them? Do it. There are great needs. You can make great change in the policy arena if you are a private practitioner. If you have some skills and are able to reach out as an attorney and represent one person as a counselor and work with one person, you might do wonderful things for those individuals. If you run policy, you can do wonderful things for thousands of people in one fell swoop. You can do so much in the policy arena. You can make such great strides. You can help lots of people at a time. It s a great position to be in. So I would tell people to do it and I would tell them to not worry about who is going to pay them to do it, because that s the thing that stops people. I want to be a lobbyist, but who is going to hire me? Well, nobody (laughs), not until you go do some stuff and get a track record. So just go do it and then point to it. Nobody asks if you were a volunteer when you did something. I mean, put it on your resume and go. So you can do it. Hook up with a group you agree with. The Sierra Club, Institute for Child Advocacy, anybody that is doing any kind of advocacy and just go learn how to do it. There s lots of people out there and lots of opportunities. What does Oklahoma mean to you, personally? Oklahoma is my home and it s a very comfortable place to be. It s where people generally are kind to each other and will help each other, will help their neighbors, and it s not cold. It s like everybody here accepts the responsibility of living in the state and doing whatever needs to be done. That s what it means to me. I m comfortable with that. Is there anybody you would like to make mention of that has played an important role in your life? Oh, there are too many. (Laughs) I m sure the list is long. The list is long. I don t even think I ll go there because I would inadvertently leave someone out. I think they know who they are. I have tried to tell people that I care about over the years how much I care about them and what they ve done for me and I think they know. If there s anybody out there that doesn t, they should talk to me because I ll tell them. I don t want to leave anyone out. Well when history is written about you It may not be. 19 Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham Nykolaiszyn Ingraham It may not be, but it may. What would you like for it to say? I cared and I tried. And I didn t change. I just stuck with it. I kept my ideals. I might change my expectations, but I ve never changed my standards and beliefs. Well is there anything else that you would like to add that we have not spoken about today? Can t think of it. You ve been mighty inclusive. (Laughter) Well we appreciate your time so much. Thank you. You re very welcome. ------- -------..