 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Today is October 2, 2007. My name is Tanya Finchum. I m with the Oklahoma State University Library, and we re doing a project called Women of the Oklahoma Legislature and I m here in Oklahoma City with Trish Weedn who was in the Senate from 1988 through 2000. Yes. Thank you so much for having us. Well, thank you for inviting me. Let s start by having you tell a little about your childhood, where you were born and that sort of thing. Okay. I was born in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and I m one of seven children born to Carl and Ted Throckmorton. I m the third from the oldest child five girls and two boys. My dad was on the farm, of course, from the time I was born. Had a farm and raised a large garden and then when I was about nine years old, my father bought some property and thought how exciting it would be to help the farmers who lived about fifteen miles from the nearest town. And, of course, we had a truck garden back then and sold vegetables and had cows and milked and everything, and he thought how good it would be to purchase a large fuel tank, gasoline tank, and bury it in the ground and have one pump and be able to sell to farmers gasoline so they wouldn t have so far to travel and to have it available much closer to the farms. So that s what he did. We had vegetables that we sold. We were on Highway 39 between Lexington and Asher, about halfway, and so dad bought that piece of property and thought, well, he d just do that along with selling vegetables on the highway. And Interstate 35 was going through at the 5 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn time and had gone as far as Purcell, so the traffic was tremendous. The traffic had a lot of cars and trucks, and it just grew in traffic, and so daddy s business kept getting busier and busier. As time went by, he started selling to automobiles. He put two tanks in instead of one. So that s how it kind of started. My parents owned a truck stop and a restaurant, twenty-four hour a day business from 1961 on. It just became a large business, and we worked a lot all of us kids seven kids worked a lot. (Laughs) And what was your mother s role in all of that? Well, my mother, of course, was the mom of the house until it got so busy, and we were open twenty-four hours a day. And then she worked just like we did. It was a twenty-four hour a day business and it was just run by family for many years until it became such a load. Daddy built a restaurant. Daddy would build as he had enough money, he would buy cement blocks at a time and would buy enough blocks until he had enough to where he could hire someone to put up the building, this gas station building. He just worked out of the pick-up, and then we had a little place we sold vegetables and that s just how we grew up. We learned how to work, all of us. And how to cook and clean Cook and clean and, oh yes, until we had a business, a twenty-four hour a day huge business. We had a restaurant and I cooked. I learned how to cook a full course meal by the time I was twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old. We had to learn how to do that. So when did you become interested in politics? My dad was very interested in politics. My dad s the one that encouraged me and of the seven children, I m the one that was always excited and involved in civic organizations. In school, I belonged to every club. I was president of the class. I just belonged to everything I could get my hands on because I was at Wanette and I was one of twelve students in school very small school at Wanette, Oklahoma. I went to school at Wanette for eleven years. But as far as politics, my dad was involved in Lyle Boren s campaign when he was in Congress, University of Oklahoma President Boren s father. My dad would talk about that and he would help commissioners get elected or work on someone s campaign. Then my grandfather was very involved as well, my dad s dad. They were born and raised around Wanette. So that s where I was raised and so it was just instilled in me. That s how I got involved. 6 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Well, when and where? What were the circumstances that surrounded your deciding to run for office? When I was, I guess I was twenty-one years old, I went to work at McClain County Courthouse. I went to work for the treasurer and was there for approximately seven years. I worked in the treasurer s office was deputy treasurer. The treasurer was very, very involved in the democrat party at the time along with the state party and the county party and the McClain County Democrat Women s Club. So she would take me with her because I was the one that was young and I was the one that really wanted to know everything I could know about politics. I wanted to be involved. Now my dad, by the time that I was in high school and of course we had our business and we were so busy dad wasn t really involved at that time like he was when he was younger. We were very young and, of course, my dad was much older than my mother. Dad was thirty-six when my mother and he married, and then he had seven kids. Dad got me involved. But when I really got personally involved and worked in the party was when I went to work for the treasurer. She was involved, so I went with her everywhere. I thought, Oh, my. I would meet candidates that were running for state office or governor, lieutenant governor or senate or house of representatives. Oh my, I was so excited and I just loved every minute of it. I would help the best I could and go door to door and got involved in that way. And then some of the county races and there wasn t very many incumbents that had opponents then, once they were elected like the assessor who had been assessor fifty-two years. But anyway, that s how I got involved with her, and I would attend state conventions and I would just get to be a part of it and got to see people. That was the most thrilling thing in the world for me. (Laughs) So that s how I got started. And before you threw your name in the hat, what led up to that? I was deputy treasurer at the time and, as I said, the assessor had been there fifty-two years. He became ill and wasn t able to walk up the steps to the second floor. He was eighty-seven years old, I believe was his age Casey Cavner. He d been there many, many years and so his first deputy that had been with him for like thirty-six years had already retired. She had already retired when he became ill and wasn t able to work anymore. We didn t have elevators so he couldn t go to his office. He decided to resign and retire, and the first deputy they talked her back. He talked her into coming back out of retirement and finishing out his term. I can t remember if it was two or three years he had left in his four-year term, but that was in 1978. I always tried to learn everything I could about every office while I was there, and so I thought, You know, 7 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn I can do this. And I was twenty-seven years old at the time when I had decided. She wasn t going to run for office again and it was going to be an open seat. So I decided to put my name in the hat, and I thought, Well, you know, it won t hurt anything. I ll just try to do my best, and I thought, You know, I can do this. I can run for office. So there were four men and myself to run. I ran and I was the youngest and it was just democrats. I was the second place in the top and the top vote-getter did not get fifty-percent plus one, so I was second in line. I think he had beaten me by fifty-two votes and so he and I were in the run-off. And that was in August. Then we had the first election, and he and I then were in the run-off. I beat him by 235 votes, I believe (Laughs) in the run-off and so that was it. I was elected in 1978. So you had a little practice before you started campaigning for the Senate then? Well, I had been there. I served ten years, had been elected three times and I was serving in the middle of my third term. And I had prepared, it was something that I wanted to do some day, to run for state Senate. So it was my time. I knew that if it was the time for me to run, I would know it was that time. In the middle of my third term in the assessor s office I felt it was the right time. So I ran. I put my name in the hat 1988. Why the Senate versus the House? I never wanted to run for House. Any particular reason why? I was the president of the state association during that time and I worked on a number of legislative issues. I stayed at the Capitol a lot because I was on the legislative committee for the state association as assessor. I had worked in committee and helped draft legislation, you know, with a legislator at the time. We had issues that we wanted to try to get through the legislature, either change or new language. I loved going to the Capitol. I loved working in that aspect of my job duties. Through that it was just an ambition that someday maybe I would run for the legislature. I tried to prepare myself during the entire time. I tried to prepare and be ready in case that time came. I learned as much as I could, and how legislation was, what they did and the process itself. So then when I felt like it was time in 1988. I had to resign my position. I couldn t keep my job. I had to resign in April and then we filed in June or July. I can t remember they ve changed so many times. I think it was July when I filed for office and started going door to door. 8 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Who was your campaign manager? I didn t have one. So yourself? I just had myself and lots and lots of people. I couldn t afford a campaign manager. At that time I just walked and worked. The first time when I ran for assessor, I had no money. I was very young, married and had two children when I ran for assessor. So I did not have any money at all. And back then people didn t spend as much well, we didn t spend as much. People just didn t give to campaigns like they do now back then. And of course, I was a woman and I was twenty-seven years old. I was running against college-educated men that had been in the community and their families were well-known. I was in McClain County and I was raised in Pottawatomie County so a lot of people did not know who I was. I didn t have that family connection in McClain County but the only way they knew me is when they came to pay their taxes in the treasurer s office but I always let them know who I was. They knew who I was because I helped with that but that s kind of how it started. Knocked on a lot of doors? Oh, but I think my signature ,when I ran from the very beginning to even the last year I ran in 1996 for Senate, was my business card. It had my information on it, my picture on it and my name. That s what I spent my money on and that s all I had. I spent 752 in two races. I walked in my first race in 78, and I made phone calls. And my opponent spent, I think, 14,000 in the two races Male or female? It was a male. I ve never ran against a woman, ever, in any of the races that I ve ever been on the ballot, even in the Senate race, even then. Yes, I ran against a lot of money. People had money, their own personal money that they used, and I didn t. I had the least amount of money of anyone ever in every race except my last one, I think. It was the first time in twenty-two years that I had more money than my opponent did. I d been in the Senate for eight years then and I had been elected ten years in the assessor s office. And I have a hard time asking for money for myself. Now I can raise you a lot of money, but I can t raise myself very much. I can raise people money. I love to raise money for things that I believe in. Did you have a campaign slogan? 9 Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum My pastor, I can remember, I still have the article it s a newspaper article and it was an ad when I ran for assessor. The slogan was (Laughs), and I debated whether to do this or not, was a full-page ad when it was the first year of my Senate race. I ran against a senator s brother that had been in the Senate. His name was Senator Bill Branch, and his brother ran after I d been in the Senate for four years. And my pastor at the time said, Hey, I thought up a slogan last night. And I said, Oh, what is it? because it was in a primary run-off, and I said, What is it? and he said, I d rather be Lead n with Weedn than out on a limb with a Branch. (Laughs) And I still have that. We printed that on a full-page ad with my picture and everything. I look back now and I think, Oh, my. That was the funniest ad I think, the most memorable ad that I ever had. Our pastor thought it up and he said, You know, we re going to have to get somebody to write something up in a cartoon-like thing, you know, and we did. We had it done and we put it in the paper. Purcell paper? Yes, it was the Purcell paper. It was a full-page ad in 19 had to have been in 92, probably 92. We ll have to see if we can find that. I have it. It was framed for me. Some friends framed that. It was a full-page ad in the Purcell Register and it was fun at that time. Do you remember your first day in office? Oh, yes. Well The Senate? The swearing-in in the Senate? Oh, yes. Justice Apollo was the Supreme Court Justice or the Chief Justice at the time that swore me in. I ll never forget it. I was just absolutely ecstatic. I just couldn t believe it. I can remember driving to work that morning in the car and going to the Capitol. And I d been to the Capitol numerous times, but of course I d parked in the south parking lot with everybody else and this time I had an assigned parking spot. I mean, it was just the most exciting thing, and I thought, Oh, my, what have I done? Am I worthy of this? Can I represent my people like I want to? And that s been my entire thought when I decided to run was I just wanted to be there for my people, represent my people. How many showed up for your swearing-in? 10 Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Oh, my. Well, we weren t supposed to have but about ten, (Laughs) but I think I had about twenty. I was really close to the Capitol. It was a lot different than having some legislators that were sworn in. There were twelve freshmen that year. Half of us run, twenty-four every two years, and half of us were freshmen. We were elected, and so there were a lot of us that year. There were term limits on the ballot. We had twelve out of twenty-four that had either retired or had an upset. There were a number of legislators that year that were upset. How many freshmen women? The women freshmen that came in that year let me think, in my freshman class (Laughs) You may have been the only one? I can t remember. I was just speaking of the twelve because we were all pretty close. We stayed pretty close. And they didn t do Mouth of the House in the Senate? No, no. We didn t do that in the Senate no, no, no. That was just not kosher. (Laughs) Everything was different in the House and the Senate. They were different. You asked me why did I decide to run for Senate and did I want to run for the House. I just never ever desired to run for the House. Did you live at home? Yes, as long as my children were at home. My oldest daughter at the time was thirteen. I had two daughters and they were still at home, but my husband and I had worked it out. He drove a truck. He hauled cars out of the GM General Motors Plant and so he would get up at 3:00 in the morning 2:00 or 3:00 in the morning, and he would be home by the time the girls got out of school. I was always with them in the mornings and always took them to school or waited till they went to school. And, of course, I had family and my mother and I had a lot of family in town in case something happened to get there quickly but we always worked our schedules out to where we were with the girls most of the time, one or both of us. Describe a typical day. How early would you get to the Capitol and how late would you stay? Well, like I said, when the girls were at home and when I was first elected, I didn t have the responsibilities that I did after I was there for a 11 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn number of years and had committee chairmanships and things like that. So when I was first elected, I would get there the girls would be in school by 7:30, 8:00, and I d go directly to the Capitol. Most of the committees did not start till 9:00, 10:00 in the mornings. If I needed to be there earlier, I had a lot of family there in town or the girls were older and they drove. The oldest one drove after awhile. So I would get there 8:00, 9:00 in the morning. And a typical day I was very seldom home early in the afternoon and at night. I d attend functions. If someone invited me to speak in my district, and I was close enough, I could maybe go to a breakfast at 8:00 or 7:00 in town or in my district. I lived halfway inside my district. I had Norman, all the way to the Sulphur exit on mile marker 50 in Garvin County. I had all that and I lived in Purcell, which was about halfway, so I was close enough that I could attend functions at night and I was most usually home late. I would leave after the girls went to school, like I said, but then it would be late in the afternoon or late at night before I would get home. I would stay at the Capitol late for meetings or attend functions in Oklahoma City or I would attend something in my district at night, and weekends I always had somewhere to go speak, almost every night. I mean every night. I tried to be very accessible to my people and if I was invited to attend a function, I always felt like it was important that I come and be there if they invited me. So the first person or first group that invited me, if I accepted, that s where I went. Very busy Yes, I was. And being close to the Capitol, I think you re busier than if you just stay there and you couldn t get back to your district. If you re close enough to where you can go to your district in the evenings and nights and attend all kinds of functions, school functions and county functions, and just all kinds of organizations and commerce banquets and Didn t have to cook for all those years? No, I didn t. (Laughs) No, I did not. (Laughs) Not very much. Do you remember the first bill you presented on the floor? The first bill I presented on the floor was well, I thought about that. I ve thought about that numerous times. It was a couple of years before I really had my own bill. Now I d debate them but the first year I did not have a bill. I believe it was a county assessor bill that they had asked me to run, and I felt like I was very knowledgeable about that. I was on the General Government Committee and it had to do with a county 12 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn assessor s position. It was an issue, I think, with mobile homes. We were having a really hard time. We kept changing back and forth whether you tag a mobile home or pay a property tax on it. It was back and forth so that was my first bill that actually passed and went on. Want to talk a little bit about some of your other bills that you re proud of? Well, I guess the first very emotional, controversial hard decision that I voted on was the House Bill 1750. That was the education bill, where they increased taxes to fund education, a very, very controversial bill and just barely passed. And Governor Bellmon was in. I was so pro-education and I wanted to do whatever it took to get the best possible education for our children in the state and I knew that we had to do something. But you had to think at the time that if you voted for a tax increase then you probably wouldn t be back. That was the decision that I had to make. I felt like whether I came back or not, it was the right decision, and that was the most controversial bill. What is very passionate to me and very important to me was partial birth abortion, to stop that. I was the author and it passed. In Oklahoma, there could not be any partial birth abortions performed. Being a democrat woman was very controversial, received a lot of phone calls and a lot of letters about how disappointed they were that I was a woman, number one, and that I was a democrat. But again that was my heart, it was my passion, and I am pro-life. I m very open to the life and death of the mother and incest and rape but as far as just for birth control, I don t agree with that. That s where I stand. Everyone knew where I stood, and that was another issue that was very controversial at the time. Did you notice any difference between the treatment of men and women during the early years there? Early years there were so very little women in the legislature and still at this time, the percentage is very small. I was one of the good old boys. (Laughs) I got along with everybody, women and men. But as far as the treatment, I would say that there wasn t a difference. Of course there wasn t as many of us on our issues, women s issues, as far as health and children. But there were a lot of men that had the same views and the same concerns we had. The difference in the women I can t really say that there was a difference that I saw. At the time Senator Shedrick was chairman of Education and part of the appropriation process. She was leadership. Penny Williams was as well. They were already there. Penny had come from the House . There were some powerful women. Carolyn Thompson Taylor was from Norman. I 13 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn looked up to her, the things she accomplished, and she was Appropriation chair. Women were very much a part of the leadership in the House and the Senate, very much so. Never was Speaker or Pro Tempore, as of yet. Jari Askins got as close as anybody at this point. Representative Winchester was Speaker Pro Tempore of the House. Leadership positions, women have had and still have. I m waiting for the day where Speaker Pro Tempore is a woman . As far as different, oh there may have been a time or two. I m sure there s times that it might not be the gender issue, but it could be just where you re from, or age, or maybe the district you represent, whether it be rural or urban. I really can t say because we were a family. Now we could get between each other and get in each other s face debating a bill, and democrat/republican, man/woman, whatever, on certain issues, but at the end of the day, we were family. We were. When I was in the Senate, we were all republican and democrat alike. We would all go out and be together in the evening or attend functions and laugh and enjoy each other. Very few bills did we truly, truly disagree right down the middle partisan when I was there. It just wasn t that many times. There were a few, but very seldom, very seldom. Did the women seem to group together? Some and the men were real nervous when we did. (Laughs) We would all huddle together on the floor and they d say, Oh my, the women, because it didn t take very many of us to make a difference. (Laughs) If we really had an issue that we really wanted to see something happen or change, well, we just worked together, worked very hard and tried to get that done. And that was the same for the whole twelve years? It was the twelve years, yes. And you chose not to run for the last term? My last term, I could ve ran one more term with term limits, but my husband was diagnosed with cancer May 5th, and I turned 50 years old May 10th, and it was a decision I had to make because I had to run for re-election and my husband had two surgeries. He s doing wonderful. He s great right now, but at the time, we didn t know, and I had to be with him. I had to take care of him for approximately three, four months, and I was with him, I never left him. I couldn t campaign and I had to make that choice. I had to know something by the first of June. We were out of session, I think, the 25th of May. The last Friday of May we adjourned and I hadn t even told the Pro Tempore because I wasn t for sure what I 14 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum was going to do. At that time, we were waiting on the biopsies to get back and the tests to get back, and after the second surgery, I just had to be with him to take care of him. There wasn t a decision to make other than I just couldn t campaign. I knew I had to campaign because I already had a democrat and a republican come out. And Senator Nichols had come out and announced in January. It wasn t an issue. I d already raised 132,000 and I d already had fundraisers the entire time I was in the Senate in my hometown and all throughout my district. I started having them in November in Garvin County, and I raised a lot of money and I gave it all back. I wrote them all checks and gave them all back after I decided not to run Well, at some point, could you go back and do four more years? I could do four more years, yes. I could run for the House for two terms or I could run for the Senate. I can. Yes, I can. I always want them to know I m out there. (Laughs) But I doubt if I do. (Laughs) Because I retired after I d been in for thirty-two years. I d been a state employee for thirty-years so I could retire, and I did. Well, this is changing the gears just a little bit. You were in the Senate in 95 when the Murrah Building bombing occurred? Yes, yes. I ll never forget where I was. We were to go in session at 9:30 that morning, and I went home the night before and I was almost directly to the east of the building on 235, the interstate. I was directly to the east of it when the black smoke I mean, my car shook. I thought it was an earthquake. I thought that there had been an earthquake was the only thing I could think of when my car moved. I could feel the motion because I was up on the interstate, up on the road and then I saw this black smoke. It was just black barrel black huge clouds of smoke. That s where I was at the time, and I was on my way to the Capitol and, of course, I got off on the Lincoln exit, right there about where I was. I got off there to go on to the Capitol and by the time I got to the Capitol and walked into Security everyone thought it was just a gas leak or something had exploded. And then, of course, it was just a few minutes and when they completely cleared the Capitol and after we found out. I was at the Capitol when I found out what had happened and, of course, they told us to just immediately get in the car and go home. We liked of never got home. Everybody was being let out of all the buildings. We got out a little bit earlier than some of the other state employees, I think, by the time the word got out and they had cleared all of the buildings. They started bringing in dogs and everything I ll never forget that. And when did you go back to work? 15 Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Well, it was quite a bit I can t remember. I think it was on Thursday is when it happened, I believe. That sounds about right. Thursday, a day of the week because we always went in early and I think it was Thursday. And then, of course, we wouldn t go back. We didn t go back to the Capitol for a week or but I went down. The first thing I did, I had to do something after I got home and I didn t want to be a part of the problem. I went to Feed the Children headquarters and helped take phone calls for food and whatever and they were asking for things by then quickly as to what the rescue workers needed. People were just bringing things in, and I thought, Well, okay. I can go to that site, and so I went there and helped answer phones and do things. I stayed quite a while, and then I went down to the site. They took some of us in to help at the site, to help feed and to just do whatever, so that was just some of the things that I did before I went back to the Capitol. Any other memorable events, things that come to mind from that time? During my time the tornado that happened at Bridge Creek. Bridge Creek wasn t my district, but Newcastle was. I can think of events that happened in my district that I tried to help and participate and to do what I could to help my people, and that was devastating. That had a lot of people die twenty-seven people, I believe, that died in Bridge Creek when it came through from Chickasha. It just kept on and on, and then a number of my friends of course were hurt, a number of people were hurt. It came up through Newcastle and then, of course, Midwest City and Carolyn Steger was hurt real bad. Just like the bombing had people that I knew that were killed or were hurt really bad, still see them today and visit with them a little bit. Don t talk so much about it, but just know they re okay. And then, of course, any event that would happen to my district like tornadoes and floods, and it just seemed like I just couldn t get there fast enough to just make sure that they got what they needed or if I could help, call someone or anything, was my main goal. I always wanted to be there for them always. If the phone rang, I answered it. I never let the machine get it, and that s what people couldn t understand. My family and other individuals that would be at the house or my church group or someone would be home, if that phone rang, I answered it. Why don t you let the machine get it? And I ve never had a caller ID in my life. (Laughs) I never had one. They d say, Well, why don t you get a caller I d say, No. I feel like when people called me, the majority of the people in my district called me, they had tried everything else they could before they called me. They were so desperate that they needed to call me to see if I could help, and 16 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn that s why it was so important that I call them back. If I did have to take a message or if I wasn t there, I always called them. I always got back to them. Sounds like you need to run again. Oh, well. (Laughs) But to me, the Senate position and the House position is to represent your people. That s what the job description to me is. And if you don t do that, I don t think you need to be there. That s just what I think. Any obstacles that were particularly placed in your path? Not really. Piece of cake? Well, no. (Laughs) Boy, it s not a piece of cake, I wouldn t say. A lot of stressful decisions because you want to do what s best for number one, your district, and the state of Oklahoma. Every time you cast a vote, it affects someone. You have to think about how it affects someone and because there s always someone for and against every issue out there. I think another one of those issues was the vote that I took to create the math and science school. That was another vote that I can look back now and see all the wonderful, wonderful opportunities that children have had and the education they ve received because of the math and science school. It s one of the most wonderful, wonderful things that could have ever happened in Oklahoma, I think, for high school students to have that ability or that opportunity to go to schools and get the education because they are so advanced. At the little rural schools that I represented, some of them, they couldn t possibly have gotten the classes that they needed because they didn t have that opportunity. And that was another very excruciating decision that I made because a lot of people in my district did not want me to pass that and tax and make that available to people because my district would never ever, ever see that. Children in my district would never have that opportunity. That it would be for urban, metropolitan kids. And I said, That is not the intent, and I will do everything in my power to make sure that doesn t happen. That s not only the kids that are going to be chosen, you know the ones that apply. They re going to go through those applications and they re going to give all the ones the opportunity, not just big schools in large, metropolitan areas. And, of course, that s happened. Oh, thousands of students in rural Oklahoma have received the education at the math science school and went on to do wonderful and great things. And the opportunity they would have in their community, they would ve 17 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum excelled and had a wonderful education, I don t mean that, but some students just had the opportunity to excel and they had that opportunity and I m just so excited. That was another big, big decision and a vote that I had to think about. Were there any disappointments? Ones that you really pushed for and just couldn t quite get passed? I just hadn t thought of that. In twelve years you have so many, you know. (Laughs) You had to read a lot of bills. Oh yes, ma am had a lot of bills, a lot of different issues, and that s why you have to depend on so many people that you trust. I knew a lot about county government. I d been in it for many, many years and watched it, and been a part of it, but I wasn t a teacher. I wasn t an educator. I wasn t in insurance. I wasn t an attorney. So you have to depend on individuals that you trust to tell you and they did the same with me with county bills. When something would come up that you just have that faith and that trust in your colleagues and people that you know that you can ask to tell you how it really would affect that issue and their expertise. What committees were you chair of? General Government Committee. And aging is another issue that I m very passionate about, seniors, and I was on a subcommittee of DHS Department of Human Services Appropriations for twelve years. I was chair of General Government for eight of my twelve years, and chaired that committee, cities and towns and general government issues. Were you ever the only woman on the committee? There are more committees now than there were when I was there a lot more committees. The committees now have less numbers of legislators on the committees because they ve expanded them. There were forty-eight of us and we only had like four or five that met on Monday and Tuesday and divided the week. Monday, Tuesday were the days and Thursday were the days of the committees and so I wouldn t say I was the only woman ever maybe subcommittee of Appropriations in DHS I was a few years, but primarily there were women on all my committees, pretty much. Did you have a particular role model or a mentor? 18 Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Yes, well, when I was very young, my mentor was Carl Albert and, of course, Carl Albert s birthday and my birthday is the same day. And then, of course, Lyle Boren. I didn t pay that much attention to it at the time but Congressman Boren was very his life and his legacy, I guess, and seeing him. My dad and grandfather loved him so and that made me love him that much more. And then Jim Townsend was Corporation Commissioner, and he lived over by Shawnee and Bethel Shawnee area and Wannette. He was very active and came to Wannette when I was in school. I d seen him numerous times, and he was someone I always looked up to Jim Townsend. Those were the three, I guess, that I looked at, and then, of course, Senator Boren and Governor then. Mostly men then? Interesting. It was right, but they were the ones in politics. The women weren t in state offices at the time. Of course, Norma Eagleton was the first woman I ever remembered that was Corporation Commissioner and Patience Latting was the mayor of Oklahoma City I thought, Oh, my. Boy, that s great (Laughs) Because that was a big deal back then, but I remember the names. Yeah, I looked up to them and respected them, but at the time, there just weren t women in those positions to look up to as far as politics at the time. Did you have to change your attire? Many women I ve interviewed have said it was so cold in the chamber they had to take at least a sweater with them. A sweater. It is very cold in the meeting rooms and I m very cold-natured anyway so yes. You wore heavy jackets all year because summer was when you d meet in session primarily, from January until June. But it was cold. You d just wear really heavy jackets, suits, suit jackets. You d wear fall and winter stuff all year. (Laughs) You would because it was cold. It was always cold. How many times did you have to switch office space? Once is all. I was on the fifth floor and there were two offices in one at the end of the hall on five. There were two of us, Senator Ben Robinson and I were suite-mates for six years and then I moved to the fourth floor and was there for six years. A lot switch around it seems. They do, but I only had one office other than the one I started in, just that one. 19 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn What was your very last day like? The very last day and still not knowing what I was going to do when we were in session because I was there till the 18th of November that following year, but it wasn t in session. But knowing I was having to deal with my husband s health and so the last day I was there till 5:00 on that Friday when we adjourned, and very emotional because I didn t know if I d be back. Of course, you don t anyway because you re running for office and I was up for election and had every intention of running and not knowing. You finish and you might not see your colleagues, you ll see a lot of them but there are a lot of them that you won t see, until you go back. You start meeting in December or January, and then go full-blown in February. But just emotional, always, it was always emotional. Last day was always emotional. You did something with prescription assistance some bill for seniors What we tried to do numerous times was to try to take medications, like bubble packs in nursing homes, we tried numerous times for years to allow those medications, because they had not been touched, to be distributed throughout the communities and towns through the health departments or somewhere where people were not able to purchase their medications. Most of those are the same medications that people have for high blood pressure, diabetes, just regular medications that a lot of seniors, especially seniors, need. And we would just flush them down the stool because drug companies couldn t take them back. Drug stores couldn t take them back, even if they were in bubble packs and not have been touched, but just have to destroy them. So I worked numerous years trying to get that done, trying to get that passed. And did it? No. Not really. We tried to. And there was a time that they were allowed to be placed in health clinics, free clinics. The paperwork was tremendous for a lot of people. Did you do any lobbying? Did I then? Or any time. I did before I was in the Senate. I lobbied for county issues. I was a county assessor at the time and was on the legislative committee of the state committee of the assessor s association. So I lobbied like that and, like I said, helped draft bills with a legislator and staff as far as some of 20 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn our issues. Now I m at the Capitol and work on issues for my organization. I m a full-time executive director for the Council of Governments. One of my jobs is to assist and work on issues that affect cities, towns and counties. That s who we represent and I work on those issues at the Capitol just like a concerned citizen. I m not a paid lobbyist. I m just employed full-time as director and I go to the Capitol and work on those issues. You ve done that since Since 2000. I went to work immediately. I m still working for the company almost seven years that I went to work for in October of 2000. You have two daughters. Have they gone into politics? No. Any inclination to? No, and will not. No, oh, no. I think they got enough of their politics with their mother. (Laughs) No, neither one of them has a desire to do that. And no siblings that might take up the torch? No brothers or sisters? No. I m it. I was the lone politician that ever went in to, put their name on a ballot and I probably will be the only one it looks like of the seven. You earned your bachelor s degree from University of Oklahoma. In public administration so you intended to do your life is pretty much as planned? Yes. And I graduated from high school and married, went to work, and so I didn t attend college right away . But it was another one of my dreams. One of my goals was to go to school and get my degree, and when my youngest daughter graduated from high school in 93, I started my college education that Fall. I said, Whether she goes with me or she doesn t, I m going to take some classes, and I did and I finished in four and a half years. So you did that while you were in the Senate, too? Yes. Started in Fall of 93, and I took off one semester when I 21 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn campaigned in 96. None of the people that helped me would let me. I had a campaign manager then but she wouldn t let me go to school. I just hated that. I loved school. I loved to take classes. And I graduated in 98. And you weren t in charge? She was? She was in charge. Yes, she was in charge. (Laughs) I couldn t do anything unless she okayed it. (Laughs) So anyway, it was great. Interesting that you chose to have a woman as your campaign manager. Oh, yes. They re organized. (Laughs) I m not, but she was. (Laughs) Oh, she s so organized. Yes, yes, she was. She was unbelievable. Very, very good friend, and she just organized and kept me where I was supposed to go, told me every day where I was supposed to go. (Laughs) So, she was great. Where do you see yourself five or ten years from now? Well, I am fifty-seven now and I plan on working till I m ninety. Here? Oh, I don t know. As everybody says, Well, Trish, what are you going to do? Aren t you retired? I say, Hey, I m going to work till I m ninety and then I m going to travel till I m a hundred, then I ll quit. (Laughs) That s just a thing that we talk about all the time, because I am a workaholic. I love to work. I can t imagine myself not having a full-time job somewhere. I can t imagine. But where I see myself is, I have to be sixty-six before I can retire anyway and start drawing my Social Security, and I m fifty-seven, so I have no intentions of retiring before then and if God lets me be healthy and I m just fine and if it s the Lord s will, that s my plan is just continue to work. And, of course, my oldest daughter and I have a snow cone stand. We have an entrepreneur, and so we opened that this last summer and just love it. How did it do? Oh, it did well, well, it did well. The first two months, it was so rainy and cold, we didn t do all that well because it was just so cool. And then they killed us the next two months. It was so busy, and then when school starts, you might as well just close it down because you just don t have anybody. Everybody s money goes for school supplies and clothes, and kids events and functions at school. Snow cones aren t a top priority when school starts (Laughs) So, anyway, we closed it down and we ll 22 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn open up in April, but just I love it. It was fun. Big girls lemonade stand, huh? Big girls lemonade stand, yes. Well, did you travel much when you were in the Senate? Did you have to go to D.C. or out of town I was one that took very few trips. In the twelve years I was there? Honestly, I ve tried to figure out the conferences I attended and I don t know the true numbers, but I probably didn t travel to ten different functions in twelve years. I just didn t. Took care of home. Well, took care of home, took care of my district, and I was in school a lot at the time, from, 93 to 98. I chose to go to school. If I had any free time at all I took night classes during session up here in Oklahoma City. Did you go through the graduation ceremony? Yes, I did. Every inch of it. They said, Trish, why would you do that? You re forty-eight years old, and I said, Because I can, and because that s one of the greatest accomplishments of my life is to get my degree. It s just a oh, oh, my Good role model for your children. Yes, I just want my girls to know that it doesn t matter, you can be forty-three years old and start school. You re never too old to learn, and you can everything that you do in your life should be for you and your family and for the people that you love, so, that s what you should do, no matter what. Well, if you don t have anything else, I can give you my last question. Okay. When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say? That I truly cared about people and that if they had a need and if I could help them, I did because people is what I love the most. I love to help people and care about people, and my family, of course, was first. I d like for people to say that I really cared and loved people. I really cared about them. 23 Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum Weedn Finchum I d say people in Oklahoma would definitely say that especially in your district from what I ve read and what you ve said. Well, I wanted to make a difference for the better and never wanted to do anything that made a hardship for people. If there was ever a decision I made or a vote that I cast that affected anyone negative, I just want them to understand I didn t know any better. I wouldn t have ever done it if I d have known because it s very important that people are loved and cared about and taken care of if they re not able to take care of themselves. That s what government is supposed to do. See, there? You need to run again. (Laughter) Oh, I m getting too old. (Laughs) I look at people and I think, Oh, my. That person didn t run till they were sixty-five, and I thought, I couldn t do it. (Laughs) I never want people to say that she got in office and she forgot where she came from and she forgot who she was and why she did it. I hope not one person in this state can say that. They wouldn t have kept re-electing you for thirty-two years if that was the case. (Laughs) Well I d say you have no worries. Well, I was very blessed, very, very blessed. My life has been wonderful, just wonderful. Sounds like it to me. Well, thank you very much for sharing it with me today. Well, thank you for allowing me to. It s great. It s been fun. ------ -------..