





Oral History Interview

with

Judith Logan





Interview Conducted by
Tanya Finchum
August 4, 2016


Spotlighting Oklahoma
Oral History Project












Oklahoma Oral History Research Program
Edmon Low Library ● Oklahoma State University
© 2016
Spotlighting Oklahoma
Oral History Project

Interview History
	
Interviewer: 	Tanya Finchum
Transcriber: 	Madison Warlick
Editor:		Tanya Finchum 		

The recording and transcript of this interview were processed at the Oklahoma State University Library in Stillwater, Oklahoma.

Project Detail

The purpose of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History Project is to document the development of the state by recording its cultural and intellectual history.

This project was approved by the Oklahoma State University Institutional Review Board on April 15, 2009.

Legal Status

Scholarly use of the recordings and transcripts of the interview with Judith Logan is unrestricted. The interview agreement was signed on August 4, 2016.













Spotlighting Oklahoma
Oral History Project

About Judith Logan…

Judith “Judy” Logan was born in 1943 in Welch, Oklahoma. The family later moved twelve miles from Vinita, Oklahoma, where they lived on a farm. Judy’s father worked at B.F. Goodrich and her mother stayed home and took care of the children and raised a large garden. In 1961 Judy graduated from Vinita High School and shortly thereafter went to work at the Glass House Restaurant as a waitress in the Broiler Room. She worked there for six or seven years with a short break when her son was born. In 1968 Judy moved to Tulsa with her husband and son. After a time, they relocated to Ketchum, Oklahoma, where her husband opened a garage and did mechanic work. When Judy was ready to return to the workforce she accepted a position with Country Style Health Care and has been with them for over twenty years.


About the Glass House…

At the half-way point on the Will Rogers Turnpike near Vinita, Oklahoma, stands an iconic landmark. The arched building opened in 1957 and was the first restaurant built over a U.S. public highway. Conoco (Continental Oil Company) commissioned the building with an aim to serve the needs of motorists passing in both directions. The building housed the Glass House Restaurant, dedicated in 1958, and included a cafeteria, snack bar, and sit-down restaurant. On each side of the building, motorists enjoyed full-service gas stations, operated by Conoco initially. Over the years other restaurants and fuel facilities have operated at the service plaza. Host International, Interstate Hosts and Howard Johnson’s have operated the plaza at different times. The Glass House and the Conoco stations employed many of the area’s youth through the years and served many, many travelers. Renovation began on the service plaza in 2012 and in 2014 it re-opened with a new name, the Will Rogers Archway.










Spotlighting Oklahoma
Oral History Project

Judith Logan

Oral History Interview

Interviewed by Tanya Finchum 
August 4, 2016
Vinita, Oklahoma


Finchum 	Today is August 4, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I’m with Oklahoma State University. Today I am in Vinita, Oklahoma, to speak with Judy Logan, and this is part of our Glass House Restaurant project, which is in Vinita. So thank you for coming today.

Logan 	You’re welcome.

Finchum 	Lets learn a little bit about you beginning with when and where you were born.

Logan 	December the 25th, 1943, in Welch, Oklahoma.

Finchum 	Christmas baby, during World War II baby, too.

Logan 	(Laughs) Yeah.

Finchum 	You don’t remember that I’m sure.

Logan 	No, I don’t remember that.

Finchum	But in the timeline there.

Logan 	In the timeline, yes.

Finchum 	Did you have brothers and sisters?

Logan 	I have two brothers, younger. 

Finchum	Older sister.

Logan 	Yeah, I’m the older sister.

Finchum	Did you get to boss them around?

Logan 	I don’t remember that We just lived on a farm and lived in the country. We didn’t have TV, we had a radio. I can remember us sitting around the radio and listening to stories that were being told. You got to imagine, [use] your imagination with the stories. I can’t even remember what the name of those shows were, but I can remember us sitting around the radio and listening to maybe Hopalong Cassidy, Lone Ranger, you know, but yeah I don’t remember that. We were always busy, always had things on the farm to take care of.

Finchum 	What did he do?

Logan 	My dad, we lived twelve miles out in the country. I think it was 320 acres and my dad worked at B.F. Goodrich in Miami [Oklahoma]. We had—my mother always did a big garden and canned. We had cows, and pigs, and chickens, so there was always something to do.

Finchum	Being the only daughter, did you have to do most of the work in the kitchen and the boys out?

Logan 	No, I helped my mom in the kitchen, but every Saturday everybody went outside and you had chores to do. Every Saturday, you know. It was clean the barn out…we had horses. In the summertime school was out, and everybody had a horse. Daddy would come—and he would work nights at B.F. Goodrich. He would come in from work and saddle the horses in the barn, so that we had something to do all day long, and that’s what we did was ride horses. We’d go down to the pond. We had BB guns, we’d shoot water moccasins. (Laughs) See there was an old coal pit at the back of our property, on our ranch, the old Goforth Ranch. We used to over there and ride our horses in those old—which weren’t’ pits, they were like a pond, big pits. We called them coal pits. We’d play hide and go seek and cowboys and Indians in the coal pits on our horses.

Finchum 	Did your parents know you were doing this?

Logan 	Yeah.

Finchum 	And they weren’t worried?

Logan 	No.

Finchum 	No accidents?

Logan	No accidents. We were taught by my dad how to ride a horse and….

Finchum 	What about shooting the [water] moccasins?

Logan 	Oh yeah, we wanted them gone because we were scared of them. They’d just be laying curled up on the edge of the pond in the summertime, and there were always these stores about water moccasins, so you wanted them dead.

Finchum 	And the girls got to do it as well as the boys?

Logan 	Exactly, yes. (Laughs) We had BB guns, and yeah.

Finchum 	When it was time to kill the chicken for Sunday dinner, who did that?

Logan	My mom did, but she always wrung—killed the chickens, wrung their necks. I remember one time I said—I asked, I don’t remember how little I was, but I wanted to do that. So she let me do that and I started wringing that chicken’s neck and I couldn’t do it. I let it go. It was walking around with its head all crookled going (makes hurt sound). My mother was really upset with me because she had to catch the chicken and kill it. So I never did that again.

Finchum 	One and done.

Logan 	Yeah. (Laughs) I never wanted to do that again, so that was the end of that.

Finchum 	Describe the house that you grew up in on the farm.

Logan	It was a little farmhouse, it had four rooms. The house was just like a square and all the rooms were square. No plumbing and no—at first we had no electricity. We didn’t have electricity, I think it wasn’t until like 1956, and it wasn’t that we couldn’t afford it, it wasn’t there. I think it was in July of 1956, and I might be wrong about that year, that REC [Rural Electric Company] set the pole on our property.

Finchum 	And you can remember that?

Logan 	Oh yes! Yes, I remember that. Then we got electricity, of course we’d always come to town on…we had aunts and uncles who lived in town. We’d come to town on Saturdays and we’d go to my aunt and uncle’s. We’d watch television until time to go, till ten o’clock. Got to watch the wrestling. I remember we went to school, and we were always the first on the school bus and always the last off the school bus. The school bus is coming down the road and there is a TV antennae on our house. We were so excited! It was kept secret. That was a secret thing. It was a surprise when we got home. I mean, but we’re coming down the road and I’ll never forget it, that there was a TV antennae on top of our house. We’re like, (gasps) “There’s a TV antennae on our house!” (Laughs) So we knew that we had a TV. I remember that like it was yesterday.

Finchum 	She got that before she got her washing machine?

Logan 	No, my mom had a washing machine, but it was a wringer washer. She started—you started it, it had a motor on it, kind of like a motorcycle. I remember you’d press it with your foot and you started it. I don’t remember, she may have gotten an electric washing machine. I don’t remember that.

Finchum	TV came first though.

Logan 	I guess, I don’t know that it really did, but I remember we had a wringer washer and it ran on a motor. 

Finchum 	A freezer?

Logan 	We got a freezer. Well see, school started in September. I don’t remember that being a big deal either, but we had refrigerators. I remember our refrigerator. I remember us having to come to Vinita—a refrigerator…it wasn’t a refrigerator it was an ice box. I remember us coming to Vinita and going to—there was an ice plant here in Vinita over on First and Van, I think. No, First and I guess it is Van maybe. There was an ice plant there and we came and got block ice for our icebox.

Finchum 	How far is Welch to Vinita?

Logan 	Welch to Vinita is…we didn’t live at Welch then. We had moved to northwest of Vinita, twelve miles northwest of Vinita. We were out in the country twelve miles. It was twelve miles to town. 

Finchum 	When you mentioned you went to town earlier, was it Vinita or was it Welch?

Logan	It was to Vinita.

Finchum 	Where did you go to high school?

Logan 	Vinita.

Finchum 	And what year did you graduate?

Logan 	Sixty-one.

Finchum	So you were—that was a little bit after integration then. You may have been here during…

Logan 	I was. We was in school in integration. I was in the ninth grade.

Finchum 	Remember anything particular about that? The transition?

Logan 	No, you know when I look back on it, what’s going on today, and what went on through the years, integration was nothing. It was just—it wasn’t a big deal. It was just an easy—it was nothing. To us it wasn’t. There wasn’t any problems. Like, let’s see, I don’t understand the problems that people have today or did. We didn’t experience that. I remember we had a black teacher and he was always—they were always just…they wore suits and they were just really, really nice. You were just really impressed that everybody was just nice. There wasn’t problems. 

Finchum 	Got along best they could, huh?

Logan 	There wasn’t—to my knowledge, there was not any problems.

Finchum 	Well did you have a favorite subject in high school?

Logan 	Home ec, homemaking. I liked to sew. My mother sewed. She made all of our clothes. She had taught me, when I was older, I don’t even remember how [old], she taught me how to embroidery. I sewed, we had a treadle machine, and I sewed tea towels and embroidered tea towels. So that was something I always liked to do was sew and cook. My mom liked to cook. She loved to make bread. We had cakes all the time, but she was kind of famous for her bread. She made homemade bread.

Finchum 	So home ec would’ve been one year, two years?

Logan 	The first year was in the eighth grade and then there was four years in high school of homemaking. 

Finchum 	Did you go on to college with that…

Logan 	No, I didn’t. No, I didn’t. I got married and had a son, and I continued to cook, and sew.

Finchum 	Got good at doing hems?

Logan 	Oh yes, yes. I made my own clothes, my mom made my own clothes. I never had a bought dress.

Finchum 	Where would you get your fabric?

Logan 	She would get it from Vinita at Carter’s. Carter’s had a—they was a big department store. They had a grocery, and they had the hardware, and they had the department store, which had fabric, and patterns, and had everything. Until Walmart came along.

Finchum 	Of course.

Logan 	I worked there. I worked there at Carter’s in the department store.

Finchum 	Do you sew today?

Logan 	Not very much, no.

Finchum 	Have a machine?

Logan 	I have a machine, yes I do.

Finchum 	That works?

Logan 	I have a machine, I have a Serger. I actually have it all set up. I have a sewing room, but I do not make my own clothes.

Finchum	Quilt?

Logan 	No, I don’t want to make quilts. (Laughs)

Finchum	Did your mother?

Logan 	Yes, my mother made quilts, yes. She made quilts from—actually, I have a quilt, I have a couple of quilts, but one particular that I can sit down and look at that quilt and I can tell you, “I have a dress out of that, and my brother had a shirt out of that, and my mom had a dress out of….” I can pick those pieces out. 

Finchum 	That’s a pretty special heirloom then.

Logan 	Yeah, it is.

Finchum 	Any idea what the pattern is?

Logan 	No. I don’t remember what that is. I haven’t even looked at it in years. It’s put away. It was used. We used it. It wasn’t anything you just put away and didn’t use. We used it.

Finchum 	Was she a member of a homemaker club?

Logan 	Yes, I believe she was, but I can’t remember. Yes she was, but I don’t remember what the name of that club was. It was around here.

Finchum 	Fewer and fewer of them.

Logan 	Oh yeah, that has been a long time ago. That’s been fifty years ago.

Finchum 	Once you graduated from high school take me through. Did you go to work? Obviously at some point…

Logan 	I went to work at the Glass House.

Finchum	 …right out of high school?

Logan 	No, not right out of high school. I think…let’s see, ’61. Yeah, it was shortly after high school I went to work at the Glass House. I can’t even remember how long I worked there, I worked there for a while. I had a baby and then I went back to work at the Glass House. I worked there until ’67, maybe ’68, and we moved to Tulsa. Then we moved back to Ketchum and my husband was a mechanic. He opened a little garage there and worked out at our house. That’s where I still live.

Finchum 	How far is that from here?

Logan 	Ketchum is about seventeen miles from Vinita. Like towards Grand Lake. 

Finchum 	When you started at Glass House and then came back to Glass House, was Annabell still…

Logan 	Yes, she was always there. 

Finchum	She’s the one that hired you?

Logan 	Yes, she’s the one that hired me.

Finchum 	What was your job there?

Logan 	A waitress, I worked in the Broiler Room. Ruth Hensley that you just interviewed, she is the one that trained me. She trained you how every…I mean, how you set the table, how you—everything. Everything had to be done in a certain way. You carried nothing in your hands. Everything was on a tray. She trained me as a waitress. I really appreciate her today. That was a precious time for me. it was just…

Finchum 	You have to serve certain things from certain directions?

Logan 	Yes, you served certain things from certain sides. Removed the plates from a certain side, you set the table, the table was set with silverware and linen napkins... 

Finchum 	Were they folded a certain way?

Logan 	Yes, they were rolled. We rolled it. We fixed our silverware. I can’t even—yeah, we did fold the napkins. I can’t remember how we did that though, that’s been a long time ago.

Finchum 	A certain way?

Logan	It was a certain way, yes. Probably if I got my hands on it I could tell you, you know, I could do it again, but at this moment I can’t tell you that.

Finchum 	Did they lay flat beside the plate or were they those that they sit in the middle of your plate?

Logan 	They laid flat beside the plate.

Finchum 	Remember any famous people come through?

Logan 	Oh yes! I waited on Mr. Clean. Mr. Clean was a real person, not a cartoon. He’s a cartoon now or animated, yeah, he was the real person. I remember he had two—there was two other men with him. They were all dressed really nice. He had like on a sharkskin suit. You knew it was Mr. Clean. The state of Oklahoma was a dry state at that time. We were not allowed to serve liquor, but we could give them something, a glass of ice or a Coke, whatever they wanted to put their drink in. They could carry a bottle in in a brown paper bag and it was kept under the table. You could serve them whatever they asked for, their Coke, water, ice, and they mixed their own drink, and then their bottle was kept under the table in a brown paper bag.

Finchum	And did Mr. Clean have one?

Logan 	Yes, he did! (Laughs) Yes, he did! He had a bottle. I don’t remember what that was. The dining room was real—we were really, really busy. There was this table with these little kids and they were my table. This little boy says, “Is that Mr. Clean, is that Mr. Clean?” I said, “Well I don’t know. I’ll ask him and see.” I asked him if he was Mr. Clean, he said, “I sure am.” I got my check stub, he signed the check stub, and I gave it to that little kid. He was so excited! (Laughs) I might still even have that, I don’t know, because he signed one for the little boy and one for me. It was just a fun place to work. We were always—we made a lot of friends. One of the girls that I worked with, her and I are still friends today. 

Finchum 	What would be considered a good tip in those days?

Logan 	Five dollars.

Finchum	Per table? One or two?

Logan 	Of four or five. If you got a five-dollar tip. I made forty-seven cents an hour. Our wages was forty-seven cents. They took a quarter a day out of your check for food. You got to eat anything you wanted except for the lobster tail and steak. (Laughs)

Finchum 	You got the mile-high lemon pie, though.

Logan 	Oh my gosh, yes! The mile-high lemon pie! Yes.

Finchum 	I’ve heard about that a lot today, yes.

Logan 	They had mile-high lemon pie, apple, and cherry, and pecan, and a chocolate cake. That was your desserts.

Finchum 	What was your favorite of those?

Logan 	I loved the pecan pie and a cup of hot tea. That was my deal, pecan pie and a cup of hot tea.

Finchum 	That was worth twenty-five cents a day?

Logan 	That was worth twenty-five cents a day, but we ate more than that. We ate more than our twenty-five cents.

Finchum 	I noticed the menu had chicken pot pie.

Logan 	Oh my gosh, the chicken pot pie was delicious. It was delicious. As a matter of fact, I make—I try to cook some of the things like they did, still today. Like their vegetable soup, their vegetable soup, beef-vegetable soup was absolutely wonderful. They put a bay leaf in it. I have to have a bay leaf in my vegetable soup. I don’t know what it would taste like without it. I’m serious. I have to have a bay leaf in my vegetable soup. The goulash, they made goulash and I make my goulash today just like they did. It was served with cornbread that was corn sticks. Yes, I have to have my goulash with a bay leaf and corn sticks.

Finchum 	I haven’t had goulash in years and I’m not sure what all’s in it besides—what? Corn and okra?

Logan 	No, and the goulash was not—that’s not…

Finchum 	That’s not what it is? Okay.

Logan 	Okay, it was macaroni. It was hamburger with a tomato sauce and it had the macaroni in it, and a bay leaf, and it had onions cooked in it—and a bay leaf.

Finchum 	What’s the deal with a bay leaf?

Logan 	I don’t know, it has a flavor. You don’t eat the bay leaf, but it had a flavor.

Finchum 	As a home ec person that liked to cook, you would know things like that and pay attention to that.

Logan 	Yes, and then when you watch cooking shows they’ll talk about bay leaves periodically. You’ll hear them put a bay leaf in something. I have no idea what—if I didn’t put it in there, what it would be like.

Finchum	I’m thinking it’s succotash or something that has all those vegetables in it. Isn’t it something like…

Logan 	Yes.

Finchum	Chow-chow or something like that? I’ll have to look up some of these recipes too. 

Logan 	But the food was really good. It was always really, really good.

Finchum 	What was the specialty, do you think, that made regulars come back or people ordered the most of?

Logan 	The chicken pot pie was popular. The French dip was always popular. With the French dip it’s like they served—like with the French dip it came with your au jus and a salad with blue cheese dressing. That’s the way it has to be. (Laughs) Sometimes I get to thinking about that and I’ll go buy me some blue cheese dressing to make me a roast beef sandwich and dip it in the juice, but you got to have the blue cheese dressing.

Finchum 	Did they make their own or…

Logan 	They made their own dressing, yes. They made their own everything.

Finchum	Have you figured out the recipe for it? 

Logan 	The best I can get to it is you take ranch dressing…and I’ve tried, I’ve bought all the blue cheese dressings and…

Finchum 	Come close?

Logan 	No, but if you take blue cheese dressing—I mean ranch dressing, and you buy your blue cheese crumbles, and mix it in it tastes pretty darn good. It’s better than if you go and buy the blue cheese dressing. No, I’m not been able to find that.

Finchum 	I can’t find a good blue cheese either. That’s my favorite.

Logan 	But that is really good, the ranch dressing with the blue cheese crumbles in it.

Finchum 	Would they do their own, like, peeling the potatoes for mashed potatoes?

Logan 	Oh yes, everything. Yes, they peeled their own potatoes, they made their own mashed potatoes. We made our own hot rolls, cinnamon rolls. Our pies were baked there, cakes were baked. Everything was baked there.

Finchum 	Your whole time there it was still Host International?

Logan 	Yes, International Host.

Finchum 	Howard Johnson’s was in the mix somewhere.

Logan	It came after I left. I never worked for Howard Johnson.

Finchum 	And then McDonald’s was way later.

Logan 	I never—I was upset about that. (Laughs) I think everybody was upset about that. That wasn’t right. But they had a dishwashing machine downstairs, and the bakery was downstairs, and the pots and pans was washed in a separate big bin, but everything was cooked there.

Finchum 	Did you have to do other jobs like fill in for someone or were you just always a waitress?

Logan 	I was always the waitress. I never worked anywhere except for the Broiler Room. There was a snack bar and I never worked in the cafeteria part. I didn’t ever work in the gift shop.

Finchum 	Even in the Broiler Room was mostly nights then or afternoon to the end of the evening?

Logan 	First the Broiler Room—when I first worked I worked in the evenings and it was in the Broiler Room and that was like from two to ten or one thirty until ten, two to ten. That was in the Broiler Room. Then later they closed the cafeteria and the Broiler Room was open for breakfast. It was open for breakfast. It was the only thing that was open and the snack bar. 

Finchum	Tips were higher in the afternoon I would think.

Logan 	Tips were great in the afternoon, but you did real good on the morning shift because you served breakfast and you served lunch. So you would do pretty good there. The Broiler Room was…you just actually worked one shift. You only served one meal, and that was your evening. When you came in at two o’clock and you’re changing shifts, things were pretty slow. There was always something to do. You always had to polish the silverware, you had to run the sweeper, clean the dining room, clean the chairs, put the ice on the stations. There’s always something to do until lunch hit. 

Finchum 	Who would assign those duties? Annabell or was there…

Logan 	She had an assistant manager and that was Thelma Nafus. Thelma actually…Annabell was there from morning until, during the daytime most of the time. Then Thelma was there from say two to ten, until everybody went home.

Finchum 	There to, whatever problems there might be, solve them.

Logan 	Yes.

Finchum 	What was your uniform like?

Logan 	Like the one laying out there, yes, except that’s the nylon. Our first uniform was actually cotton. It was gold just like that, but it was cotton. The pinafore was cotton and we took them and they had to be starched, and later we’d take them to the laundromat. If they did it they were starched really, really good. They would stay looking nice for a long time. We’d have three or four aprons because that’s what you got dirty was your aprons.

Finchum 	So you could wear your dress more than one day.

Logan 	You could wear your dress more than one day, yes. You had to wear hose, we had to wear hose, and we had to wear girdles. 

Finchum	Why a girdle though?

Logan 	Their reason was for safety, for support for your back. They didn’t want any wiggle. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Okay. I hadn’t thought of that. (Laughs) Was it pantyhose or was it…

Logan 	There was no pantyhose. Pantyhose did not exist. 

Finchum 	So you’d have a garter. 

Logan 	Yes, it was the hose and the garters, yes. They would have the little garters, yes. And nurse’s shoes. You had to wear nurses’ shoes. You had to have a good shoe. At that time all the white shoes were either nurses’ shoes or tennis shoes. You just couldn’t—you could work in tennis shoes for a short period of time, but they really wanted you to have nurses’ shoes because of the walking. They were expensive. They were very expensive, but they were worth it because you were on your feet all day long.

Finchum 	Not too many breaks.

Logan 	Not too many breaks. You would get a break, you could have your break, but there was times that you were so busy you didn’t want to take a break, because if you took a break you lost your money. So you didn’t take breaks because…

Finchum	Tips.

Logan 	…you got to have them tips. If you took a break then somebody else is going to take your station. That was our deal. If somebody else took your station then when you come back, you don’t have no people because somebody else got them. We didn’t take breaks, not like that.

Finchum	If you were on for eight hours, how would you—you just nibble out of your pocket or something?

Logan 	Actually we’d have a little bowl of—there was a place in the back of the kitchen that we could sit at and snack.

Finchum 	Every time you got something done, go by and take a bite?

Logan 	Exactly, that is exactly what we did. We’d get us a little bowl of soup and we’d eat it and then run. I was skinny. I weighed 114 pounds and I ate all the time.

Finchum 	But you were moving all the time.

Logan 	Yes, we were moving all the time. All of us were moving all the time. We didn’t care because we liked, we loved it.

Finchum	About how many would be on the same shift?

Logan 	On the same shift there would be about four, maybe five on a shift. Dependent on the time of the year and the time of the day.

Finchum	How many tables were there roughly?

Logan 	I don’t remember exactly. I can’t tell you how many tables, but I know if the whole dining room was all the way open, it would seat like 150 people. Because there was like these doors and they could open them all up. The dining room would hold like 150. 

Finchum	So maybe thirty or forty tables. 

Logan 	Probably.

Finchum	How many would you have at one time?

Logan 	I’d have to think about that. Let’s see, if you had station one there was one big table and that would hold like six. Then there’d be like a deuce. That would be two. Probably three or four…two or three, four, and a booth. You’d probably have twenty, twenty-five people. 

Finchum 	That would turnover two or three times or more during a shift?

Logan 	Yes. There’d be always—there’d be somebody always waiting for a place to sit because we had a hostess and there was always people lined up to sit. Then we’d have our parties. People would rent it and have parties, like weddings. I remember once the lawyers had a convention or something and they rented the whole back room. At times like that she would ask other people to come in, because we would have the ordinary people. They would ask other people from other, morning shift or somewhere, to come in extra for those parties.

Finchum	Get paid a little extra? No tips for those, I wouldn’t think.

Logan 	You didn’t get tips for that, but she would tack that on and you got paid so much.

Finchum 	You had to work your way up the food chain, as they say, as the new waitress versus one that’d been there?

Logan 	Not really, because she was always real fair about that. There wasn’t any favorites. It was wherever she needed you. You was okay if you went back and worked that party, you was okay because you was compensated the same as anybody else. So there wasn’t really an issue with that.

Finchum 	Would she have holiday parties for the staff?

Logan 	Yes, she would do Christmas parties for the staff and their kids. That’s really what it was all about was the kids. I remember having—it was over in the part where the buffet’s at or the cafeteria’s at. Ted Dixon was the Santa Claus, and she’d have Santa Claus come. She’d have this big Christmas tree, little gifts for all the kids. She always had a big party for the—then I was there the tenth anniversary. I’m not sure exactly what the ten years was, but this was around—this was in October and it was Halloween. One of the cooks, Nancy Smith, she lived out in the country, out by ?Pensacola?? on a farm. They had the party out in the woods. They cut off tree stumps for people to sit on and they had a little pit where they cooked the steaks. She had little brown bags of—had sand in them and a candle. Those sat around all around the trees. People dressed up for Halloween and they had a contest for who won first place and second place. My girlfriend and I won first place. (Laughs)

Finchum 	What did you dress up as?

Logan 	Oh gosh, I was telling somebody this. (Laughs) There was these two boys, Marian Arnold and Russell Walker. They worked in the bakery. Then my friend Darlene and I, we were buds. No one knew this except the four of us and Annabell, that Darlene and I talked Marian, we called him Butch, but Marian and Russell into letting us dress them up like women. So her and I went to the Goodwill store and we bought them dresses and purses, and gloves. I’ve got to find these pictures. Bought them wigs and they had little hats. We bought them makeup, and false eyelashes, and in the bakery we put all their makeup on them. Marian was a pretty little woman. (Laughs) Russell was—he was a big guy, so he was a big woman. 

Darlene and I, and I’ve got the pictures up somewhere, and Annabell took pictures, and I’ve got to find those pictures, so Darlene and I, we really didn’t have a plan for us. We didn’t know what we were going to do. But we had bought wigs, and a mask, and so she had brought cowboy boots. I had these big old house shoes that looked like big old red feet. I had this linen like coveralls that were my mother-in-law’s fishing pants and they were entirely too big for her. I don’t even know how and why we did this, but we decided that we could both get in that pair of pants. (Laughs) So she was in one leg and I was in the other leg and we were a two-headed person.

Finchum 	How did you walk?

Logan 	See we didn’t think about that. When we were doing this, putting this together, we didn’t think about what kind of problems we were going to have. So we walked together, and Marian and Russell had to help us. After we got it together, they had to help us. Annabell came out and took our picture, but then we can’t walk to the car. She had one cowboy boot on and I had one cowboy boot on. We had a shoe on. We were like this. She’s taller than I am, so that’s another issue. (Laughs) But we were having fun and who cared. They had to help us to the car and like I said, we didn’t think about what kind of problems we were going to have. When we came out to the car, we can’t get to the car. So together we have—and Butch come on one side and Russell the other and they pulled us and pushed us in the car, got us in the back seat. It was crazy. 

Then we get out there and nobody knows who we are and we’re not talking. We’re not talking because if we say anything they’ll know who we are. So everybody’s all lined up and we’re walking around together and kind of picking at people you know. They’re like, “Who’s in there, who’s in there?” (Laughs) We wouldn’t say anything. Somebody pinched Darlene on the butt and she goes, “Somebody pinched me!” We’re in the same pair of pants, okay? It was just crazy. Then we got tired and we needed to sit down, and we couldn’t sit down. They took us to the car and shoved us up on the hood of the car. We won first place. Then when we pulled our mask off they go, “Oh! It’s Judy and Darlene! Should’ve known it was Judy and Darlene!” Yeah, because we were always doing something. (Laughs)

Finchum 	And the boys didn’t care to be dressed up as…

Logan 	No, they were having a good time too. (Laughs) They were younger than we were. We were older than them. They were seventeen, sixteen—seventeen.

Finchum 	Blackmail photos now.

Logan 	(Laughs) I have got to find that picture. It’s a polaroid. But I’ve got—it’s black and white, but I’ve got to find that picture because it is so funny. That was funny.

Finchum	It was in October…

Logan 	Yeah, it was in October for Halloween, because that’s the way everybody dressed up for Halloween. Then the little man that—he was a cook in the kitchen, he was an older man. He won second place. He came dressed as an old woman walking backwards. Like he put the mask on the back of his head and he had his big old coat on and it was buttoned up the back, and he put a headscarf on his head. He looked like an old woman walking backwards. (Laughter)

Finchum 	Some creativity there.

Logan 	I know! We didn’t have costumes. You had to…

Finchum 	         And they were better.

Logan 	Yeah. You didn’t have—you couldn’t go to the store and buy costumes. I don’t know. You had to do whatever you could think of to do I guess.

Finchum 	Would customers come in dressed up?

Logan	I don’t remember that, no. I do not remember customers coming in dressed up.

Finchum 	Remember any stranded ones during bad weather?

Logan	I do, but I can’t—there wasn’t anything outstanding happen.

Finchum 	Big buses full of people?

Logan 	Oh my gosh. One time, and I think it was in the wintertime, me and Darlene again, we didn’t have any people. No people in the dining room, no customers. So we’re wandering off down to the gift shop, and we’re piddling around down there. There was a Buddha there. We rubbed that Buddha’s belly. Don’t ever rub a Buddha’s belly, okay? We rubbed that Buddha’s belly and go, “Oh! I wish we’d get a whole bunch of people. I wish we’d get a whole bunch of people.” (Laughs) Oh my gosh. We got about six buses. We said we’d never do that again. (Laughs) Them buses were already on the way, okay? You know what I’m saying? They were already on the way. It was—but the snack bar was open and people were…it was just crazy. Waited on them as fast as you could. We swore we’d never rub another Buddha’s belly.

Finchum 	Would customers get irate if they had to wait too long or bad service?

Logan	I can’t remember that either. I don’t remember that. 

Finchum	Any regulars that would show up?

Logan 	Probably, but I don’t remember them either. I couldn’t tell you. I mean there was local people that would come periodically, but not anybody locally came on a regular basis. They really couldn’t afford it I guess. A lot of people came from Tulsa and Joplin, because there wasn’t anything as nice as the Glass House in Tulsa nor Joplin.

Finchum	For the Broiler Room primarily?

Logan 	Yes, for the Broiler Room.

Finchum	Not the cafeteria line?

Logan 	No, just for the Broiler Room. At the time when I was working there Shangri-La [Resort] was being built. It opened during the time that I was there, because Annabell took a couple of us girls, whatever our days off was, she took us there for dinner when they first opened.

Finchum	Check out the competition?

Logan 	To check out the competition, exactly. (Laughs) That’s exactly right.

Finchum	She sounds like a neat lady.

Logan	Oh, she was. She was a wonderful person, just a wonderful person.

Finchum	And she didn’t have children I understand. 

Logan 	No, she did not have any children, so all the people that worked there were her children. 

Finchum 	Took care of them.

Logan 	She took care of them. She sure did.

Finchum 	If you all had uniforms, would she wear something special? 

Logan 	Her and Thelma had uniforms and their uniforms was a light blue dress, and seems like it—I think it buttoned up the front and it was light blue. They had these belts that were elastic, but they were metal. Like a Concho belt, but it was elastic. And that was their dress, that was their uniform. 

Finchum 	And would have their…

Logan 	Have their name, yes. Everybody had a name badge, yes.

Finchum 	So if they come in, regulars come in, they’d say, “I want Judy today.” Could they? 

Logan 	They could ask the hostess if they wanted to sit at our station. But you didn’t have the same station all the time. The stations rotated. 

Finchum 	Who would decide that? This Thelma person, the assistant manager?

Logan 	I think the hostess did the schedule for the Broiler Room. I think she did the schedule for the Broiler Room.

Finchum 	And that wasn’t a position that was higher than being a waitress? The hostess?

Logan 	The hostess, yes it was. She didn’t get tips. She didn’t make tips, but she took the money and she greeted people and she seated them. If you was busy she would take them water. She would help you if they was busy and you needed help, she would jump in and help if she could. 

Finchum	Would you have wanted to switch from being a waitress to being a hostess?

Logan 	No.

Finchum 	Made more money the other way.

Logan 	Made more money the other way. Then we also learned to run the register also if we needed to. But we didn’t have to do that very often. Maybe the hostess was sick or something and there was no one to fill in. In the wintertime it was kind of pretty low staff. 

Finchum 	Did people generally want seats by the windows?

Logan 	Oh yes.

Finchum 	So you would hope for that station if you were…

Logan 	Well, everybody had a window. Every station had a window seat.

Finchum 	Okay, tried to be fair that way too.

Logan 	Yes, about everybody had a window seat, so everything was fair. They made it a point that it be fair. 

Finchum	When you weren’t working there would you go on occasion there to let them serve you for a change?

Logan 	Yes, I did. As a matter of fact, I would take my son, he was four years old. I’ve got a couple of pictures of him that I took him to—on my day off. He was out of school or something. I took him there for his birthday and we sat at a window seat. And he liked grasshopper ice cream. He remembers that.

Finchum 	He liked to watch the cars go under him?

Logan 	I don’t know that that was a big deal. I don’t that that was a big deal, as a matter of fact, we didn’t even notice that even more. It just was not an issue, a thing, the cars going under you.

Finchum 	Could you hear them?

Logan 	I don’t remember that. We had music, music piped in, and the people, and the dishes. No, I don’t think you could hear them.

Finchum 	What about the windows? The louver windows?

Logan 	They were only on one side. They were on the side that faced the west. They automatically would—they would close with the sun and then they would open back up at sunset or at nighttime.

Finchum 	That would be neat to watch.

Logan 	Yeah, and it was a slow thing though. I don’t remember even if you could even see it, but it happened because the sun was always on that side. When it was really hot they were closed and then at nighttime they were open. Then on this side they didn’t have louvers, that faced the east.

Finchum 	So they’d be open at night.

Logan 	Yes, they were open at nighttime. 

Finchum 	Then you’d see the lights when the cars come.

Logan 	You’d see the lights from the cars, yes. We had candle—and the Broiler Room had candlelight. They were like little wooden round things like that and you’d put a candle in it. The globes were big like that and about that tall. (Gestures) You’d just lift it up, and every evening the candles were lit, like at five o’clock.

Finchum 	Waitresses would take turns doing that?

Logan 	Yes, you did your own station.

Finchum 	No fires?

Logan 	No fires. It was a big glass globe. Then every evening you had to take a towel, wet towel, and wipe the globe out.

Finchum 	Just for your station?

Logan 	Just for your station. If you needed help, people would help you. Everybody worked together.

Finchum 	I would imagine there’d be some nights that you didn’t get out at ten o’clock. 

Logan 	There were some nights we did not get out at ten o’clock. That is right, but that was okay.

Finchum 	Made more money.

Logan 	Made more money, had more jingle in our pocket.

Finchum	But your feet were more tired.

Logan 	Our feet were more tired, but we didn’t care. It was okay.

Finchum 	What made you decide to stop working there?

Logan 	We moved to Tulsa. That’s when I stopped working there, I moved to Tulsa. Then when we moved back, I went to work at Carter’s in Vinita. 

Finchum 	That’s a restaurant?

Logan 	No, Carter’s, it was a grocery store, hardware, and a department store.


Finchum	Quite a bit different from being a waitress, but still customer service oriented.

Logan 	Yes, still customer service. Now I work two miles from my house for Country Style Health Care. I’ve been there twenty-one years coming August. I’m the office manager there.

Finchum 	Plan to retire any time soon?

Logan 	I don’t know how to spell that.

Finchum 	As long as you’re enjoying it there’s no need to, right?

Logan 	That’s right.

Finchum 	        You have one child?

Logan 	Yes, I have one.

Finchum	Grandchildren?

Logan 	No grandchildren.

Finchum 	Grandpuppies?

Logan 	Oh my gosh, yes. I have a little weenie dog.

Finchum 	I read somewhere that Annabell had dachshunds, did you know that?

Logan 	I don’t remember that, no.

Finchum	And that they were always named Fritz. It was something in the paper. I was looking at old papers from the ’60s and it said something about that.

Logan 	I didn’t know that she had—I didn’t know that.

Finchum 	I don’t know who would know of this bunch that’s coming. I don’t know. 

Logan 	Warren Fetter would know.

Finchum 	I think he comes tomorrow. Yeah, he comes tomorrow. I’ll ask.

Logan 	He would know what kind of dogs she had.

Finchum 	Dachshunds.

Logan 	Yeah.

Finchum	I have two, that’s why I’m asking.

Logan 	My friend, Darlene, that I’m talking about, she has dachshunds. That’s kind of funny if Annabell had dachshunds. I’ve had different dogs through the—that’s what I have now.

Finchum 	Do you remember when she passed away? Were you in Vinita when she passed away?

Logan 	I lived at Ketchum when she passed away.

Finchum 	I wonder when that was. I haven’t seen anything about when it was.

Logan	I don’t remember when that was.

Finchum	The last ten years or longer than that?

Logan	I think longer than that. I’m positive longer than that.

Finchum	Do you think she’s buried here in Vinita since she was from here?

Logan 	Yes.

Finchum	I can do some digging.

Logan 	I’m sure she’s buried at the Fairview Cemetery. They were from here, her mom was from here.

Finchum	Okay, I’d wondered where she’d gotten her training, but someone thought she had been trained under someone named Kellogg or Kellow?

Logan 	Mrs. Kellogg.

Finchum	Is it Kellogg?

Logan 	That’s how I remember, Mrs. Kellogg [Kellow].

Finchum	She was pre-Annabell.

Logan 	Yes, but when I met Mrs. Kellogg [Kellow] she was like a supervisor over more than the Glass House at Vinita. I think she was—seems like she was from Kentucky or somewhere. 

Finchum 	Different type of approach than Mrs. Southern?

Logan 	Yes, she was an older lady. Sometimes she was real staunch. I would only see her periodically. She was real strict and whenever she did come with her, everybody was serious.

Finchum 	Shaped up.

Logan 	Shaped up. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Flew right that day, huh?

Logan 	We had a good time. We would have a good time. On those days, no you didn’t, you did it right.

Finchum 	You could call in sick?

Logan 	If you were sick.

Finchum	If you were really sick.

Logan 	I guess, I don’t know. 

Finchum 	Did you have your own car by that time?

Logan 	Yes.

Finchum 	Where you could come and go yourself.

Logan 	Yeah, but I don’t remember calling in sick. I don’t remember anything about that.

Finchum 	Would you get pay raises along the way?

Logan 	Seems like the last I worked I was making forty-seven cents an hour. Seems like I made less than that, but it was the tips. That forty-seven cents an hour wasn’t nothing. It was the tips.

Finchum 	Would you have to report how many tips you got? What your tips were?

Logan 	Yes, we were, but Annabell did not want to know what they was. That was our—she didn’t want to know how much we made. It was up to us to write that in, “And I don’t want to know,” she said. 

Finchum 	Whatever’s right for yourself, okay. Taxes, rules changed with that sort of thing too sometime during that part, I think, didn’t it?

Logan 	Yes, I remember at first we didn’t have to do that. Then that’s when I’m saying—when the rule changed that we had to, I don’t think she was real happy about that. We weren’t real happy about that, and I’m sure she wasn’t real happy about that either, but it was what we had to do. We had to write it in and she said, “I don’t want to know.” Okay, we got the picture. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Mum’s the word, just move on.

Logan 	I can still see her saying that, “And I don’t want to know.” We never told. She never asked and we didn’t tell.

Finchum 	How much older was she than you?

Logan 	I didn’t ever feel like she was a whole lot older than me. I don’t know how old she was.

Finchum	Five, or six years? Ten at the most? I don’t know, I don’t have any idea either.

Logan 	No more than ten years I don’t think.

Finchum 	Would she help serve sometimes if it got really busy?

Logan 	Yes, if we would get buses and we were swamped she was right out there bussing tables and in the kitchen. Wherever she needed, she would take money, she did it all. She knew how to do it all. She would be right there with you and so would Thelma, the assistant manager. She would be out there too.

Finchum	It was a team effort.

Logan 	It was all a team effort, everything was a team effort. Everybody worked together as a team.

Finchum 	Have you been back out since it’s been reopened? Renovated and reopened?

Logan 	No, I haven’t.

Finchum	Last time you were there?

Logan 	The last time I was there it was McDonald’s and my girlfriend and I, I’d go home that way, over the overpass, sometimes if I come to Vinita. I said, “Let’s go get us a fish sandwich.” (Laughs) It’s just not—I can walk around and see…because things aren’t there anymore. In the bathrooms there was a machine for perfume, I just now thought of that. And it would be a high-dollar perfume. I don’t remember how much it was, but you’d put a quarter in there or something and get a squirt.

Finchum	People used it?

Logan 	I guess they did.

Finchum	Something similar in the men’s?

Logan 	I don’t know.

Finchum 	Like aftershave or something?

Logan	I don’t know. 

Finchum	Interesting.

Logan 	I knew—I remember there was in the ladies that was open to the public. We had our own bathroom. The employees had their own bathroom.

Finchum 	How was it decorated? Since it was the Will Rogers Turnpike, was there stuff that referred to him?

Logan 	Yes, there was a statue of him. I really can’t remember anything other than it was—I don’t remember that.

Finchum 	The postcards looked like there was at least some artwork on the walls.


Logan 	Yes, there was artwork, but I don’t remember that. There wasn’t a lot of wall space actually, because it was glass. This one whole side was all glass and this was all glass. So there wasn’t a lot of wall space. Then where the—went out in the hall it was open. It wasn’t totally open, but it had some kind of design there, but it was open, so there really wasn’t a lot of wall space.

Finchum 	They had escalators.

Logan 	It had escalators on both ends, yes. Had an elevator too.

Finchum 	I would imagine that the escalators were thrilling to some kids that hadn’t ever seen one before back..

Logan 	Oh yes. And when I went out there when it was McDonald’s, the escalators were gone.

Finchum	I wonder if they’ve put them back in since it’s been renovated.

Logan	I don’t know.

Finchum 	We’re going to stop on our way back and see.

Logan 	I think Subway’s out there too.

Finchum 	Saw the sign for it, yes. And some Kum and Go or some convenient store.

Logan 	Then see it was Continental—it was the service station.

Finchum	Conoco now.

Logan 	Conoco! Because the building belonged to Continental Oil.

Finchum	It was full-service someone said.

Logan	It was full-service, yes it was.

Finchum 	It would’ve been neat to see that in action.

Logan 	Yeah, it was full-service. The guys that worked in the station have their own stories. (Laughs)

Finchum 	I get a couple of those tomorrow, I’m anxious to hear.

Logan 	And them stories would float up the stairs, okay, (laughs) because they would come up there and eat or have coffee. They would be telling what they saw when they was washing a window. (Laughs) People I think—oh, and the Highway Patrol would have stories, too, the Highway Patrol at that time.

Finchum 	They were regulars, I guess then.

Logan 	They were regulars too, yes. 

Finchum 	They got their coffee for free?

Logan 	They got their coffee for free. They would meet there. Like once a day they would all meet there at a certain time and have their coffee together.

Finchum 	And their mile-high lemon pie…

Logan 	They usually didn’t eat though. Sometimes they did, sometimes they didn’t, but they didn’t spend money. They didn’t tip either.

Finchum	Just took up space at your table, huh?

Logan 	They didn’t take a table, they’d take a booth. They always sat in a booth. If we were busy they weren’t there. They’d always come in the mid-afternoon when it was nothing, nobody there. 

Finchum	They were there in the ’60s. Vietnam War was going on during that time.

Logan 	Yes, one of the young men that was our busboy, Harry Dresher, went to Vietnam. He was killed over there. He was actually the only person that I personally knew that died in Vietnam. He was just young and good little guy. 

Finchum 	I figured there might’ve been some military transports going back and forth, too, during that time.

Logan	I think there was, but they went to the snack bar.

Finchum	Faster.

Logan 	Faster, and the people that worked in the snack bar—the snack bar was set up, it was open twenty-four hours a day, and it was set up that they served you and cooked it right here. It was sandwiches, and hamburgers, and bacon, eggs, and pancakes. That fast stuff. It was cooked then, it wasn’t fast as if it was already cooked. They cooked it. Yeah, they went to the snack bar.

Finchum	I’ve heard a couple stories about eggs from the Glass House. Do you have any comments about eggs? Or scrambled eggs or easy over?

Logan 	No. I’ve thought of this last night when I was looking at the menu. Lavon [Lewis] posted the menu on Facebook and I was looking at the menu. I forgot about—that we had these shakes and we served them in big frosted mugs. I remember this man ordering, now understand I’m a little country girl, okay? (Laughs) He ordered a chocolate shake and he wanted an egg in it. Okay?

Finchum 	A raw egg?

Logan 	A raw egg, and I just cracked the egg and put it in there and it floated to the top. (Laughs) I carried it out there to him and—well, he wanted it beat up. It’s like ‘Ugh, Really?’ 

Finchum 	You had to redo?

Logan 	Yes, I had to redo. You know, I’d never heard of anybody doing that.

Finchum 	Me either. Wonder—for the foam on the top?

Logan	He wanted it mixed in for the protein. Something—people do that.

Finchum 	Lifted weights or something.

Logan 	Yes, I guess. Anyway, wow, okay. 

Finchum 	Just pour it down and do it over.

Logan 	Pour it down and do it over. Lesson learned.

Finchum 	He probably got a chuckle out of that.

Logan 	Yes, yes. And one of the things that I learned to eat that I love and that is apple pie with a slice of American cheese on top of it, melted. It is yummy.

Finchum	Seems like an odd combination.

Logan 	But it’s good.

Finchum 	Together. I’ve not ever tried it.

Logan	It was on the menu, slice of cheese was like ten cents extra. You just put it in the oven and let it warm a little bit and melt it. It’s good, I love it.

Finchum	You’re making me hungry. 
,
Logan 	The food was really good.

Finchum	Did you have a favorite thing that you liked though?

Logan 	I loved the chicken pot pie.

Finchum 	Was it made in house?

Logan 	Yes, it was made in house. It was scooped up into a bowl and the crust was, it was like a pie crust, and they—it was round like that and you put the top on it. Everything was served with an under dish. When you served it, you took the crust off for them, and you scooped the pie out on top of the crust and then you took that away. 

Finchum 	Kind of a hint of elegance. People ordered it just to get to do that.

Logan	I guess, and some people that had ate it before would say, “That’s okay, I’ll eat it like that.” That’s how we would serve it. They had a plate and we would put the top out and then scoop it out and then those dishes were took away.

Finchum 	I think that’s a better way to eat it. The crust is the best part.

Logan 	Yes, on the bottom. You’d end up with the crusts on the bottom. It was really good.

Finchum 	Have you figured out how to bake it?

Logan 	Close to it. (Laughs)

Finchum 	You’ll have to share these recipes.

Logan 	Just close to it.

Finchum 	Round them up and send them when we…

Logan 	They’re up here! (Gestures to head)

Finchum 	Write them down!

Logan	They’re up here.

Finchum 	Seriously, write some of them down.

Logan 	The food was absolutely wonderful.

Finchum 	Did they try anything that didn’t work? That wasn’t received well? That sticks out in your mind?

Logan 	No, I don’t recall that.

Finchum 	Was a dud and didn’t work.

Logan 	I think everything had been already tried and tested.

Finchum 	By Host International?

Logan 	Host International, yes. Everything had been…because everything had to be approved by them.

Finchum	 That makes sense.

Logan	 I often wondered whatever happened to Host International. 

Finchum	I don’t know, it went out of business at some point I think. I don’t know, maybe someone bought it out. I really don’t know. It was from California, wasn’t it?

Logan 	Yes. 

Finchum 	Who knows.

Logan 	I think they had a restaurant in Hawaii, too. Seems like they had something in Hawaii. Actually, what they’d do was lease the facilities for a certain length of time. 

Finchum 	I think this one for a while belonged to the, I guess it still does, belonged to the Turnpike?

Logan 	Yes.

Finchum 	Oklahoma Turnpike.

Logan 	The way I understand, it belonged to Continental Oil with the agreement that after so many years they turned it over to the Turnpike Authority. 

Finchum 	So they get the money from whatever business happens to be in it?

Logan 	Yes.

Finchum 	That’s why McDonald’s is there.

Logan 	Yes, that’s why McDonald’s is there and why Subway is there. And why whatever the convenient store…

Finchum 	Travelers don’t want to spend the time anymore.

Logan 	No, they don’t.

Finchum	It’s fast food and move on.

Logan	No, they don’t. That was a really special time. Things are different now.

Finchum 	You’re glad you worked—did that.

Logan 	Yes I am. I am very glad that I did that. Met a lot of people, made a lot of friends and that are still friends.

Finchum 	Good times.

Logan 	Good times.

Finchum 	Good tips.

Logan 	Good times, good tips, good food.

Finchum	I think that’s a good way to end, don’t you?

Logan 	Yeah, I think so too.

Finchum 	Thank you.

Logan 	You’re welcome.

------- End of interview -------
