





Oral History Interview

with

Denise Jones





Interview Conducted by
Julie Pearson-Little Thunder
September 26, 2017


Spotlighting Oklahoma
Oral History Project












Oklahoma Oral History Research Program
Edmon Low Library ● Oklahoma State University
© 2017
Spotlighting Oklahoma
Oral History Project

Interview History
	
Interviewer:	Julie Pearson-Little Thunder
Transcriber:	Lauren Gray
Editors: 	Micki White	

The recording and transcript of this interview were processed at the Oklahoma State University Library in Stillwater, Oklahoma.

Project Detail

The purpose of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History Project is to document the development of the state by recording its cultural and intellectual history.

This project was approved by the Oklahoma State University Institutional Review Board on April 15, 2009.

Legal Status

Scholarly use of the recordings and transcripts of the interview with Denise Jones is unrestricted. The interview agreement was signed on September 26, 2017.













Spotlighting Oklahoma
Oral History Project

About Denise Jones…

Opened in 1884, Chilocco Indian School was one of the largest federally-funded boarding schools for Native American youth in the country. Located twenty miles north of Ponca City, Oklahoma, the school offered a half academic / half vocational curriculum, focused on assimilating Native students into the dominant culture. Like most boarding schools, Chilocco went through different phases of development, reflecting changes in the federal policy towards Native Americans. These changes were often prompted by the efforts of Native educators, community workers and activists, and shifting attitudes within the larger society. Throughout these shifts, however, the school’s status as a National Guard center as well as boarding school made it unique. 

A federal retreat from funding such schools, and rising Native enrollment in public schools, ushered in the close of Chilocco in 1980. By the time of its closing, it had seen close to 18,000 students and had awarded more than 5,500 high school diplomas during its near-centennial history. Today, the school’s land is owned in trust by the Kaw, Ponca, Otoe-Missouria, Pawnee, and Cherokee Nations. While remaining Chilocco alumni do not always agree on the school’s long-term legacy, most share memories of friendships and often marriages that arose from attending the school. They consider themselves part of a Chilocco family, working to share the school’s history, good and bad, and to celebrate the accomplishments of its students.

Denise Jones, of Ponca and Absentee Shawnee descent, was born in Pawnee, Oklahoma, and grew up in her family’s Ponca culture. The family moved to Dallas when she was very young, and they remained there until Denise was twelve years old, when they came back to Oklahoma. She attended Newkirk public schools, which was quite a shock, coming from Dallas, but she soon became acclimated to the smaller school setting. In 1979, she transferred to Chilocco with her two-year-old baby, considerably more responsibility than most of the student population. She was already familiar with the campus because she was a fourth-generation Chilocco alum and had heard her family’s stories of the school. Plus, she had spent a lot of time there with her father when he’d visit the school. One of her fondest memories is taking friends home with her on weekends because her father knew a lot of the students didn’t have a strong home life and he wanted to share his family’s love with them. When the school closed in 1980, Denise went to live with her aunt in Kansas. She attended Chaparral High School there to finish out her education. 

After high school, she came back to Oklahoma where she worked at radio stations and enrolled at Northern Oklahoma College to study broadcasting. She changed her major to business, and she changed schools, going to OSU-Okmulgee. There, she helped start the school’s first Native American Student Association, and the group coordinated their first powwow, with the help of Denise’s grandmother. At that powwow, Denise was honored with a plume, a treasured gesture and symbol in Native American culture. After a couple more moves to Kentucky and Illinois, she ended up back in Tulsa and enrolled at OSU-Tulsa and OSU-Stillwater, eventually earning her bachelor’s degree. Denise had also learned several trades outside the classroom by working with her father. She gained painting and construction skills, but most notably she became an adept diesel engine mechanic. After college, she was marketing director for nursing homes and assisted living facilities, and she spent some time driving for Uber and Lyft, ultimately co-creating the Tipsters tip jar for drivers. In her interview, Denise shares memories of her youth, adulthood, and time at Chilocco, specifically the closeness of the students, being part of the school’s last class, and how she has reconnected with her classmates over the years.
Spotlighting Oklahoma
Oral History Project

Denise Jones

Oral History Interview

Interviewed by Julie Pearson-Little Thunder
September 26, 2017
Tulsa, Oklahoma


Little Thunder	This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is September 26, 2017, and I’m interviewing Denise Jones as part of a collaboration between the Chilocco Alumni Association and the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State University. Denise, you’re Ponca and Absentee Shawnee, a fourth-generation Chilocco graduate, and your time at Chilocco ended the year the school closed in 1980. You worked at OSU in Stillwater for a number of years before moving back to the Tulsa area, and you’ve done a lot of interesting things since then, including raising seven children and being self-employed. Thank you for taking the time to talk with me. Where were you born, and where did you grow up?

Jones	I didn’t graduate from Chilocco. I was actually a junior when it closed.

Little Thunder	Okay, yes, thank you for that correction.

Jones	Yeah, and I was born in Pawnee, Oklahoma. My dad was a master printer and immediately moved us to Dallas, Texas, where he worked for a big printing company…. I was there until I was twelve, and then he moved us back here. My grandmother had a restaurant called Wimpy’s in Ponca City. We moved to Newkirk, and they opened a second one there in a [teen town]. They also had a Pizza Hut—or, it wasn’t Pizza Hut, but it was called The Hut, which was pizza.

Little Thunder	Oh, that’s neat. What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side?

Jones	Well, they’re dead. I used to spend summers with both. I was sometimes with my grandparents on my mother’s side, and then sometimes I’d come for the summer, growing up, and work with my grandma in the restaurant.

Little Thunder	And were you around both the Shawnee culture and Ponca culture? Was one more predominant?

Jones	Mostly the Ponca, yeah. My grandmother, they all lived around the Ponca City area, so, yeah, it was mostly Ponca.

Little Thunder	Well, tell us a little bit about Wimpy’s. That was a pretty well-known restaurant.

Jones	Yeah. (Laughter) It was homemade food, and it was really good. Some of the family felt like my grandma was getting up in age, and they went ahead and sold out. 

Little Thunder	It was kind of unusual for a Native-owned enterprise to start. Do you remember any stories about it?

Jones	Most of my family has been entrepreneurs. My dad, as well, and my grandmother. He got it honestly. My dad’s grandmother was full Ponca. She was the first notary public female in Oklahoma, and she was full Ponca. That came a lot probably from Chilocco Indian School.

Little Thunder	So you were in Dallas for quite a chunk of time. What was it like growing up in Dallas at that time?

Jones	It was great; it was really good. We initially lived downtown. I’ve since gone back and looked, and it’s a parking lot. Then Dad moved us into the suburbs. It was great; it was good.

Little Thunder	And then when you would come back to Ponca City in the summer, big change?

Jones	No, it’s just family, cousins, lots of cousins.

Little Thunder	Right, right. What was Ponca City like at that time when you were going back in the summers?

Jones	It seemed considerably smaller, but it was good. We just mostly stayed at my grandma’s house. Sat out on the porch and talked.

Little Thunder	You went to public school, I guess, then in Dallas. What grades?

Jones	First through sixth.

Little Thunder	First through sixth, and then you were back in Ponca City, going to public school?

Jones	Newkirk, which is twelve miles north of Ponca City, yeah.

Little Thunder	What was school like in Newkirk?

Jones	It was hard. It was really hard. One, it was a huge cultural shock from Dallas, Texas, to twenty-five hundred people. Probably didn’t adjust that well. I did okay, first couple years.

Little Thunder	Did you find it was kind of like going over the same old material, or just was it attitudes, or what was the difference?

Jones	I did come advanced from Dallas to Newkirk, and yeah, I think I did get bored. There wasn’t anything to do, (Laughs) except a little mischief. (Laughter) I found that pretty good.

Little Thunder	Did you? (Laughs) You had this whole family history of attendance at Chilocco, but what was the first time that you actually went to the campus? Was it before you went to school there?

Jones	Oh, yeah. My dad used to do some things up in there. He learned to be a master printer from being at Chilocco. He immediately went to work for a printing company, well, a newspaper right after that.

Little Thunder	So, like, the first time that you went maybe was with your father to the campus, or was it before that?

Jones	No, with my father. Yeah, we used to go as a family. He had friends and family. I had an aunt that worked there at Chilocco. We’d visit her.

Little Thunder	What job did she have?

Jones	Tillie Hernandez, I believe she worked for Mr. Baker.

Little Thunder	Okay, and did you like to go to the printing classroom?

Jones	Yeah.

Little Thunder	So tell us a bit about your family history at Chilocco.

Jones	Well, I was the girl that got pregnant in high school. I wasn’t doing too well in school, and so Dad put me in Chilocco. That helped a lot.

Little Thunder	But all the way, as you mentioned, going back to your great-grandmother, you had family there. Can you take us through, kind of walk us through who went, and what they felt like Chilocco had given them?

Jones	Well, I was fourth-generation. My great-grandmother went there. She was taken from her home when she was four. She went to school all that time, and then she also stayed and was a matron afterwards. My grandmother, which was her daughter, Velma Pensoneau, was the second generation to go, and then my dad and my aunt was the third generation to go. Then I was fourth.

Little Thunder	So I’m kind of thinking, when your great-grandmother was working as the matron there, then your grandmother sort of grew up on that campus, too?

Jones	I think it might have been before….

Little Thunder	Might have been before? Okay, that’s so neat. What were some of the, maybe, stories, either good or bad, that they shared with you about their experiences before you went?

Jones	I mostly just heard good. They had the school dances, and all of the girls learned how to type and sew and do all the homemaking things. They had proms and dances. Everything, pretty much, that my dad told me was really positive. 

Little Thunder	Were there any Chilocco marriages that came out….

Jones	Yeah, I’m sure there are. My dad didn’t marry out of there. He probably should’ve, that one picture I showed you of him.

Little Thunder	Yes.

Jones	I mean, he’s always liked her, but no, not directly, except for me.

Little Thunder	Right. 

Jones	I did marry a man that I went to school with there, so I guess I did. (Laughter)

Little Thunder	So when you came to Chilocco, and, like you said, you have a little child…

Jones	I had a two-year-old, yes, and so….

Little Thunder	…so you’re coming in with a lot more to deal with than some of the students.

Jones	Yeah, still excelled. Was head cheerleader and did really well.

Little Thunder	Talk to us a little bit about the cheerleading team.

Jones	They were awesome. We just had fun. It was a lot of fun.

Little Thunder	Was it competitive to get in?

Jones	Yeah. 

Little Thunder	Pretty competitive?

Jones	Yeah.

Little Thunder	Because you have to be real athletic.

Jones	Yeah, and I’m still friends to this day with my cheerleading coach. She was also the art teacher.

Little Thunder	Oh, neat. That’s really neat. What was her name?

Jones	Sandy Wilson.

Little Thunder	Oh, Sandy Wilson, yes, also an artist. (Laughs)

Jones	Yes.

Little Thunder	Did you all compete against other cheer teams?

Jones	No, we just cheered for our teams, yeah.

Little Thunder	And what about the games? Do you remember one that was particularly special, or do you remember any…

Jones	I know our basketball girls were really tough. They were awesome. I mean, that’s thirty-some years ago, but I just remember a lot of camaraderie and just loving everybody on the team. It was fun, and we had…. Sandy just made it really lighthearted and fun. It was good.

Little Thunder	What was the most, kind of, amusing thing that happened, either during a cheer practice or when you were cheering at a game?

Jones	Well, I mean, you know, just learning all the cheers and things. I just think we thought, we felt like we were hot stuff.

Little Thunder	(Laughs) I’m sure you were. (Laughter)

Jones	It’s funny to think of now, but yeah. (Laughter)

Little Thunder	What kinds of classes did you take when you were there?

Jones	Mostly business. (Laughter) Typing was particularly interesting. 

Little Thunder	Why is that?

Jones	You used the old-time typewriter stuff, and we were all pretty ornery. We looked like we were typing a lot of the times. (Laughs)

Little Thunder	Who were some teachers that stood out for you?

Jones	I can’t remember her name for the world, but I remember her face, just right there. 

Little Thunder	Is this the typing teacher?

Jones	Yeah. (Laughs)

Little Thunder	Do you think she was on to you or not?

Jones	I think she pretty much hated us. (Laughter)

Little Thunder	Did you still have work details then or not?

Jones	I didn’t because I commuted. I had a baby, so I commuted back and forth, but yeah, I’m sure the girls did.

Little Thunder	Did you ever bring your toddler to school?

Jones	No, but I did bring the girls home with me on the weekends. They’d get weekend passes, and I’d take a different one home with me every week. It was fun.

Little Thunder	I bet they really appreciated that, too.

Jones	We had a lot of fun.

Little Thunder	Did they go to Wimpy’s and just kind of hang out?

Jones	Yeah, and I think they got to meet my friends in Newkirk and Ponca City. Dad would take us places, and we’d just have a good time.

Little Thunder	Oh, neat. Were some of them from out of state?

Jones	Oh, all of them, yeah, all from far, faraway places.

Little Thunder	What was one of the most special, intertribal friendships you had over there?

Jones	I’d have to say Christine Callshim because I met her the summer before I went to Chilocco.

Little Thunder	In Newkirk or….

Jones	No, I met her—we were on a Indian program, working at Marland Mansion. I was a little fair-skinned than some. She was my friend. They all, I think, were afraid of her. (Laughs) I don’t know, but they left me alone. (Laughter) We’re still friends, and we still talk quite a bit. She’s a awesome, awesome person.

Little Thunder	Wow. You said the other students were kind of a little afraid of her, did you say?

Jones	Yeah, and she’s really not very big, so I was like….

Little Thunder	She was tough. (Laughter)

Jones	Yeah, apparently. She was always really sweet whenever I worked with her, but yeah, some people were afraid of her. I was thrilled to death to have her as my friend.

Little Thunder	Oh, yeah. And how about homework and balancing? Of course, you were—how much homework did you have when you had to go home and be with your daughter?

Jones	Not a lot. I don’t remember. Just studying and things, studying for tests and such.

Little Thunder	And you already knew you wanted to do something in business.

Jones	Yeah. I think Sandy’s husband was my math teacher, I believe.

Little Thunder	How about the food? You ate there at lunch?

Jones	It was awesome. I did end up marrying the cook’s son, Semion McCarty’s son. No, there was never any complaints about the food or the amount you got. He would feed you well, for sure.

Little Thunder	That’s great. 

Jones	It was right up there with restaurant food. I mean, it really was good, really good food.

Little Thunder	When you started that semester of 1980, I guess 1979, fall of ’79…

Jones	Yes, ’79, ’80.

Little Thunder	…were people talking then? Were rumors afloat that Chilocco was going to close? Was it announced at the beginning of the year, even, or….

Jones	I don’t think it was announced. I don’t remember it being announced at the beginning of the year. I remember it kind of being a shock.

Little Thunder	But you were hearing people talk about it. When was the official announcement made?

Jones	I’ll be honest; I can’t remember. I just remember back then you think that’s all everybody else’s stuff to worry about, but it was not good. The seniors had it the best because they were done and they could move on, where the lower classmen had to find other places to be. I, particularly, was sent to my aunt’s house up in Kansas and went to Chaparral High School, and that was pretty traumatic.

Little Thunder	Oh, yeah, we’ll talk about that in a minute. So basically—and they probably didn’t want to disrupt. I mean, they wanted the students to be able to focus on their studies, but then, come springtime, everybody kind of knew that this was the last semester. They needed to make preparations. Do you remember, did they—at the end of the year, what was that graduation like? That must have been tough.

Jones	Oh, I think the senior class got to go to DC. They sent them out good. They really did. 

Little Thunder	They got to take a special trip?

Jones	Yes.

Little Thunder	Did you go to the graduation ceremony, too?

Jones	Yes, for sure.

Little Thunder	So you’ve got these friends, and they’re also having to make alternate plans.

Jones	We didn’t have Facebook back then, so you just lost track. I found a lot of them now, so that’s a lot of years later.

Little Thunder	Through the association, the alumni association?

Jones	Mostly through Facebook, (Laughter) Twitter.

Little Thunder	Wonderful thing that that can do.

Jones	Yeah.

Little Thunder	When you went up to Kansas, that was not a good experience in that public school?

Jones	Well, no. It’s not that my aunt wasn’t doing a good job or that I didn’t like my cousins or anything. It was just different, back into a different society. This was rural Kansas. When you’re used to feeling—when you’re with people you feel a part of, it’s really hard.

Little Thunder	Right, and that was for your senior year, right?

Jones	Yes.

Little Thunder	Okay. So what happened after that?

Jones	I married the man that I went to school with at Chilocco. Didn’t last very long, but I did. (Laughs)

Little Thunder	Were you back living in Oklahoma at that point?

Jones	Well, he come got me, and then yes. (Laughter)

Little Thunder	Were you doing anything related to business at that point, too?

Jones	No, I was just a high school student and working in a restaurant.

Little Thunder	Okay. Up there in Kansas, you were working part-time?

Jones	Yeah.

Little Thunder	Saving your money or….

Jones	Of course. (Laughter)

Little Thunder	And then you were at another college before going to OSU, right? Did you have another….

Jones	I first went to NOC [Northern Oklahoma College] for broadcasting.

Little Thunder	For broadcasting?

Jones	Yeah, and then when I figured out you can’t make any money at this, I worked at, I think, three different radio stations and did some disc jockeying in several clubs. I think even having your own show, I made five dollars an hour, so I decided I should probably go into business. At that time, I remarried, and we went to OSU-Okmulgee. He graduated before I did.

Little Thunder	And at OSU-Okmulgee, you were still on the business track?

Jones	Yeah, still on business. We started the first-ever Native American Student Association (I think we called it ASA) and had the first-ever powwow there.

Little Thunder	Which your grandmother….

Jones	My grandmother helped put together, and a lot of our members were already dancers and already knew all they needed to do. I got plumed that year.

Little Thunder	Oh, neat.

Jones	Pretty awesome. 

Little Thunder	Yes, that’s very awesome.

Jones	Then we transferred up to Paducah, Kentucky, and I went to work for a radio station.

Little Thunder	This was you and your husband…

Jones	Yeah.

Little Thunder	…both? Okay….

Jones	Yeah, and then he got transferred again, and I went back to school. Went to Kaskaskia College in Centralia, Illinois, and got an associate’s degree in two or three different things, retail management, business association, and maybe marketing. I don’t know. I took so many different classes that it just all…. I had several different, little things. Then we got transferred again to Houston. They had the Katy Mills mall, and it was a little different type of mall. I was general manager of two toy stores there, Toyco and Playco. Don’t suggest it. I think they take your retail managers and plug them in until they burn you completely out. Then we got transferred again to Tulsa, Oklahoma, and we were finally back home. 

Little Thunder	Wow, and you’re raising your family, your kids at that time, too.

Jones	Yeah, that’s when I went to OSU. 

Little Thunder	Okay.

Jones	Yeah, and raising seven kids in the middle of all that.

Little Thunder	At OSU, you decided on some specifics, a specific track, sort of?

Jones	It was still business.

Little Thunder	And was it a graduate degree, or was it…

Jones	No, I was just working on my bachelor’s.

Little Thunder	What was the difference between OSU, maybe, and what you’d gotten….

Jones	Well, I can tell you. At OSU-Okmulgee, I ran back into Sandy and her husband…

Little Thunder	That’s neat.

Jones	...and her sister. They were all my teachers again.

Little Thunder	Wow! (Laughter)

Jones	Yeah! It was pretty neat.

Little Thunder	That is awesome.

Jones	It was awesome. I hated leaving Okmulgee. I really did.

Little Thunder	I bet. I bet. When you were at OSU-Stillwater—or were you going to the Extension?

Jones	I went to OSU-Tulsa and OSU-Stillwater.

Little Thunder	Yeah, traveled back and forth. So at OSU, what kind of skills did you pick up that maybe built upon what you had, that you felt made a difference?

Jones	Oh, at OSU?

Little Thunder	Yes. 

Jones	I think at OSU they just want you to learn to learn and give you the skills and knowledge that we’re in a trending, technological…and that this is how you find what you need to find because you do a lot of research papers and things because you’re always going to be wanting to learn. I mean, everything’s different from when I went to school. Not a lot of it’s even applicable, (Laughs) so you have to learn to learn.

Little Thunder	Right, especially in that area of communication.

Jones	Yes, and I think they put so much pressure on you. I could say the one thing I left OSU with is learning how to push through difficult obstacles. You have three term papers, and you’re striving to try to keep your grades good. You’re like, “There’s no way in the world I’m ever going to get this done,” and you just do it. At the end, you’re like, “How’d I do that?” I think that’s what I learned, how to push through and learn, mostly.

Little Thunder	When did you begin getting involved with the alumni association again?

Jones	I haven’t really been that awful involved with them. Mostly my dad, after my dad passed, because he loved the alumni association so much. I think since he graduated, I don’t think he’s missed one alumni thing all of those years. I used to go with him quite a bit. At that time, my class wasn’t really even attending, raising families and things, but I went several times with him.

Little Thunder	What do you think’s the most fun part about the ones that you went to?

Jones	They know how to have fun. There are judges and lawyers, and it’s amazing to me the quality of people that Chilocco did raise, like I said, entrepreneurs, the quality. They were taught how to live in society and succeed, but they did know how to have fun, within reason. It was fun watching older people have fun. Now I know how to have fun, since I’m the older person now. (Laughter)

Little Thunder	What would you like people to—well, you’re currently self-employed.

Jones	Yes.

Little Thunder	Can you tell us a little bit about your job?

Jones	Well, I was working as—my dad and I worked together for eight years in Stillwater, and we had a diesel repair shop where I learned to be a diesel mechanic.

Little Thunder	Oh, my goodness! Your dad had a printing background, but he also….

Jones	Yeah, and he had a bridge-building company for thirty years, him and his brother. When they got older and decided to dissolve it, Dad was wanting to get all of the equipment together and get it fixed up so they could sell it all off. We brought in a mechanic to work on things. Well, at that time, there wasn’t any mechanics, diesel mechanics, in Stillwater. Next thing we know, his friends are bringing us their equipment, and we’re starting to work on their equipment. Then we’re like, “We probably ought to start charging,” and the next thing I know, we’re in a business.

Little Thunder	And you’re kind of running the business side?

Jones	I’m doing the marketing, those kind of things, office stuff. Dad was in charge of the mechanics and all of those things. As time went on, next thing I knew, I’m kind of getting pulled into the shop and helping them do all kinds of little things that I didn’t really, at that time, want to do. I’ve always been my dad’s helper. He was Dennis Michael Jones, and I was Denise Michelle Jones, the only boy he ever got. (Laughter) I got to learn how to paint. I’ve got to learn how to be a finish carpenter. I got to learn how to do construction work, learned how to diesel mechanic. We ended up dissolving [B. C.] and then opening up D. J. Construction and Repair. We did that for about eight years until my dad got real sick. Prior to that, when he had started getting kind of sick, we thought, well, we’ll just—I couldn’t imagine running it without him. We went ahead and had a big auction, and most of the stuff that was bought was bought by this construction company. Since Dad was in construction all those years, he really liked [Robby], and he would give him advice. 

Next thing I know, my sick dad is working for Robby. I’m coming over, and I’m noticing that he is doing things that he shouldn’t be doing, so I start helping him on my spare time. Next thing I know, I’m working with Robby. He and I are fixing equipment together again, and then he got too sick for it. I remember him being in the hospital, and me, still asking him questions on some of the things because we worked on such a wide variety of stuff. After he passed, I really had a hard time doing that anymore, so I packed up and moved to Tulsa, be a little closer to my grown kids. Ended up going to work for, well, I went to work for a manufacturer that sublet. We did airplane parts and stuff. When I figured out 100 degrees, 108 in the flash rooms, as cool as it gets in there, I called a friend. I’m like, “Do you have any positions open over there?” She goes, “Yeah,” so next thing I knew, I was in medical records. I ended up from medical records into the office, working as an administrative assistant. Then they started having me doing some of their marketing for them. 

Then from that, I went to marketing director of five nursing homes and one assisted living that they had. I did that until they had one of them close, and it was the one that I homed out of. At that particular time—kind of like my dad, I work a lot. I had been, on weekends when I wasn’t doing anything, I was Uber and Lyft driving. Well, I was finding out at that particular time that I was making more doing that and less days than what I…so then I moved on into doing that. We later started noticing Uber wouldn’t let you have tips on the app or anything, but they had lost a class-action lawsuit saying that we couldn’t have a tip. Some of my comrades and I, couple of them, we came up with a company called Tipsters. We made lighted tip cups and light kits for your car, so that…. Our logo is “making tipping fun” because it has a remote control, it goes to the music, but you still have your tip jar there. It was kind of our way at that time to say, “Yeah, we can have tips.” We pretty much was on the forefront of helping rideshare drivers get tips.

Little Thunder	You had a lot of the ideas for the marketing of that.

Jones	Yeah.

Little Thunder	Well, what would you like people to know or remember about Chilocco?

Jones	It was family. 

Little Thunder	Very literally for you, and emotionally.

Jones	Yes, and for a lot of the students, it was the only family they had. 

Little Thunder	Is there anything else we should talk about that we haven’t? 

Jones	Can’t think of anything yet. After you’re gone, probably. (Laughter)

Little Thunder	Well, thank you for your time today.

Jones	Well, thank you. 

Little Thunder	Just a little postscript about taking kids home [from Chilocco].

Jones	Yeah, I think probably one of the most memorable things was my dad would always want me to bring some of the kids home with me. He knew that some of them was so far away from their families, and that some maybe didn’t have any family and came from all kind of different situations. Every week, I would bring one of my friends home with me, and it was awesome.

Little Thunder	All right.

------- End of interview -------
