 PLUSS: Alyssa Pluss, interviewing Tiik Pollet –– is that –– that’s how you say it? POLLET: Yes PLUSS: Ok. Birth date January 13th, 1951. POLLET: That’s it. PLUSS: Ok –– great, alright. So, first question: tell me about growing up in Washington, D.C.? POLLET: Ok, well, actually I was born in Washington, D.C., and we quickly moved into the suburbs of Maryland, and then, the way my mother tells it, my brother and sister went to school, and I was four, and insistent on going to school too. I evidently threw tantrums. And so, she was forced to send me to school, but the only place that would take me at the age of four was back in the District. Since my grandmother lived in the District, I lived with my grandmother for a year so I could go to school. And, an interesting thing is I went to Oyster School. I now teach at Oyster School. PLUSS: Oh, wow. I don’t– (overlapping voices) POLLET: It’s amazing. PLUSS: Is Oyster School a– POLLET: It’s a - it’s a school in Washington, D.C. It was just a little school back then, but it’s now this incredibly advanced bilingual school. You know, it’s really a highly held school, and I’m very proud that I went to kindergarten there. PLUSS: And you teach– POLLET: And now I teach there, I teach guitar. PLUSS: And how do you– POLLET: Well, I teach at Fillmore Arts Center, and we also go sometimes to a school, we take our Fillmore teachers to a school. So that’s one of the schools I actually go to and I teach guitar to seventh grade, seventh and eighth grade. I teach them rock and roll. PLUSS: (Laughs) How –– how do you, how do you like working with kids? POLLET: Well, I will say, those particular kids –– seventh and eighth graders are challenging, very challenging. Um, they’re at an age, I’m sorry to say, where girls don’t want to mess their nails up, and they whine a lot. They’re tired, they’ve just been out to recess, and they don’t want to do anything, you know. And they challenge you. You have to get their respect. So, other than that –– the ones that are interested in performing are amazing. Some of them are just like little jack guitar players, they’re going to be good. And, I will say, I have this guy Abdul. Abdul has like a crush on me, and he doesn’t mind. He shouts it to the world. He loves me. He heard me last year, at the end of the year school performance, and he heard me sing. And he came up to me, he goes, “Ms. Pollet, you can actually sing. I’ve never heard a teacher who could actually sing.” He goes, “You actually can sing, you’re a real singer. Oh my god, you have a beautiful voice.” He goes, “I’ve got to get in your class next year.” You know, and I said, “Well, actually, Abdul, you will be in the class next year,” because they have to take the class. So, he’s in the class, and he’s thrilled. And the class misbehaved, I had to call the principle in, and Abdul came and gave me a personal apology. He says, “I’m so sorry, I don’t know why I got in with all the kids, I wish I hadn’t done it. But I’m really, really sorry, and you deserve better kids than that.” So thank you Abdul, you know? So it’s very sweet. I will tell you this, I couldn’t teach kids –– I started teaching in ’99 –– previous to ’99, I couldn’t. I was healing to be able to teach kids. That was just not anywhere near anything I was ever going to do. And I do teach Pre-K through eight, and it’s a challenge, you know? I’ve told some of my friends, I worked in a place in Washington called Food for Thought where I was the manager, and all the employees acted like they should be in Kindergarten. And now I’m in an age-appropriate –– I’m in a venue where the behavior and the age match, it’s appropriate. The kindergarteners act like kindergarteners. I called my old boss at Food for Thought, I said “I’m so excited, I work in a place now where kindergarteners act like kindergarteners, and adults act like adults.” (laughs) So, it’s challenging in the sense of learning to understand that in the big world, kids really are kids. To assign adult characteristics to them is completely wrong. You know that expression “stop acting like a baby?” PLUSS: Mhmm POLLET: That should be –– anybody who says that should be put in jail. Because –– they say that to two-year-olds. Do you know what I’m saying? That’s um –– excuse me, that is a two-year-old. And even five-year-olds, you’re still a little baby. You may be five –– don’t tell a five-year-old they’re a baby, but, they’re big kids now, you know, you tell them, “you’re little people,” and they say, “No, we’re big.” So you say, “Ok, but you’re still a little big.” You know, so they really want to grow up. Because, you know, adults put that on them. So, I don’t know, it’s a whole new world. I have a lot of compassion for kids, and the kid in me, I think kind of gets a break. And I don’t mean by getting to act like a kid, although I do get to do that. Do you know I’m becoming a comedian? I’m becoming a kindergartener comedian, a kindergartener and first grade comedian. It’s the funniest thing. Sometimes I go to the director and I do one of my bits that I did with the kids. And they’re like –– they’re hysteri –– they’re like, we just want –– just be funny, Ms. Pollet. I’m like, “If you behave, I’ll be funny.” But it’s, I’m having more compassion for what it means to be a kid. It means you’re excited about things. It means you giggle at things. It means things that aren’t funny to adults are hysterical to you. It means your feelings get hurt, real easily. It means you’re scared real easily, like adults can scare you. It means you want to please the adults. And I think that’s a big one that adults forget, that children naturally want to please you. They’re wired that –– they’re hard-wired that way. So when adults forget that, they go into all kinds of unhealthy behavior for themselves and for kids. You really have to remember that this is a little being that wants to please you, all I can do is guide them, how to. And at the same time, help them develop, which is actually thrilling for me, to help them develop as artists. And keep encouraging them, even the little ADD Garrett, ugh, just, “You’re doing really good today, Garrett.” And he’s been sitting there the whole time turning his guitar upside down, and, “Now, Garrett, please pay attention! If you will put finger one on fret one, string one, you will be able to make a sound. If you just do it ––” (laughs). “Ok, Ms. Pollet.” (motions guitar playing) “See, that was great, Garrett!” And for the rest of the class, he’s eating his guitar. So, I could talk a lot about it, I think that every adult that’s having a difficult time in their life should be forced to go into a kindergarten room, and see what’s age-appropriate, you know? And I’ve even threatened my seventh and eighth graders with field trips to my kindergarten class, so they could see where their behavior borders on childish, that it’s really not appropriate anymore to be as whiney as they are. Because some of them are very spoiled. PLUSS: How do you see your politics colliding with your teaching, or do you? POLLET: I put it right in there, and I sometimes talk to my director and ask her if I went overboard, or if I’m still within the correct boundaries for this. The other day –– well, first of all, I am out at work. They outed me, I guess they just figured it out. They took one look at me and assumed I was a lesbian and macrobiotic. You know, I’m like, “I’m not macrobiotic. I did use to be.” “Oh, then you’re a vegetarian, right?” “Well, actually, no. I’m lactose intolerant though, but I eat chicken and fish. Poultry and fish, basically.” “Really?” It’s like I have a big “V” on my head or something? What is it, do I look like a zucchini or something? So, that’s always funny to me, that people just assume I’m a vegetarian. And we have gay people at work, so that’s totally fine. And it’s –– it’s an art school, Fillmore Arts Center is an arts school, so –– And, the other day, my little third graders who I teach digital art to, we were doing a digital art project and I allowed them to bring in their Nintendo’s. We were doing stop animation, you know, frame-by-frame stop animation. So, you know, set your little Nintendo figure up, snap, move the arm, snap, move it a little further, snap. So, they all brought in these soldiers and ninja guys and knights with horses and things. I said, “There are some rules to this: no bloodshed or war unless it’s historically contextual,” in the sense of, they had some knights. And I said, ok, if you want to do that, but no gratuitous knocking people on their heads and things like that. So one little boy wanted to know why. I said, “Ok, let’s have a talk.” And I do this frequently with my students. That’s why I have to ask my director if I’m still, you know, within the boundaries of not talking too adult to kids. I told them, I said, “Well, let me just tell you – the girls already know this, girls I know you’re going to be very bored by this, but listen.” I said, “Fellas, the deal is, you’re being primed for war.” They’re like, (mimes a look of surprise, laughs). I said, “What is happening is, since the day you were born, the country you live in, the United States of America (gestures quotation marks), is priming you for war. They want you to want to play with the little war toys, want to engage in the war toy behaviors. They want you to become excited about it and that to be something that gets you charged up. They want you to someday be ready to go to war. So they are –– they prepared you for it.” I said, “You’re –– you fight a lot with each other, you like to go out and fight each other, you like to beat each other up.” And this little boy went, “Uh, Ms. Pollet, um, I don’t play with war toys, and I don’t like beating people up, and I don’t fight.” I said, “Well, good, you’re a powerful example for some of these other little boys.” And one little boy went, “Well, that’s true, he doesn’t –– um, he doesn’t fight.” And of course, other ones were, Well, I like fighting, or whatever, you know, they do their little funny games. And I looked at the girls, and I said, “Girls, do you understand what I’m talking about?” They went, oh, yes. They all were, like, rolling their eyes, even the Russian ones, because we’re multi-cultural, multi-racial. And this is across racial lines –– we are, we have a very large mixed community in our school. And the boys got it, they understood. I said, “So you asked, there you have it.” And in my guitar class, we were talking about –– I don’t know how this –– I honestly am not sure how this happened, but one little girl came in with like a tie on. Ah, we were talking about how we dress. Like, femmey dress verses sort of a boyish dress, for the girls, somehow. Or clothes, like how the boys are supposed to dress a certain way and the girls are supposed to dress a certain way. That came up somehow in the class. And I think maybe because we were going into rock star costumes, the dress of, you know, Britney Spears, verses Boys II Men, or something like that, verses a rap star. So we were talking about how girls are supposed to dress a certain way and boys a certain way, and the girl said, “No, I dress the way I want.” And this one little girl had on a tie, tight tights, some weird shorts, suspenders, and little girlie shoes. She says, “Look at me,” she says, “I dress myself, I don’t follow any fads or anything.” And so I said, “Ok, I’m going to give you the speech, here you go.” I said, “Actually, everybody in this room has chosen their clothes based on the propaganda of America (gestures quotation marks) selling you fashion. Whether you like it or not, you chose those clothes based on the clothing that has been shown to you. You know, it isn’t original. You get to shuffle it around –– of the 50 possibilities, you choose the ones you want, but they’re the ones that are presented to you. And they’re presented to you as a girl and you as a boy. So maybe you grab a few boy things, but by and large, that outfit that you’re wearing ––” they were talking about androgynous –– “Is not what you think androgynous is, and no it’s not.” I said, “It’s a very femmey little outfit you’re wearing.” She’s like, (frowns), you know, trying to understand what I’m saying. She goes, “Well, I did pick it myself.” I said, “And good for you! Pick what you enjoy, enjoy wearing the clothes you want, but please don’t be fooled into thinking that it’s something it’s not. I mean, enjoy wearing anything you want to wear, but don’t trick yourself into thinking you’re –– you’re being anti-fashion, because you’re not, or that you’re being anti-girl, because you’re not. And I said, “If you really want to be anti-girl, fashion-wise, you’re going to have to go out to the boys’ department, and buy boys’ clothes, and wear boys’ clothes, because today, your only two options are boys’ clothes and girls’ clothes, ok. And even when they mix them –– if you really want to challenge the status quo –– when they mix them –– and we talked about gender identity, that was the whole thing, was gender identity verses sexual –– birth –– anatomy. And I put that in there too! I said, “Typically you’re born a boy or a girl, and then you start choosing your gender identity (hands wave back and forth smoothly), and you’re supposed to dress like a boy if that’s your gender, or dress like a girl if that’s your sex, or you mix them up a bit, but still, you come out looking more like a girl or more like a boy.” So I said, “Very few kids your age have the courage to really go dress like a boy.” And the boys aren’t going to come to school in skirts, very few of them, you know, they’re not going to ––.” So, yeah. So that’s what I do, I just –– when it’s appropriate, I give some sort of political rap to them. PLUSS: So, going back to gender identity, how do you define yourself, in terms of –– POLLET: Well, you know, I –– probably much like you –– I’ve been through, I guess, learning stages with that, you know. I can tell you the background. When I was growing up, I was mistaken for a boy a lot of the time. When my parents cut my hair short, um, I guess I was a boy for about three years, and– PLUSS: How old were you then? POLLET: You know, that was, like, from 9, 10, 11, 12, around in there. But I still could get away with it up until I started having breasts, and I didn’t really get any until I was 16 or 17. You know, I just did not have breasts. And now I have huge ones, thank you very much (laughs). But, so I actually had fun with that, and I actually enjoyed the privilege. That w –– “male privilege” was not thrown around in the s –– in my neighborhood, but I recognize that I enjoyed it and was proud of it. One example that always stands out is that my friend Willy and I were hanging out in the construction yard, which I did a lot as a kid. Loved hanging out in construction yards. Always loved things that weren’t quite built yet –– anything –– pieces of paper with nothing on them; I always loved the start of something, that excites me. So we were at this construction yard, and we weren’t supposed to be in it, which was part of the excitement, which I always, again, lean toward the boy thing there. The boys were the ones that wanted to do those exciting things, and my little girl friends had no interest. Except for Shirley. Shirley was, we were both, (gestures quotation marks with hands) as they called us back then, tomboys. We liked that adventure, the adrenaline rush of doing the wrong thing. So we were in the construction yard against the rules, and the big construction guy came over. I was like 4 foot 1. Because I was short forever, I was going to be this big forever, (gestures shortness) but then I got seven more inches or something. So he comes, and he’s like, “Hey, you kids, get out of here.” And we were like, Um, we didn’t –– we didn’t do anything. He goes, and he referred to both of us as “son,” he says, “Son,” he says, “Boy, son, boy, get out of here.” And I was like –– and when we got out of distance, Willy said, “He thinks you’re a boy.” I said, “I know, it’s cool!” And so –– and Willy referenced me as a boy in situations like that. So, I identify with what it means to have some of that privilege. To me, how is it a privilege? I don’t know. I guess I didn’t do it long enough to get into the deeper societal privileges of passing. But, you know, as a kid, I was in the boys’ club. So we’ll call that the privilege, being included in the boys’ club, which meant I didn’t get yelled at for being in the construction yard and being a girl in the construction yard. And my parents never did that to me, anyway. They always let me do any –– they never stopped me from –– they never tried to make me a girl or a boy, really, I mean, I think that’s pretty amazing. That’s one thing I really love about my parents is that they never –– we were always pushed toward the arts. And tap dancing, and my brother –– two girls and a boy –– Go dance. Ballet –– two girls and a boy –– Go do ballet. It was like, there was no sexual differentiation. And even in the toys –– I mean, we got –– except for the dolls and the trucks initially, but that ended really quickly in our family, because, I wouldn’t play with dolls. I mean, they had to get me, really, I would say, gender non-specific toys is kind of what I liked as a kid. I liked games, and ball –– what’s that –– yo-yo, skates, kites, action things like that. Yeah, so, and then I was traveling cross-country with my partner. We were, uh, in our twenties. We had her son, he was four. We were in a restaurant, and –– in Oklahoma, I’ll never forget. Peggy had long hair, she’s part Cherokee, part Irish. And I had my big fro out to here, cause my hair is like anti-gravity hair. When it grows, it’s like, cshh (gestures hair growth out of sides of head) –– it’s like that, all curly –– and the waiter –– female waiter –– came over, and she said –– she looked straight at me –– she said, “What can I get you, sir?” Mm, I said “I’m a –– a ma’am.” She said, “Oh, I’m sorry, what can I get you?” And I gave her my order. Looked straight at Peggy and said, “And sir, what can I get you?” I said, “She’s a ma’am too.” She says, “I’m really sorry, and what can I get for the little girl?” (Laughs) I was like, “Lady, you got ’em all wrong!” She goes, “I’m really sorry, just, what do you want?” I thought, ok. That was in the seventies, and it was a struggle for people. You know, it was new –– the long hair on boys, the clothing styles. Everybody thinks that this gender thing today is –– no, in the hippie day, it was, like, really, you couldn’t tell, unless the girls were halter-top hippie girls, you know what I mean? You really couldn’t tell –– because the boys were dressing a lot like the girls. I mean, that’s really what started happening, is the boys were dressing like the girls. They had the long hair and the flowered clothes and the sandals, and rings, and bracelets. And at that age, without the stubble yet –– and boys are baby-faced in their teens –– so that happened. And then, really, I don’t think I’ve thought about it much, except for Halloween, sorry to say, until –– and I don’t know, if I sat down and really looked, maybe there was something in there –– but I think –– well, actually, now that I think about it, in the ’80s. I had my hair short again, and when I went into the gay men’s bars, I was mistaken for a gay man. And –– now, you have to understand that I didn’t have these big breasts, this really is a phenomena of my late thirties, early forties, that my breasts just really grew. But I had small breasts for years. And when I went into the gay men’s bars, in my leather jacket, and my short hair, the guys would hit on me. And I was with my friend David once, and he says, “Tiik, all these guys are going to think you’re a guy.” So I played with it for a while, in there. He says, “Just shove a sock in your pants, you’re like ––.” So I did, I went back in there another day with a sock in my pants. I was like, I just thought it was kind of cool. So it’s not like I’m in some gender pain, do you know what I mean? But –– and I absolutely respect that –– either disassociation or whatever, some clinical term. Like dysphoria, I guess, or there’s a term for a gender, a real gender issue, having a real deep one. But I think after that, the next time I thought about it was when everybody was throwing around “boi” (says each letter separately) as an identity. And I kind of liked it, being part French, I was like, I kinda like that boi thing. So, when I put up my little gay adds looking for a lover thing (motions computer typing), I put it in on boi. And I started playing with all of that –– you know, boi, top, with femmey undertones, or something. And then I thought do I really –– I had fun with it. For me, it’s fun. It should be non-serious, it should be fun. But I do know that in the big world of politics, the world that’s terrified of my ability to play with any of that, the world that’s terrified of a woman even expressing her sexuality –– you know, in America, women are supposed to be –– publicly, the whole Puritan, sort of white, non-sexual thing, you’re not really supposed to express sexuality –– unlike, for example, in the Latin countries, where women are more expected to have that kind of overt sexuality. Which is, by the way, annoying to me that that’s what all the gay men copy. When they do drag, they’re like all, that expression of, that’s what a woman is. And it’s so not, we’re anything we could possibly be. So I just thought –– the thing that’s most important to me is just to be anything, you know? Just be, and –– and screw you, if you don’t –– I don’t care –– tell me I can’t be a thing? Go eat your dog, you know? That’s how crazy you are to me. I respect that you’ve been raised in a society where you have a lot of prejudices, and it’s hard for you. Ok, so, do your best to get over it. And then even my sisters and brothers in the gay community –– we do struggle with these things, and –– and when I first came into the whole gender thing, I was pretty terrified of it, myself. I was trying to understand it, and I had female friends who wanted to transition, and I was like, Why are you going to mutilate yourself like that? That was the only way I could think of it. PLUSS: What –– what years were these? POLLET: Well the first time it ever happened was in the ’70s. My friend Ali, (SPELLING?) she’s a gorgeous –– East Indian –– absolutely gorgeous. But we had a walk on the beach, in Oregon, Port Depoe Bay, actually, and she told me all about what was really going on inside of her, and I was like, Wow. And she firmly believed she’s a boy. She says, “You just, people don’t get it, I’m –– I know that I’m a boy.” And I said, “Ali, when I look at you, I see the most gorgeous, one of the most gorgeous women I’ve ever seen.” I had a huge crush on her, she was, like, really, rock star, she was amazing, and she didn’t see herself as anything like that. She says, “You can say that all you want, except, to me, you’re saying that to a boy, and that’s fine.” She says, “I –– just, it doesn’t match. What –– you think I’m a girl, but I think I’m a boy.” And I’d never –– I don’t have any idea what ever happened with Ali, I mean we didn’t stay connected. So now, in Washington, when I did my photographic series Girls Will be Boys, I put –– I had friends who had transitioned, and who shall remain nameless because they –– initially, I asked those, um, he/she’s if they would participate, and five of them said yes. And then, one of them con –– you know, they took a vote, I guess, or something, but they talked with each other, and one of them came to me and said, “You know, we’ve decided we really don’t want to do this.” And, in that particular group, those are all female-born persons who have transitioned to male, and who live as male, and they don’t want to be questioned. They’re not, like, on a cause, do you know what I mean? They’re not trying to fight for transgender rights or transsexual rights, and they will privately help any transsexual, or help a transgender, understand, but they have all completely transgendered to transexualized themselves, and are living as men, and are accepted as men. So I get that. But I still –– a lot of people came to me who have a different personal relationship to it and want to out it –– out it with themselves, and so I have a beautiful series in that regard, and became, really a healing factor in the lives of some very pained women, who –– I’m thinking of one in particular, who lives as a man. Her self-description is a man on the street, a woman under the sheets. She has no desire to change her sexual organs. He is a completely happy man. But she has no desire, again, to change sexual organs, and is a happy woman, you know, sexually. And that’s a trip to me, that’s –– and I absolutely adore him, you know, and –– and I only know him, now, I don’t know her, and I would only know her if we were sexual partners. So my only reference for that person, who shall remain nameless, is he, and every time I see him, I –– it’s very easy for me to think nothing but he anymore, there’s actually not a hiccup for me anymore. I will say, I get confused when I see female to males with Adam’s apples. And I did recently talk with a friend who said, you know, a lot of women actually have Adam’s apples. I said, “I didn’t know.” Because I wasn’t trusting this one transgender friend of mine. And you –– if Shawn (SPELLING?) walked in the room right now, I guaren –– well, I can’t guarantee that, because what do I know about you –– but, I think I can guarantee that you would just assume that Shawn was a guy, and wouldn’t ever have a thought that Shawn was ever a female. When I first met Shawn, I thought, Gay guy. Sweet gay guy, ok, nice. And many of my transgender friends –– females to males –– I immediately know. But Shawn, nothing. And especially with the big Adam’s apple and the stubble –– so I didn’t trust Shawn, and I thought, This is one of those, like, double-back, reverse flip kind of people, where he was born a male, and he feels like he’s a female, so now he’s a lesbian, and maybe he did have sexual organ change to female. So he’s born a male, who became a lesbian, who’s had a sexual operation and who has female organs now, who’s now a boy. That’s what I was thinking. And that’s because I’m crazy. It’s like, you have to do something. We have to have some –– we’re scared, we have to have some grounding, you know, we have to –– something to –– what is it they say with identity and ego? You have to have something that is your grounding post, and when I saw that Adam’s apple, I had to like, ok –– I could have just walked up to Shawn and said, So you were born a female with this big Adam’s apple? But I was a little too embarrassed to do that, so instead I had all those thoughts. And now I know. Somebody said, “No, Tiik, some women do have very large Adam’s apples.” PLUSS: Going back to your own identity, can you tell me a little bit about the process that you went through realizing or discovering that you liked women? POLLET: Well, that’s interesting. I will credit Janis Joplin for first inspiring inside me that I was attracted to women. I went to a Janis Joplin concert at Polley (SPELLING?) Ballroom at Maryland University in the ’70s. I went with Dixie, from a restaurant that I worked in, and I had a huge crush on Dixie. And I had had crushes on other female friends of mine. In fact, on Judy, we used to go to clubs together, and she was always, you know, groupie-ing, being a groupie to the rock star, skinny rock star boys. And she was so pretty that she didn’t have any problem coming up to them after their show and then hanging with them, leaving me in the dust. Because I had no interest in them, I was interested in Judy, but I didn’t know how to reference that, I just knew that, well, it hurt my feelings when she went off with the boys. Because she would try to hook me up with one, but, well, I didn’t have any interest. And I did date boys, but it was very choosey. If you look back on my history with boys, it was always boys that looked like girls. Now, let me just clarify that –– boys who looked very manly on the one hand, but they had this girl thing to them. They would be, like, butch dykes or something, you know, that’s the easiest way I can explain it. So I had that in my history. So I go to the Janis Joplin concert, and Janis comes on, and me and Dixie both jump up out of our seats. Now, first you have to realize that the only time I had ever jumped out of my seat before that was The Beatles, right, and I did that with thousands of other kids, we were all jumping out of our seats. And, I will say, the other kids were screaming, Ah! And I was screaming, “Shut up!” But nonetheless, I jumped up out of my seat. So with Janis, I jumped up, I mean, it was like –– honey, I’m telling you –– this adrenaline, and I’ll say, it probably came from here (motions towards crotch), but it just went poof, like that, through my body, and shot me into the air. I mean, if I was in a car, I probably would have hit my head on the roof. We just jumped up, grabbed the railing, and started screaming. And at some point, I realized –– I’m looking at Janis –– because Dixie’s here, on the railing, I’m like (makes a triangular movement with eyes), you know? I’m looking at Dixie, I’m looking at Janis, I’m looking at me. And I was like, (deep breath), What are we doing, you know? And I was –– I mean, I’m thinking, really, We’re girls, you know? I’m like, Oh my god. And then, I don’t know what I did, it’s a blackout from there. I will say that I was very uncomfortable around Dixie from then; I couldn’t be around her without blushing. Dixie was always really cute with me, she would –– we worked together, waiters together, and let me tell you what waiters do in the back room: they fix each other’s hair, and they go, Let me tuck this in for you, oh no, that doesn’t look good –– honey, your hair looks so good today, oh look at that, oh look at you, you’re blushing. And I’m like, Oh, great. So Dixie comes over to me, and she’s fixing my hair for me, and she goes, “Honey, you’re so cute, you’re such a pretty girl, if I was a boy, I’d date you,” or something like that, and I’m blushing, and she goes, “Oh, look at you, you’re blushing.” But I’m also melting, now I’m purple. She goes, “Oh, look at you!” And I’m like, Oh god, I’m going to go wait tables now. I didn’t know what to do with that. What am I going to do, kiss Dixie? I didn’t know anything. I’d barely kissed a boy at that point. So, I was like, ok (sighs), you know, this is not easy, but I really like going to work every day. And that kept happening, because I waited tables. It kept happening, and the push came to shove when I was working on Sunset Blvd. in Hollywood, and I was working with Gigi (SPELLING?). Dixie, Gigi, they all have some kind of sexy girl name. Gigi was Italian, and she was the cutest could be, and she did everything Dixie ever did. She comes up to me, and she goes, “Oh look at you, I love this hair, oh I have to play with your hair,” you know, and I’m like –– girls like to play with my hair, it’s one of the things that got me a lot of attention growing up –– anyway, so, but when Gigi played with my hair, you know, it was different. So what happened is she went away for vacation for two weeks. Well, till that point in my life, I never knew what depression was. I was depressed for two weeks. And at some point, each day, it grew and it grew, and by about a week of Dixie (GIGI?) being gone, I was like, what’s wrong with me? And then, bonk! I miss Dixie (GIGI?). Huh! What? So, when she came back, oh, I couldn’t look at her without blushing. I’m like, Oh my god, I have a crush on Dixie (GIGI?), and by then, I could say “I have a crush on Dixie” (GIGI?) to myself. So I – I had a male friend, and I talked to him about it. I said, “Do you know anything about being bisexual?” He says, “Oh, wow, do you think you might be?” I said, “I’m not sure.” He says –– this is a straight guy –– he says, “I don’t know a lot about it, but the one thing that I’ve heard is if you’re a girl and you go bisexual, you never go back to boys again.” (laughs) And he was like, “And you never go back to boys again” (mocking serious tone). And I was –– inside of me, I was like, That doesn’t sound so bad, he makes that sound bad. That doesn’t sound bad. And I knew that, too, when he said that, so I’m getting this idea, these are the little things that make me clue into the fact that maybe I’m a little different. So my sister was already gay, so –– that’s a story –– but anyway, I said, “Can you take me to one of those bars you go to?” So she did. And this is historic –– Bacchanal 70 in Hollywood, it was a notorious ’70 lesbian bar, and it was –– you know, movie stars’ daughters were going there, and all the movie stars were going there, and all of us were going there, and –– I went there under a false name. I was Darby, and I didn’t want to give my real name, and I played pool, and I signed up as Darby. My sister was in the bar somewhere, and I was walking around, leaning on a wall, and this woman, came up to me –– oh my god –– and she takes my hand, and she –– I’m leaning on a brick wall, just like that (motions to brick wall behind her), and we’re leaning there, listening to the band, it was a live band, and she looks at me –– I mean, she’s right here, she turns, and she’s staring at me, and I’m looking at the band, and all of a sudden, I realize there’s this face staring at me. And I go, “Yeah?” She goes, “May I see your hand?” I said ok, and I put out my hand, and she’s holding it. She goes like this (trails finger up middle of palm), and then she goes –– she looks in my face, she goes, “What are you doing here?” And I’m freaking out –– oh my god, how does she know? How does she know I’m not one of them? How does she know? I said, “Well, I came with my sister.” (laughs) She goes, “No, I mean, you’re like an artist or a musician. You don’t really belong in a bar.” I said, “Oh, well, yeah, I am, but I wanted to come here.” And she goes, “May I kiss you?” And I said ok (laughs) –– so she kissed me. And then she looked at me, and I said, “Could you excuse me please?” She said sure. And I went into the bathroom, and I looked at my face in the mirror, and I just went like this (touches face with hands), and I was like –– here’s what I’m thinking, Ok, I didn’t turn into a frog. I swear to god, Alyssa, this is what I thought, I’m still me. Ok, it’s ok. And I went back out, I was like, Oh, I kissed a girl (laughs). And then I avoided her, and I went to the girl that I had been looking at all night, and I introduced myself, and her name was Jamie, and she became my first lover. I’ve been watching Jamie all night, I’ve been like, God she’s cute. But I just had to kiss a girl, you know, before I could kiss Jamie ever. We became girlfriends for a year or something, and she lived with me and my mother for a little bit, and my mother took her in as her third daughter. Never talked openly about us being gay. And my mother was very upset when Jamie and I weren’t friends (motions quotation marks) anymore. “What happened to Jamie?” But we never talked about it –– my mother didn’t really want to talk about it. But that was a fun memory for me, thank you for asking. PLUSS: So what were your –– what kind of words did you use to describe yourself at that point? POLLET: Lesbian. Yep. Never a question. And I think people were saying “gay” as an umbrella term for all of us back then –– no I don’t think that, I know that. But I always liked the L word. I just thought –– you know, in mixed company, I would switch to gay, because lesbian is such a dangerous word it could kill you, so, wow, and it’s clear that gay was such an easier word for people to deal with, so in mixed –– straight –– company, I didn’t just blast people with lesbian, but I always used it whenever I felt safe to use it. Nowadays, I like to go ahead and just say lesbian, even if I know it’s going to shock people –– because there’s still –– people still don’t want to say lesbian. We had to get it into the GLBTQ thing, you know, that was a big struggle, getting the L in, and why is their show called The L Word? Because, the L word (motions quotation marks). So, yeah, that was the reference. “Dyke” was actually quite popular back then. I just remembered that. Dyke. And, uh, “Bulldagger” was an insult back then. I think at some point, it didn’t become an insult anymore; some women embraced it. Yeah, but that’s basically it, lesbian, dyke –– I was never bisexual, so that never came up. PLUSS: How did you see race playing into all of these, and class? POLLET: Oh, wow. I have had some very intense class struggles. Race? I could tell you what –– ok, my relationship to race: I am a mixed race person. So I have my relationship to that struggle. And then I have what I can share of my Black, Native American, Chicana, Pacific Islander, Asian American friends’ struggles with it. Now, referencing self as lesbian or gay, or identifying with same-sex relationships’ terminology, I’m kind of not really sure how to respond in a racial way. My experience in, say, black (motions quotation marks) culture, as a quote white person (motions quotation marks), and as a quote black person (motions quotation marks) –– because, oddly enough, you can look at me, but I lived as a black person for a year, because I was assumed to be black in the black culture. Now, when I went to the Bahamas, down there I was assumed to be what’s called a “high yellow.” There’s a lot of differentiations in the Black community. Now, my sister looks like a high yellow, but with straight hair, and my brother had nappy hair. My sister has a Swahili face, but with creamy white skin, big full lips, big Swahili nose, big brown eyes, the straight black Indian hair. My brother’s got nappy hair, and he’s got my grandfather’s lean face, light-skinned. He’s red, my sister’s creamy white, I got the yellow tone, and –– I’m not so yellow now as I can be, in fact, in this light I don’t think I even look yellow –– but I tend towards yellow. So, at the time that this was happening, I was very dark, and I had lived in California for six years. My skin acclimated to that, and I was going back and forth to Las Vegas, where my mother lived, and my skin had acclimated to all of that, and so I was very, very dark, with my yellow and dark, and with my hair (motions big hair), you know. So, from that perspective, what I learned and experienced, is, that being gay in the black community was more accepted than in a white community; that it’s just not the big deal that it is in a white community. That it’s a huge deal in a Chicana community. And I have Asian American friends, but I’ve never really been in the community, in the Asian American community. My Pacific Islander friends, same thing. And I had a lot of East Indian friends, but I really was never in the community, I only know what they told me, which is don’t even go there, you know. So I think that’s pretty much all I know. I do know that “bulldagger,” when referencing a black woman back then, was also considered not just a gay slur, but also a racial slur. And class things –– you know, I come from a lower- and working-class background, economically. I come from an upper-class background spiritually and behavior-wise. I only know that because I’ve been told that, and as I move through the space of living, it’s reflected back to me that my way of carrying myself is in a very high-class way. Not this social –– socializing of the upper class, but in the true sense of class, you know, and integrity. So when I think of economic class, or when I think of actual spiritual, personal class, I’ve always felt kind of complimented from the feedback I get of passing through this world. But economically, I’ve had my feelings crushed by a bunch of freaky economic snobs who need to just go get a life, to put it bluntly. You know, it’s just like, what do you think you are? And I’ve had to –– I’ve had to learn to give up a little money, because you know, I didn’t want to purchase something for –– $300 would be like my life savings, but I need a car, so what do you do? And then I would be terrified to spend the $300, and then after I bought the car, I’d have panic attacks. You know like, what’s going to happen? Because we ended up on welfare, and –– we were treated like kings and queens by my mother, she didn’t make –– we did not suffer, but we knew, when we were on welfare, and the neighbors were bringing us food, that there was a problem. And we were in the special lunch line at school, and didn’t have to give money to the lunch lines anymore. We knew that we were being treated differently, and we weren’t made to feel bad about it by our parents, but somewhere along the line, we were made to feel bad about it. Is it mine –– PLUSS: Alright, this is session two? I don’t know what that would be– POLLET: Yes, and I was interested in that class question, because I did think of something else, unless you want to go on. PLUSS: No, go ahead. POLLET: Well, regarding class, I want to say that I think that, class-wise, I have really gotten in my way, and I think the last ten, 15, 20 years of my life –– 23 years clean and sober –– as I’ve been working on healing, I’m getting out of my own way. I have held myself back more with my own class issues than I thought I –– I didn’t realize the part I was playing. And we do have a society that is set up to keep me from rising in class; nonetheless, I’ve risen a little economically –– to the degree that I would like to be, I mean –– or who wouldn’t? I don’t know if I’ll ever make that, but you know what? I’m not as angry at the structure in the way that keeps me from progressing. You know, my anger used to keep me from progressing, and with that kind of anger, I didn’t see clearly a path I might take to better myself. You know, a plan I might make, to have an increase in income, or a wish that I might have. I mean, my defenses were always, I don’t want your money –– you can have –– I don’t want that materialism, I don’t want to be burdened by the shit you have. You think I want that? I want other shit. And the stuff I want costs as much money as yours, but I don’t want what you’ve got. I don’t want a Mercedes, you know. Actually, I want a Model T. And I want to fix it up really –– just blow everybody’s mind with it. But to dare to dream, regarding, economics, I’m free to do now. My mind is freed up now, the chains –– even my ability to wish or dream have loosened. Um, so that’s good news, for me. In the big picture, you know, the reality is, is there’s –– is that me again? (Two Voices). PLUSS: Is that your –– I’m not sure –– yeah, I think it is. POLLET: Or is that you? PLUSS: I don’t think it is. POLLET: Ok, let’s –– (Goes to fix second camera. Tape pauses.) PLUSS: Alright, it’s recording now. POLLET: Well, it’s just that –– I have, sort of, I don’t know, a realistic point of view now. You know, there’s the big picture, where –– the big reality. The big reality is all the people with all the money don’t want to give it up. You know, the people that make a lot of money, they don’t want to give it up. There are people with a lot of money who would give it up, they just –– they’re not attached to it the way some people are. I’d like to find them, actually, and I’m actually searching. But anyway, the point being, we’re fighting a very mean group of people, regarding their money, and obviously people who will kill you to hold onto their money, and that’s a reality. So, I mean, when you’re going up against something like that –– this is why back in the seventies, there were these big ideas about a revolution, you know, and the government really feared it, and they went after the Weather Underground –– and my friends, and they went after my lesbian music community. They came in to our community and harassed us and were looking for Susan Saxe and Katherine Ann Power, and these women that were in the Weather Underground, and you know, they scared the poop out of us. And a lot of us have, now, FBI files, you know, that we shouldn’t have. A lot of us were trying to go out and be teachers and things, you know –– oh, you have to get this expunged from your FBI file. What, that I was in a lesbian rock band in the ’70s that sang political songs? I’m a threat to national security? And they –– the fact is, the Weather Underground was bombing, and back in Berkeley, it was like, Was that an earthquake or a bomb? You know, that was like, you didn’t know. When the ground shook, when your house shook, it was one or the other, and you didn’t know until you heard the news. So the idea then was, you know, that’s the only way we can fight them. We have to fight them the way they fight, and that –– the Weather Underground believed that, you know. And I’m not so sure they’re wrong, but, you’d have to have hundreds of thousands of people doing that, you know, so –– and I don’t know that I want an armed revolution in our country, you know, so um –– PLUSS: What about back then, what did you feel about an armed revolution? POLLET: I –– I um, don’t know that I want to say that. Oh, I guess –– PLUSS: That’s fine. POLLET: Yeah –– probably not a good idea for me to answer that. Um –– PLUSS: What about in the general lesbian-feminist, musician communities? POLLET: Well, the general sort of look at the Weather Underground was actually cheering them on, because people knew that it was never the Weather Underground’s intention to kill anybody. And the couple of times that it actually happened were completely regrettable. You know, they were just –– like in this one bank, no one was supposed to have been in the bank, and precautions were taken and everything. And I guess someone came in to get a hat they forgot, or something like that. And with that bank thing, that guard was not supposed to have been shot, that was not supposed to go down that way. So, you know, that’s what we knew. The community knew that, and the government, based on fear –– look, let me tell you something: when that was going on, the government put agents everywhere, in plain clothes, trying to look their best like one of whoever’s community they were trying to infiltrate. And, by and large, they didn’t succeed, because, you’d be sitting on your porch, and somebody –– no, I was in the house, somebody would be sitting on the porch, they’d come running in, and say, “Hey there’s two FBI agents coming up the street.” You’d be like, Oh, look, they’re trying to look like they’re cool. Today, they can do –– pretty much, they know their mistakes, I’m sure, but back then, it was laughable, you know. One time, I was at a lesbian musician group house of musicians, and –– visiting –– and two agents came looking to hire the band. Well, what the poor little agents didn’t get is this band would never have been hired by anyone looking like these two people who walked into this neighborhood where two people looking like them had never walked in before. They were so out of place in the neighborhood that you could smell them. That’s why, when they were coming up the street, we knew. And everybody had been warned that they were coming. You didn’t know what day it was going to be, but everybody knew they’re going to do something, and they’re going to come. They’re not going to come arrest you, they’re going to try to trick you. So everyone was sort of aware of looking for the trick. But the way that they were able to infiltrate was in the music community, and they were able to hide that way. You know, and that was very sad. They put an agent –– and I will say this to whoever is listening –– they put an agent in our community, his name was Earl, he was a sax player. And this was when the food co-ops were trying to organize the farmers in the area, and it threatened the large corporate grocery chains. And the farmers were totally into it, they were being put out of business by the large grocery chains, so there was this huge organization and meetings going on. PLUSS: Where was this? POLLET: In Berkeley. Berkeley and San Francisco, the whole Bay Area. The whole Bay Area. We had these meetings regularly, to talk about like the next business plan, whatever, and so I would go to the meetings, and I was not on any committee, I was a co-op volunteer. You know, I got my pay in food –– exchange. And one day –– and Earl, you know, he jammed with our band, at our gigs and stuff, and we thought he was just a dude, you know –– Earl was –– he loved the lesbians, you know. He was this big black guy who played really well, with a bald head. And one day, he came to a meeting. The meeting –– in San Francisco –– the meeting was over, people heard guns shot outside, they saw Earl with a gun. Somebody shot at somebody, or Earl shot at somebody, and initially people questioned why Earl had a gun to begin with. But then nobody ever heard from Earl again. So then the buzz was that Earl was an agent, and that he –– that blew his cover, and so he had to be pulled out, and that they were looking for Weather Underground members. You know, this was a huge, huge effort on the part of the government to find the Weather Underground members. And the fact is, truth be told, they were really close, you know, and that’s why everybody knew it, because they were close, and the people they were looking for were right under their noses, and were getting shuffled around –– but still managed to avoid them for twenty or more years until they decided to turn themselves in. Katherine Ann Power turned herself in. Um, so (sticks tongue out at camera, laughs). PLUSS: Tell me a little big more about the various lesbian communities that you lived in. POLLET: Well, in Venice, California –– my first lesbian community was in Venice, California, and it’s probably –– of all the communities, it’s the one I miss the most. We lived in the Venice canals. We were just, like, artists. Oh, and another thing, back to the class thing, you have to understand that I’ve –– everything that I’ve gone through, I’ve gone through as an artist –– so I’ve escaped a lot of potential skirmishes, in some ways, by being in the music scene, and being a waiter, you know, it’s like, you can sort of fool yourself into thinking that you could get out of whatever mess you’re in, because someday you’re going to be famous, or whatever. You’re just waiting tables for a while until that big break, you know what I mean. But anyway, there was, I don’t know, it was the beginning of the women’s rock scene. It was –– back then, most women were known for acoustic guitar playing, like Janis Ian, that kind of thing. And I always came straight into hard rock guitar playing. I came straight into original songs in electric guitar, and full, you know, slaughter you with our band music kind of thing, you know. And so there was Fanny, Birtha, our band at the time was called Lizzy Tisch. That’s all west coast Venice stuff. In the east, I know there was a band called Isis, New York band called Isis. And we were –– we were the only three in our area, and we did all, we got all the shows that were all female bands. And that was in nineteen seventy –– I guess 1970-74, somewhere in that area. And Rosemary Butler was a singer in Birtha, and she just had this knockout voice, to die for, just (growls), and big, better than Janis, I’m sorry to say, really. And I actually spoke with Rosemary last year, for the first time in years, I called her. I googled her and found her. I said, I’m going to call Rosemary. Oh my god, and she still teaches singing lessons, she’s alive and well, and gave me permission to do –– I was doing a show, I wanted to do one of her songs, and she gave me permission to do it, which I didn’t need to get her permission, I just thought it would be cool to call her and tell her that I wanted to do it. And it’s on one of their albums, it’s called “Feeling Lonely,” and it’s well worth a listen to that entire album. You should hear it, and actually, I’ll turn you onto it. Separate from this, I’ll turn you onto that. And then, and they were the hard, you know the more gritty rock band, and Fanny was more the light, fluffy kind. And I love June Millington and her sister, I really love those women and what they’re doing in the music scene, but I was really not a fan of their music. It wasn’t, like, earthy enough for me. And then there was us, and we were the, sort of, vanguard, avant-garde sort of, singer-songwriter band, that was not traditionally hard like Birtha. Eclectic, kind of –– new, you know, new agey rock –– we didn’t have that kind of label yet. And we were playing my songs, and some covers, you know. We played “For What it’s Worth,” that Buffalo Springfield, you know, “Something’s happening here,” that political tune. And my tunes, and that was pretty much it, politically. There were a lot of women running around doing music in Hollywood at the time, but they weren’t political. But a lot of fun stories, I have to tell you. Al Jarreau was in our crowd –– you know, he was this guy –– we’d be in the Bitter End (IS THAT RIGHT?) playing, in the big room, and he’d be in the little cocktail lounge playing –– he had a piano player named Junior –– and he’d be in there, and on our break, we’d always go in there and listen to him, because he’d be doing, like, flute with his voice. He’d be doing this with his hands (motions flute playing), but his voice would be doing flute. We were like, This guy’s going to be famous someday. It was like the big, Al, you’re just going to go so far. And he was just gorgeous, and the sweetest guy ever, you know, so it’s really nice to have seen him do well over the years. And then from there –– so that was up until ’73, and then Kate Millet had the Sacramento Women’s Music Festival, and she sent our band money to go up, and we were sort of in kind of break-up mode at the time. And she sent us money to go up, but nobody could go but me, so I went. And since a bunch of the songs were mine, and –– Virginia Robino was in that band, and I think two songs were hers and the rest were mine. I felt, you know, my songs were a good representation of the band, so I went, and it was amazing. And Margie Adam, it was her very first gig ever. So I saw Margie Adam at her first gig, and she was amazing. And the thing about this is I think Margie is a really good performer; however, there was never, for me, another performance of Margie’s like that one. She was angelic and humble, and just –– the innocence that came off of her when she sang her songs, it was pure and beautiful. It was like watching Ferron in her early days, you know, Ferron is still an amazing. And then, I guess, Berkeley Women’s Music Collective was there, Linda Tillery was there, a band called Sweet Chariot was there, it was an all-female soul band, rhythm and blues soul band with a boy guitar player, and their bass player was Peggy, and Peggy and I fell in love. She had a son, and –– that’s the one that I told you about, we went across country. I went to Berkeley with them, I wasn’t scheduled to be back home in Venice, so I went to Berkeley with them, with Peggy, got together and realized we were going to be honeys, but I lived awfully far away. I went back home and was milling around one day, and there was a knock on the door at like 2 a.m. or something, and it was Peggy –– it was the whole band except for the boy. And Sharon Russell comes in, she goes, “You’re comin’ with us.” I said, “What are you guys doing?” “Pack your bags, you’re comin’ with us.” And I’m like, “Peggy, what’s going on?” And she goes, “Well, honey, we came to get you.” I said, “What do you mean?” She says, “Well, it’s obvious you’re breaking up with your band, we need a girl instead of a boy, you just gotta come be with us.” I said, “Like, right now?” She goes, “Well, in the morning?” I said, “Well, ok.” And I had just found $100 on the beach the day before, and I was like, well, I’ve got $100, so, that was really cool. I had to go say goodbye to Virginia first though because we were like –– Virginia and I were soul mates, we were like –– it was clear from when we met that it was intense, Aries –– she’s Aries, I’m Capricorn, but with an Aries moon –– so it was just completely intense between us. We were –– we never became lovers at that point, but it was sort of like, it’s one of those things, you just –– the power of it can knock you over, you know –– it’s like being in the presence of somebody where your energy with each other is that strong. It’s, you can barely breathe sometimes, it’s like damn, where did this –– how did this happen? So I had to go say goodbye to her, I did that, and went to Berkeley, and did Sweet Chariot. Now, when I got to Berkeley, there was, well, Sweet Chariot, and a group called the Gang Band (SPELLING?), and they were –– they were probably one of the first for real alternative rock bands –– they were whack, they were cool. I would love to find out what happened to that band. And of course, Fanny and Birtha still existed, but they were both mostly in the south, Berkeley Women’s Music Collective, and, gosh, that was really it. Oh, and of course there was Gwen Avery, who was a soloist. And then Sweet Chariot broke up, or Peggy and I left Sweet Chariot. We became a duo, went across country, and we did one of the early Sophie’s Parlors, which you can google and find out about the early Sophie Parlor, in Washington D.C. WPFW, and it was –– we were interviewed there, and we sang on the radio. I would love –– if they have an archives –– I would love to find that music. And then we went back across country, and we had adventures, especially in Wyoming, where the cowboys loved us. And we were singing all these songs I wrote, you know, and even the lesbian ones, and even the political ones –– they didn’t –– they weren’t upset. I had this one song called “Broken Down Houses,” and it goes –– let me see, “Hey mister, can you tell me where I might find a sink / clean enough to rest my body, / to catch about 40 winks? / For the years, for the days, for the nights I spent painting these broken down houses just to make him happy. / Tuning the strings on my shoelaces just to make him happy. / Changing the colors of prisms just to make him happy.” Right, and it goes on like that, “Can you tell me where I might find a drain, / to plug my sink into and isolate myself and my brain? / For the years, for the days, for the nights I spent ––” and then, “Where I might find a road, / to plug my drain into and pass this heavy load? / For the years, and the days, and the nights I spent” doing all these ridiculous things for a man, basically. And they would be applauding and everything, they didn’t get it, you know. So actually, we had a lot of fun and were received well, and we just played our way across the country in a green van, with Peggy’s son, and initially, nine dogs and two cats (laughs). They were puppies, so we handed them out along the way, and ended up with two dogs and no cat. But we still had her son. And um, came back to Berkeley, and basically, that’s when we formed BeBe K’Roche. We stole Jake from the Berkeley Women’s Music Collective. What we did is –– there was this women’s jam at the Wild Side West, put on by Pat Ramsaur (SPELLING?), who was the owner back then, and we showed up, and we found Jake, and she loved us, and so we had a three-person core, and, eventually adding Virginia to the group. She came up and became a part of our band, and really –– really actually –– it was kind of, very fun for a while. And I will say to you that –– I just think it’s important to share this part. I want to share like, kind of what happened with the BeBe K’Roche breakup, because it was basically drugs take their toll. You know, that’s not probably recorded anywhere, and probably won’t be recorded anywhere but here, and I think it’s important. I think it’s important for women to really understand just how crazy it is, addiction. You know, you play with it, you think you’re playing with it, but you know, you’re kind of messing things up, too. So what was going on is, we’re young lesbians, and there was a lot of, I guess, incestuous sort of things, if you want to put it like that, but I –– I like to be careful with the use of that, because that really is something different. But Peggy and I were lovers. Virginia and I were in love. Peggy was very open, you know, she was Cherokee and Irish, she had very open views. She would hug trees –– she was the original tree-hugger. We’d be walking down the street, and she’d just go and hug a tree. You know, just loved it. She would talk to the bushes, she’d go, “Hi,” (motions petting). I’m like, I love that you do that, I don’t know anybody else that pets bushes. But anyway, so we got a manager, and the manager like fell in love with Peggy, and –– quite frankly, I think it’s the only reason she became our manager –– but anyway, there was a little, like, divisiveness around Peggy’s son. So, who’s Christopher’s two mommies? Or does he now have three mommies? Peggy and I were having an open relationship, and that was ok. We actually were able to do that. Drugs entered. Our manager was –– ok, let’s put it this way, everybody in the band was addicted and using pretty seriously, except for the drummer and me. Now, I was an alcoholic, I didn’t use drugs of any kind other than alcohol, but I wasn’t drinking at this point, and I didn’t know I was an alcoholic. I was in one of my three-year, don’t drink, it’s bad for our community, it fucks us over, and the man wants us this way, and don’t do it. So I was in my political thing, I had written anti-drinking songs, anti-drug songs. I had this one: “Fuck off needles, fuck off pills, they make your eyes sizzle and your body ill,” it went on from there. And we sang that song, it was one of our songs. And people would come up to me and thank me for those songs. I mean, I think they were in AA or something, and I didn’t even know, you know. But anyway, so –– Kimy (SPELLING?), I love you, you know that. Kimy’s addiction, Peggy’s addiction, it just got crazy, and some of the more personal aspects of that I won’t share, but, suffice to say that, I mean crazy –– clinically diagnosable. And so that created a lot of pain in our band, and confusion, mental and emotional confusion. And the position that I found myself in was that everyone was being so nasty. It was like, like what is going on here? There was jealousy flying all over the place, I had Kim coming to me, yelling things at me, and –– and I’m this little –– you got the girl, you know what I mean? What’s the problem? You got her, you know, so –– and I didn’t do bad things to anybody, just –– Peggy and I loved and cared about each other, and I guess –– whatever –– problems, and I, really, it’s not all clear to me, but I know that behavior got nuts, absolutely nuts. And feelings were hurt, and everybody misunderstood each other, and –– so how did that affect performing? I won’t say who, but I had a band member yell at me on stage. Paranoia set in. I made a mistake on a lead line once or something, and I was accused of doing it on purpose to sabotage the band, things like that, weird accusations against each other. So I said –– we were getting ready to record with Olivia, we’d already done studio recordings –– which I have my copies of, which I will get to you. We had a band meeting, and I was like –– and I took one of my best friends with me, because I couldn’t go to this band meeting without somebody who really loved me and acted like it –– and I said, “You know, I will do this record, I will commit to this, but not until this band cleans its act up.” And I didn’t say, “Stop doing drugs,” because I didn’t know how to say that back then. I said, “We have got to, like, straighten ourselves out. I don’t want to record this mess. I don’t want to be reminded, years later, of the mean-spirited nastiness of this,” you know, forever, on wax. So just –– and all that I remember about it is that nobody –– but they all pooh-poohed it, like what? It was like I was the crazy one, you know, and I was breaking the band up if I didn’t go along with the program, and the –– oh, they got furious. And so I said, “I’m taking a vacation, and I’ll come back.” And I went on the vacation, and I ended up getting kicked out of my group house. They said, Don’t come back. So I never went back. PLUSS: Was the group house with the band? POLLET: Yes. Well, at that point, Jake didn’t live with us and Peggy had moved out. Virginia and I were still there. But they were just so crazy on drugs, they didn’t know, really, what they were doing. And since then, I’ve had two apologies given to me from –– the two worst of it came and made amends to me, came all the way to Washington, D.C. to make amends, and I was very grateful for that. And even said, “I honestly can’t tell you what I did back then, Tiik, I don’t remember, because I was so whacked out on drugs, you know, but god love you for getting through any of it.” You know, but I was fully willing to do the record, to record with Olivia, if everyone would just work on talking through whatever the fuck was wrong –– just get over this stuff so we could have some sort of joy, some level of joy when we do this recording. And they didn’t want to, so I said –– I think I said, “I quit.” I must have quit the band, I guess. And we had a couple of shows to do before that, and I swear to god, and I won’t say who, but we were at one of the shows, and one of the band members did this whacked thing. Just, right behind my back, followed me, just followed me, behind, cussing at me. “I hate you, I can’t believe you’re doing this, I’m just gonna follow you everywhere. You’re not getting rid of me, I’m just gonna follow you everywhere you go.” And I turned around and said, “What are you doing?” She said, “I hate you right now, I’m just gonna terrif – I’m gonna torture you,” or whatever, I don’t even remember what she said, it was like, (noise of fear/exasperation), you know? So I’m sorry to say all that, but that’s real crazy behavior, that’s all drug behavior, you know, and they hurt me. That was my band, you know, and I had to cajole Peggy into being in the band to begin with. She was way too shy, she didn’t want to do it, but she was good and she should have done it, so she did. And Jake really –– you know, Jake was totally there, and Virginia of course loved it. So Virginia and I wrote –– Jake wrote a couple of songs, beautiful songs. Virginia had about two that we were doing at that point, and the rest were mine. And, so they had made the record without me and kept the name, which really pissed me off. It was like, just change the name then, get a new name, because you’re not BeBe K’Roche. Virginia wrote a whole bunch of new songs, and none of that was BeBe K’Roche, and it’s very –– you know, I got the album and listened to it once, and I was like –– it was too painful, I was like, it –– I would be happy to listen to this if you just wouldn’t call it BeBe K’Roche. So yeah, that’s pretty much the full story, I guess. And I do have my album, and I do have the tapes of my songs that we did in the studio, and actually I’m going to –– I’m starting a BeBe K’Roche website, so I’m going to put both of those up, because I think they both –– they both belong. People who were fans of BeBe K’Roche before the album know all of that music. And so –– so get off drugs, stop drinking. PLUSS: What was your sense of –– did you have a sense that there were these drug problems in other parts of the lesbian community, other than BeBe K’Roche? POLLET: Well, I was very aware that everybody and their mother was smoking pot, and I had tried pot every now and then, but it always made me paranoid. I never smoked pot but maybe once when it didn’t make me paranoid, and that time it was only because I had already had cocaine and alcohol in such quantities that you could barely tell that the marijuana went in me. My drug usage was fast and furious. I was basically alcoholic, and I did about two or three years of cocaine, and that sent me to my knees. That was like it –– I mean I never would have made it as a junkie, or any of the other things. The band members were doing mushrooms up the butt and –– they did crazy shit, and I just would have been dead, you know? I just, I don’t have the constitution for it because –– I mean, wimpy little cocaine, which can be a pretty nasty drug, but I mean, I didn’t last very long with it. So yeah, pot, definitely. But I was completely oblivious to hard drug use, completely. We would do a gig, we’d be upstairs, be on break, everybody would disappear, I’d be all alone upstairs, I’d be like –– where were they? I could never find them. They were off shooting, ya know? I was like, Oh, this is where you guys go. Well I –– actually I found them once. I found them once, and they sort of hid everything from me. But I do remember seeing something that time, and that was the first time I ever thought, What are those needles? Like, what are those needles? Inside of me, I’m still not thinking junkie, but I’m thinking, Something bad’s going on down here. I was pretty naïve. So, but in retrospect, I now can see –– because I know what junkie behavior is now –– it’s clear to me who the junkies were. So yeah, there was a lot of drug use. A lot of alcohol. A lot of alcohol. And I was one of the lone voices for straight edge, which wasn’t being called “straight edge” yet. And then I would flip. I would have three years, and then –– well, with the whole BeBe K’Roche thing, that sent me over the edge, before I got kicked out, before I left. We were –– Virginia and I were still living in the house, and we had guests coming from here and there every now and then, and Virginia and other people would do things, but I was never invited to anything. And I wanted to tell you this one –– this is –– this is when I started drinking again. I knew that there was some party that this –– I’m not going to say who it was, but –– for the record –– she was having a party, and she was, you know, getting a big name in the industry, and that sort of thing, and a friend of mine. And I was very aware that for three days –– that they were planning to go to this party, but no one had ever said a word to me, but I had overheard everybody talking about it, including our guests. We had these three women from Italy visiting. And I was like, ok, so the day came for the party, and I –– everybody was leaving and getting in the car, and I was getting dressed, and I had already made my mind up about it. I got in the car with them. I just got right in the car, and one of the band members was in the back seat. I got in last, and she kept sort of moving this way so I couldn’t get in, and she was saying, “You know there’s not really enough room back here for all of us.” And I’m like, “No, just squish over, there’s r ––,” and then one of the other –– I said, “Well, why don’t you get out and get in the front seat, see there’s room up there for you.” So she got out and got in the front seat. And there was plenty of room. And so, we were sitting there in the car, and the driver wasn’t driving. And she said, “There’s just really not enough room for all of us. Somebody –– just one person should get out.” And I thought, Bitch should just say, Tiik get out. And I said, “Oh,” and one of the Italians looked at me, she goes, “Well.” I said, “Ok, I guess I could walk.” And the Italian, she looked at me, she goes, “I walk with you.” And the other Italians said, “We all walk.” And they said, Well no, no, you don’t all have to walk. And they said, No, we all walk. So they all got out. I said “Yeah, come on.” We all got out, and they drove off, like, freaked out. We walked to the party. And we got there, and the Italians walked in, and the host stopped me in the foyer, and she says, “Tiik, I’ve got to talk with you.” I said, “What?” She goes, “Please don’t be upset, but this is my first party since I moved up here, and I don’t want any trouble.” I said, “Well, I’m not going to cause any trouble.” She goes, “Well, there’s a lot of people in here that are really upset with you right now, and I’m just, I just don’t want it here.” I said, “You’re actually telling me I can’t come to your party.” And she said, “I’m really sorry. It’s nothing personal.” She said, “I would love to have you here.” And I said ok. And I went straight to a bar and drank. You know, I couldn’t handle it. It was horrible. It was actually horrible. And what it did, unfortunately, you know, I told you I’m a person of post-traumatic stress, and it kicked it off again. And I was undiagnosed; I didn’t know what was going on. And with post-traumatic stress, you disassociate, it’s one of the things that can happen, and –– oh, it was god awful. I just went into a bar, and I hadn’t drank in three years –– and I had a glass of wine and I couldn’t even finish it. And I had to –– I put it under my coat, and I walked down the street sipping it. And I managed to finish it, and I went to a liquor store and I got a bottle, and I started drinking that, and I got home, and I went into my bedroom. I woke up in the morning and started drinking more of the wine, and I took my guitar and smashed it into the wall. Christopher had stayed over that night –– Peggy was not living with me anymore, but Christopher –– it was his night with me. And he knocked on the door –– I shut the door in my bedroom –– and he knocked on the door, he says, “Tiik, are you ok?” And he’s like five by this time. I said, “Christopher, you should get out of this room.” And he saw the guitar –– I had smashed it and thrown it into the wall, and the neck snapped –– you know, there’s a metal rod in the neck, and the rod pierced into the wall. So the neck was sticking out of the wall like this and the body was hanging down like this. And he looked up there and he says, “Don’t you think you shouldn’t break your guitar?” I said, “Christopher, you’re probably right. Please leave the room.” And he wouldn’t leave. And that little boy did something similar to that before. And I just visited him, when I went across country this summer. He’s like thirty something, he’s got three kids and a wife –– it was amazing. Um, so yeah, it was awful. I mean, that’s another thing: we’re just people, really, and we come with all kinds of packaging. I don’t know, for all I know, the woman who had the party had some issues. I mean who knew? They didn’t know that I had undiagnosed post-traumatic stress. They had no idea I was going to go off and drink. They had no idea I would start to disassociate. I had a minor nervous breakdown after that, I had a –– oh my god, I thought I was seeing spiders on the wall. I didn’t do psychedelics ever in my life. I was in a bar just trying to hang out and dance and all of a sudden I thought I saw spiders crawling on the wall, and I was starting to hallucinate, and it was all part of my post-traumatic stress. You know, so, deep fear. They turned against me, and I had suffered at the hands of an attempted gang rape, kidnapping, when I was kidnapped at gunpoint, and being set up to look like a narc in my community, and it worked. I was set up by a teenage narc in my community, when I was a teenager –– and it’s very interesting, all of that stuff. And then, you know, coming from an alcoholic family, it’s like, you know, I didn’t really have a prayer. I was going to become somebody who has post-traumatic stress, survives it, lives with it, and then can help others understand it. I don’t regret any of it, but the BeBe K’Roche thing was like whew (motions explosion slowly with hands). I mean, some people break up with a band, it’s like, get a new band. For me, it was like, you’re killing me, do you know what I mean? I’m dying and nobody knows it kind of thing. And I have to say that it –– that did affect my slow sort of keeping together of bands in the future, from that point on, because I was very accustomed to –– I was in bands with people who, like, actually loved each other. They got on drugs and were mean. We really actually loved each other very much. So I never was able to play with indifferent musicians or anything. I was always needed to be around people who met me and then just kind of loved me right away. If you love me, we can play music –– I’ll teach you how to play bass. You know, it’s like, I don’t care if you’re not even a musician, if you love me, let’s play together. So, I’m just not –– it’s funny, the way we can be a musician. There are people out there that just want to find the best musician, say, You rock, honey, come play with me, I don’t even care if you like me. But I’ve needed to have love around me when I play, so –– I think that’s partially who I am, but I think it’s also a big part of being a person who has had a life that has caused me to be a post-traumatic stress survivor. I say survivor, but I mean, I have post-traumatic stress and I live with it. So, I’m a survivor of the things that occurred, and as a result, I live with episodic post-traumatic stress. So, there’s that. PLUSS: I’m sorry that all had to happen to you. POLLET: No –– PLUSS Um, I wanted to go back to –– you said you lived in a communal house with BeBe K’Roche? POLLET: Yes. PLUSS: Was that the only communal living situation you were– (two voices) POLLET: Oh no. I’ve lived in three communal houses –– one of theme severely communal, in the sense of, they really meant it, you had to go to house meetings, and you had to do the chores when it was your chore day. You had assigned –– the chores were rotated, and you could get kicked out of the house if you didn’t follow the rules, and –– PLUSS: Where was that? POLLET: Washington, D.C. So in California, the BeBe K’Roche house was my one communal house there, and then I left. And then it was –– in Washington, D.C., I lived in a communal house with a bunch of hippie types, and some very political Marxist-Leninist types, actually. Studying, multi-racial, complete– PLUSS: Did the house have a name? Sorry. POLLET: You know, it might have had a name. It’s not there anymore, it’s now a condo of apartments. But it was a three- or four-story house. I was on the top floor. I think it was a four-story house. I know I had to go a long way to get to my room, you know, there was no elevator. But I do remember Josie (SPELLING?) was sort of the head of the house, and –– I don’t remember much about it, but –– but people lived well together there. I had a little room. I did rebel against some of it, and I think they allowed it, as I recall. Because I couldn’t do the food thing exactly the way they wanted it, because I had very specific food needs. You know, I wasn’t going to eat dairy, and there were certain things –– I think I did my food differently, and I said, “You know, you’ve got fourteen rooms in this place. What’s it going to hurt if one person kind of is independent from that, but does everything else?” I think I was allowed to do that, but it’s kind of fuzzy. But then, I was in a group house on Quincy St. (SPELLING?), and they were a variety of musicians in the house actually. But it was a lesbian group house, and multi-racial, and we had women who worked at Off Our Backs. Off Our Backs is a Washington, D.C. women’s newspaper. We had people, we had –– actually, we housed Yvonne Wanrow, when she came into Washington to fight the government. And we had FBI agents –– I’ve just had a lot of FBI agents around me –– sitting outside in their cars, watching our house. And we would sit there and look at them, (waves), you know. It was –– we would walk –– I’d go out the door, walk to work, and stand at the car and just say hi. They’d be like (covert, marginal look in one direction), you know? But you know, Native American rights, it’s a big deal, and it was a huge deal back then. They were very afraid of the American Indian movement, which is what was helping Yvonne Wanrow with her case, and the whole –– all these land rights things. So we had a mixed, you know, Black, Native American, white, mixed white, dogs –– we had dogs up the kazoo, we had cats, and it was a pretty cool group house. Now class comes into this –– one of my rude awakenings. The house, when it advertised that it needed tenants –– was a lesbian owner –– you have to understand that she presented herself as the owner. Now, I’m naïve, I don’t know anything about real estate at this point, so she’s the owner, and she’s trying to, you know, get some people, and I’m like, oh cool. The rents were nice and low, and I was like, oh, this is really cool, we live in a lesbian-owned house. You know, I was naïve. Well, come –– then, I guess a year or maybe two later, she introduced the new owner to us, some guy, and he was going to raise the rent, so we were like, didn’t think of that. It was like, what do you mean? You –– you sell something you own? It was like, what do you mean, you’re selling it? No one –– I’d never thought about it –– why would you sell your house you own? And we live in it, or do we have to leave? No, you can stay, but he’s raising the rents. And she was gone, and it was like, what happened to Diane? Well then, somebody clued me in. And this is like, you know, me ignoring the kinds of things that to me reeked of, you know, people who have money know those things, not me, kind of thing. And she said, “No,” she says, “What happens is, she never actually –– she was the owner on paper, but she never fully paid for it.” Because I was like, “Why is he raising our rent?” “Well, to help pay for the house.” “Well what do you mean, help pay for it?” Says, “Well no, he doesn’t actually own it,” and they explained it to me. I said, “So Diane never owned it either? So you mean to tell me that for two years, we’ve been buying this house for her?” Yeah. “And now we’re going to buy it for him?” Yes. I said, “Oh no, I’m moving out. I’d rather go live in an apartment. I’m not helping that man buy this house.” Said, “OK, I got tricked, I helped Diane buy it, but –– I could do that. Why don’t I just do that? Why don’t we do that, you know? And yeah, that was a rude awakening. So, but it was a really cool group house, and it ended on a nasty note, I hate to say. There was some lesbian in-fighting, some attempts for, you know, to trade girlfriends. Someone breaks up with one and the other one says, “Well I like her,” you know, and how do you handle it, and not be klutzy, and –– and there were some mean-spirited people who didn’t care to not be klutzy. What’s –– what do you care? She’s not your girlfriend anymore. Huh? We live together. Don’t you have some like integrity here? No (laughs), because everybody was smoking marijuana. They said, come on babe, just have a little weed, you won’t even care anymore. Really, it was like that. And alcohol. So again, marijuana and alcohol. And then there was the getting over stage –– very nasty stage. The phone bill was in my name, and I said, “I’m turning the phone off.” And one of the roommates said, “Well, I’ll call and do it.” I said ok. And on purpose, they didn’t do it, and they ran up the phone bill and never paid it, for $300. They came back to me, and I was like, I didn’t even live there. And I ended up not having to pay it, and I got a lot more savvy about bills at that point. That’s when I found out that they can’t really do the things that they –– and you can sue them for harassment. You know, as long as you pay one penny, they can’t do anything to you. Just pay a penny, one penny a month, and you’re paying off your bill. I was very happy to find that out. So, but the, the getting over thing was –– that I was, because I had a regular job –– what, fucking waiting tables and doing janitorial in a restaurant, I mean that was my job. But it was more money than anybody else in the house. They were like, we can’t –– you could afford to pay it, we couldn’t, kind of thing, it was like getting over on me. I’m like, you –– we’re supposed to be friends, you freak, what did you do that for? We figured, you know, if anybody could afford it, you could. You make money. Ugh, so –– and they never apologized for that. It was like some self-righteous justification in that. So yeah, I mean, lesbians aren’t always nice to each other, you know. Group houses aren’t always like heaven, but, you know, we’re just like babies learning, really. And again, Alyssa, drugs. Do you know, I think both of those experiences would have been completely different without the drugs, honestly. People can actually be reasonable, and they can think straight –– so yeah. PLUSS: Um, what were the politics of the last group house? POLLET: The last group house was –– well, actually, that was a lesbian-separatist house. Well actually, so was the one in Berkeley. We –– at first we weren’t, and then we decided to be, so men were not allowed in the house. And then, after, I don’t know how long we did that, then it was like, ok, you can have a man in, but we have to talk about it first or whatever. So this –– we were lesbian-separatists, and um– PLUSS: W –– I’m sorry, but what about the boy child that lived in the house, was there ever– POLLET: He was out. PLUSS: He was out. POLLET: Yeah. PLUSS: What happened to him? POLLET: Well, when Peggy moved, he went with her. She moved in with the crazy manager, and all of that was going on. The crazy manager only when she was on drugs, she’s a lovely person, really lovely person. So I should say the drugged manager, at the time. So the last group house –– well, I’d like to tell a very pretty story. I asked permission for my brother to come over because he wanted to visit, and I was given permission, and so he came and visited. And when he left, the staunchest separatist in the house –– and again, this is multi-racial, this was a black woman. The house was multi-racial. My lover at the time was black. And I was not out to my brother. I said, “You know, I’m not out to my brother.” And the other, the one that wasn’t my lover said, “Tiik, I mean, he’s going to come into this house with these women in here looking like we look. Do you think he’s not going to know?” I said, “My brother’s pretty naïve. I –– honestly –– wait till you meet him.” So he came, and when he left, she said, “Tiik, I’ve got to tell you something. Your brother really loves women.” She said, “I absolutely love your brother.” She says, “You’re so –– what a great guy. I’m very proud of you, I’m very proud of him.” That was like, she’s like real (motions strength), you know. And she stays in touch with me today, she calls me. She calls me once a year or something like that, from wherever she’s living, to say, How are you doing? I loved you, I’ve always loved you, ya know. And I love her, and I will say her name, her name is Sheila, and she goes by Isis these days. And she’s doing midwifery in Arkansas. She’s doing really well. And the others in the house, I have not heard from any of them, I don’t know where they are. So yeah, politically, we just supported the things that we believed in. We challenged racism when we saw it. We talked about our own ethnic mixes. I remember one time, Paula was talking to me –– she’s Italian, but very dark Italian –– and she said –– this is when they were using the term “third world” –– and she said, “Tiik, am I thirk world? Do you think I’m third world?” And I said, “Well, you’re dark, you have brown eyes, you’re Italian. Um, I think so.” She said, “Oh.” She says, “Because I don’t know if I am or not.” I said, “Well, what does ‘third world’ mean?” She goes, “Well, that’s what I want to know, what does it, what do we really mean with it?” I said, “Well, in –– in the developing of such a name, and in the world of isms, to not be that, you simply are white, and look white. And you don’t, and you’re Italian. And there are white Italians, but you’re not. You’re a dark Italian. And you’re a southern Italian. You know, there’s the northerners and the southerners, and, I think that tips you over the line into practically Latina.” You know, and so she was struggling with that, you know? So that was a big deal back then. It’s like, how do we reference any of these things we’re trying to talk about? What are the correct terms? Oh yes, the neighborhood kids came over one day. And these are black children. They came over, and they were visiting, two little girls, and Tay (SPELLING?) was very white, pale white. At that point, you have to understand, I was dark. And I know, I mean, you just have to forget what I look like right now, it’s dark. And the little girls were talking about –– they said, literally, I’m telling you, this little girl looked right at us and said, “How come all white people look alike?” And I just started laughing. I said “That’s fu ––” She goes, “What are you laughing at?” I said, “That’s kind of funny,” I said, “Well you know, all white people don’t look alike.” She goes –– POLLET: (Not in formal interview, but on tape) has gotten better, I’m amazed, but I mean it was really, ugly orange back then. PLUSS: Wow. POLLET: It’s freaky. Really, it was. I mean, I think that’s why Virginia left, also. Yes it is, and Julia (SPELLING?) left for that reason too, yeah, she moved to Depoe Bay, couldn’t take it anymore. PLUSS: Talking about pollution in LA. I just turned the tape on, after you said all that. POLLET: Talking about pollution in LA. Here we are talking about –– PLUSS: (laughs) Alright. POLLET: So what was the last –– PLUSS: We were talking about communal living. POLLET: Well, the two little girls, and they said to me, all white people look alike, how come, blah blah –– PLUSS: I think your thing’s making a noise again. POLLET: It follows right behind you, doesn’t it? Ok, well (Pause to fix camera). So, you know, because Tay (SPELLING?) and I put our skin together, and we had them look at it long enough so they could see the difference. And it took them time to look at it and see the difference, you know –– she’s really pale white, she’s practically albino, and I said, “Look at our faces together, look at the differences. Look at her pointy chin, look at her, cheek bones are low, mine are high. Look at the difference in our eyes.” And I said, “You know that a Chinese person would say that all blacks look alike. And, you know, a Spanish person would say that all Chinese look alike. You know, until you look closer and you see people, you begin to see the difference. And you know, a lot of people would say that all black people look alike.” “Black people don’t look alike! Oh, we’re so diverse and so different. Oh, look at –– there’s so many different kinds of black people.” And I said, “Well, that’s what the Chinese would say about the Chinese, and the Spanish would say about the Spanish.” And it was the first time they had ever heard it. It was like –– and I actually thought that was good –– it was like, you know, the first time that they had ever heard that anybody would say that all black people would look alike. They were like, what? Almost like, why would anybody ever say that? You know, and I was like, hey that’s really cool that they haven’t –– they’ve gotten to be 13 years old each and have never heard any of that part of the slant on racism, you know –– PLUSS: What was the racial makeup of the community, the neighborhood that you lived it? POLLET: It was a black community, black neighborhood, yeah. We were the little white girls –– well, the ones that were white in the house. But actually, those two little girls fessed up that they thought that I looked mixed, you know, so that happened. Like, “Well, you do look mixed, but we didn’t want to say.” And in fact, it was one of the reasons why they felt comfortable asking the question, you know, so we got that clear towards the end, because they were a little bit embarrassed, they were giggling and stuff, asking the question. Because you know, kids, they’re like, why do all white people look alike, you know? So yeah, it was a mixed neighborhood (ABOVE YOU SAID IT WAS BLACK -WAS IT MIXED OR BLACK?), and interesting, kind of –– that was back –– I don’t know what goes on now –– but that was back when every woman and her elderly grandmother was getting harassed by men on the street with this, psst psst, hey baby come here, psst psst. Now, I haven’t heard that in a thousand years, and it is possible that men have become re-educated, but at that time in Washington, it was an epidemic. So women were talking to each other about you know, we’ve got to do something, we can’t take it anymore, we’re going crazy here. So women were training themselves and each other to confront these, these guys. And what you were supposed to do was turn and say, “Excuse me, I live in this neighborhood, and my name is Carol. Now, we have not been formally introduced, but if you want to talk to me in the future, just say ‘excuse me, Carol,’ or ‘excuse me, ma’am.’” And the other thing was, “Excuse me, women don’t like being talked to like that.” So, I did a couple of those. I did, actually, both of those. And each time, I got an apology, or I got a, woah, woah, I didn’t mean all that, I didn’t mean all that, I’m sorry, you know. Because the psychology was, these are men who are so accustomed to that privilege, they don’t expect communication with you. They don’t really want it. They want that vicarious thrill of you walking by. They want –– they want the fake idea of power, do you know what I mean? The assumed, diluted experience of power. And the minute you turn and face them, you snap that delusion, you know, and they don’t know what to do. And that’s exactly what happened. Women all over D.C. were doing it, and talking to each other about it, and then it stopped. I was like, is it just that those men don’t see me anymore, or has it really stopped? And so I don’t know, I’d be very interested, at least in Washington, to do some sort of survey about how that goes these days, but I was getting ready to hit somebody, and I was getting ready to get killed, because –– and you know, the average man that was psst psst at me was pretty big, and I probably, if he really was whacked, you know, I’d probably –– would be very seriously harmed. That was an interesting period, I thought. And also in that neighborhood, kids were a little crazy. When it snowed, they got snow-crazy, and they’d throw snowballs at anybody. They don’t give a shit, they just throw snowballs at you, it’s like –– hard snowballs –– it’s like, excuse me, I’m trying to go to the grocery store. You’ve got to get through our snowballs. And I’m like, oh god, because, how often do you get snow? It’s like, snow! And it was beyond race. And you know, you learn that too. Another racial thing that happened was there was a singer, she had written a song, I won’t say her name, but she had written a song that Aretha Franklin had recorded on one of her albums. And she was looking for a guitar player, so we met and auditioned, and she took me on as her guitar player. So one day, she invited me to this function she was going on in her neighborhood, and she says, “You know, I’m going to say that you’re black.” Because she knew that I was mixed, but she knew that I wasn’t black. She’s like, “I’m going to tell everybody that you’re black.” I said, “Oh, why are you going to do that?” She says, “Well, they don’t really like white people in this neighborhood, and they’re going to believe that you’re black, so you’re going to pass as black today.” I said ok. And I –– and you know, the think is, when I was passing as black, I was completely treated differently. So that’s an interesting racial thing. Another class thing is –– this is another thing, too, it’s like, growing up around money and –– again in the ’70s –– a woman came over one day and she was showing off her shoes. She says, “Well, how do you like my $100 shoes?” And I was like, yeah right, you know. And to make a long story short, we got into an argument or whatever, it was kind of nasty. But to make a long story short, I did not know that there was a pair of shoes that could cost $100. You see, I had never heard of a pair of shoes that could cost $100. So, I was like, what the fuck? Why do you come in here, lying about –– you know, you could say $50 and I’d believe you, but there’s not even a pair of shoes that would cost $100 –– I was like, whoa. And now when I think back on it, I’m like, oh my god. I just didn’t know any of those things that –– and let me tell you, this is another thing, people assume things onto you. I don’t know how many people that I meet anywhere, who would look at my skin –– especially white people –– who would look at my skin, and see me as white, not even have any experience with mixes, so they would not see any mix in me, would never see the Native American. People who know mixes do see the Native American, and in fact, last night, at the show that I was at, someone came up to me and said “You’re part native, aren’t you?” And I was like, “How do you know that? Most people don’t even see it.” We didn’t get into a conversation, but I was like, good for you, you know. But anyway, those who just would see me as white would then assume to me their class, or something like that, depending on how I’m dressed or whatever, until I open my mouth. Or until they try to engage me in some kind of conversation regarding something I know nothing about, or knew nothing about at the time. Certain political things, certain things regarding jobs. You know, I just didn’t talk –– I talked like my class back then, in the sense of, I just didn’t know those things. I wasn’t familiar with anything a lawyer would do, anything that somebody who held a government job would do. Working for the government was like, well, something I would never want to do. I’m going to go work for the government. What? You know, you could be scrubbing floors for the government, and to me, I would be like, Yeah, but you’re working for the government. So I was really naïve about a lot of things, and who knows –– so many situations I was in –– and one of them with a girlfriend. She just completely embarrassed me in front of her friends. They were talking politics, and I didn’t know what the fuck they were talking about. I knew my politics –– I knew about, you know, Native American rights, I knew about racism, I knew about, you know, gay and lesbian things, but I didn’t know what they were talking about. They were talking about, you know, things having to do with lobbying for congress, and sort of the upper political thing, the Washington political thing. I didn’t know what the hell they were talking about. But they were trying to engage me in the conversation, and I was trying to be a part of it without embarrassing myself and saying, I don’t know what you’re talking about. But she kept insisting that I respond differently in front of them, like, Well what is it, you just bored by us or something? I said, “Well what am I supposed to say?” It’s her house, her company, her dinner party, I’m her new girlfriend. No, actually, Mary, I don’t know what you’re talking about. And they were using big words that I had not in my life started using –– which today I can use some of these words –– you know, elitist words, for real, because they leave a lot of people out. She had a big argument with me later. And I just started crying. I said, “Mary, the truth is, I didn’t know what the fuck any of you were talking about.” She goes, “What do you mean, why are you pretending you’re stupid?” I was like, “Well, first of all, I’m not pretending I’m stupid, and I’m not stupid that I don’t know anything that –– any of those things that you’re talking about. But I didn’t know what you were talking about.” And that’s when we realized that we were fuck buddies –– oh, can I say that on this tape? PLUSS: (laughs) You can say whatever you want. POLLET: I realized we were fuck buddies, but we were not girlfriends. And that was fine, we had great –– you know, she would call me at midnight, say “Can you come over?” I said sure. Because we had great sex. But we agreed –– said, we can do this because we love it, but let’s not try to pretend that we’re going to socialize. She goes, “I’d like it if we could try.” I said, “We’re not gonna, Mary, if, especially if you would do it like that again, it’s just not gonna happen.” She said, “Ok, are you sure?” And I’m like –– she was so sweet, other than that mean thing, but –– PLUSS: Did you sense this kind of divide between the people you were associating with and sort of –– POLLET: Absolutely, you don’t even have to say it. When I first came into Washington, it was the big thing, and I was like talking with all my friends about it. I kind of, this is, um –– ok, my native name is Brown Hawk Many Directions. It’s completely me, and I have always traveled –– it’s one of the things I’m able to do pretty much effortlessly, because I’ve always intuitively known when to keep my mouth shut and when to sort of just nod, you know –– like I was trying to do at Mary’s friggin’ dinner party, and she was blowing it. And I was passing, you know, I was passing. I was watching everybody’s behavior, and I was passing. And she blew it. But anyway, the point being, I’ve always been able to go between the classes through the arts and through sports. And with lesbians in Washington, I did that, and more specifically through sports. I joined a softball team, and the softball team was womaned by some very upper-class women, like lobbyists in Washington, and some waiters. And these more upper-class lesbians kind of took to me, and you know, took me into their crowd. And so I attended some of their parties, at their houses with their swimming pools, and was completely bored and lost in conversation, but passed. Because one of the things that I can do, Alyssa, is I know how to, you know, peak the interest of somebody. If you’re having like a boring conversation with me for some reason, I don’t know why, but because you feel the need to socialize in this way, so you’re talking about your job. Obviously you’re bored, I can tell by your mannerisms, and your non-animated manner. So I have a skill at interjecting into that some kind of controversy, you know, and that raises your intellect, and it raises your animation. And so that’s what I would try to do at those parties. And I kind of learned that, actually, from a black friend of mine who I watched do that, and I thought, That’s really ingenious, she’s really good at that. And I’m, you know, I’m just a nice person, so they liked me. But what always happened is, somewhere along the line, they found out that I didn’t have any money, and then everything changed. I could still be on the softball team, but I didn’t get invited to the parties, because the parties were really disguises for networking, do you know what I mean? It’s a social thing in Washington: you go to the party, you do the fundraising, you do networking, and I was of no use to them. PLUSS: What years was this all going on? POLLET: ’80s. PLUSS: Ok. POLLET: In the ’80s. And you know, it’s just like when you go to a store in New York, when you go to the more expensive stores. They can tell –– you’re of no use if you –– and these days, it’s a little hard to tell who has money and who doesn’t, because the style has changed to the degree that people are sort of disguised. But some of them are disguised expensively. And when you start being able to see that, then you can tell, they’re dressing down, but they’re dressed down expensively. So let me go attend to them, you know. And then a lot of people have figured out how to dress themselves –– a lot of people without money have learned how to dress themselves up, by looking like they’re dressed down expensively. It’s like a trick, two ends coming to here. But it’s, but the point is still, everybody’s like dancing around class, you know, and really, it’s just people trying to make money. Even the people in the stores that don’t own the stores, they’re just trying to make money. But class is an issue, race is an issue, it does play. I mean, you’re going to give somebody more attention in a store who you think’s got money. But also, you know that some of these kids that look like they don’t have money have the money for this, because that’s why they came in the store, and they want to spend it on these. Whether they’ve got money at home or not, they have it in their pocket now, do you know what I mean? So that was very clear, and we –– me and my friends –– talked about it. And at some point, I really tried to bring it up with the women that I knew were in that group of lobbyists and businesswomen in Washington, who are not bad-hearted people, believe me. They just are women trying to make their money too, and in the process, hurting some feelings along the way, and being a little klutzy along the way. And –– with their silence, and their relegating you to invisibility –– you know, the phone doesn’t ring. You know what’s going on. The calls quit coming in, the phone doesn’t ring, you’re not invited anymore. They found out I’m a waiter, you know. Today though, I honestly couldn’t give any insight into any of that anymore, I really don’t know what’s going on. I’m in a whole different world about that. I’m giving you a picture of like how naïve I was, coming into all of that. And I still know some of those women. One of them is very rich, and gets a lot of network attention, and still doesn’t call me, but is friendly to me. We actually run into each other every now and then, and –– and she’s very friendly. I like her, but she’s not going to draw me into her world. Actually, at one point, she broke up with her partner, and I thought about all those class things, you know, they came racing right through my head. I think when I found out she had broken up with her partner, I felt bad for her, like how are y –– are you ok? The next, number two on the list was class issues. She’s going to get herself another rich girlfriend, you know? Good luck, but it won’t be hard in Washington. You know, a lawyer, whatever, an executive for some corporation –– of the ten in the country, she’ll find her. PLUSS: What kinds of organizations were these very rich women speaking on behalf of, or lobbying on behalf of? POLLET: In a way, I’m reluctant to say that, because in one case, if I say that –– I really don’t want to say the name of this one person. So I’m not going to say one of them. Well, let’s –– I’ll do one easy one, political campaigning for the Democrats. PLUSS: Right. POLLET: That’s obvious. Women’s advocacy groups, Human Rights Campaign –– solely in the gay community –– GLAAD. And it, you know, other than that, I’ll tell you off the record. PLUSS: (laughs) I’m interested in the political affiliations that you had in Washington, D.C., and how– POLLET: Ok. PLUSS: And um, sort of how that differs from these women that you’re talking about, or just –– POLLET: Ok, well, how that differs. Well, some of the women that I’m talking about, you know, they are politicians, so that’s their livelihood. I mean, that’s what they do. And there’s a lot of lobbyists in Washington, so that’s some peoples’ jobs, you know. And some of the women that I’m talking about are lawyers. There’s a lot of lawyers in Washington, and most of them are women, that’s a statistic. So, when it comes to lob –– you know, legislation regarding, you know, gay marriage, or abortion rights, anything that I would be in favor of ––some of these women are right in the trenches, you know what I mean? I’m the one, you know, playing music to help get people to come to the event. Or I’m the one donating money to it. I’m the one offering a space in which to have the function, or I’m the one volunteering at the organization. Like the Mautner Project for lesbians with cancer, that was one of the ones, I volunteered every year as a photographer, or stuffing envelopes in the office, or whatever I could do. I worked on their website. And Jeremy Rifkin’s Pure Food Campaign is one of the organizations that I actually worked at and got paid, uh, around the bovine growth hormone issue. I cold called farmers around the country, and asked them if the Monsanto Corporation had approached them, and that was really interesting, I really enjoyed that, and I was kind of a little rebel rouser there because I just sat at the phone and kept calling and calling and calling and calling. How are you doing? I don’t want to bother you, but I just, I’m trying to do some research here, you’re not going to be in any way inconvenienced by this. So, two of the ones that I would like to tell you about are –– two different farmers. And these are dairy farmers, by the way. And what Monsanto was doing, it was basically forcing this bovine growth hormone onto the dairy farmers, and strong arming a lot of them, you know, and some of the farmers, dairy farmers, had been finding that it was actually harmful to their cows. Some had no problems, but some did. And in one case, like three of his cows died. And, and this is someone that I called, and he said he was brokenhearted. He said, “You know, you may not believe it, I actually love my cows,” and he says, “I don’t know what to do,” he says, “They’re threatening us, and they threaten us in subtle ways, and they threaten us in overt ways, and they send goons around.” One farmer made it clear, he says “I will talk with you,” he says, “But what we need to make clear is that this is completely off the record. I will not allow you to us my name in anything, and you need to know that I’m scared of Monsanto, and I’ll tell you a lot of things, but you have to guarantee me that.” And he said, “I will sue you if I find my name anywhere, and I’m tru –– you’re calling from the Jeremy Rifkin Pure Food Campaign, and I’m trusting that, I know that organization, and I know Jeremy Rifkin’s work, and I know that he’s a watchdog in Washington, so I will talk with you, but you ––” you know. And I agreed to all of that, and took all my notes, and gave them to Jeremy Rifkin, and had my eyes opened in a whole other way. And in fact, I just spoke with a dairy farmer today here. He was selling milk, Linda bought the milk from him, and I asked him if he’d ever had to deal with any of that. And he started talking about it, he says, Oh yes. He says, in fact, they brought a lawsuit against his dairy for putting “We do not use bovine growth hormone” on their product, their milk products. And Monsanto says, by saying that, you’re saying that there’s something wrong with our product. And so they sued him. But I –– we didn’t go into who won or whatever. You know, so –– my affiliations politically are with, pretty much, in any way that I, you know, working my job and doing my music, can help. I’m especially now with GPack (I’M NOT SURE WHAT THIS IS - SPELLING?), you know, very strongly wanting to do what I can there. And, let me see –– so I would say, you know, Mautner, GPack (SPELLING?), um– (tape cuts out) PLUSS: So we’re going to continue our discussion of your politics in Washington. POLLET: So, one overtly political thing –– and, mind you, I’ve always put my politics into my music. Basically, I write political songs and love songs. I don’t know how to do much else, so –– ah, every now and then I write a funny song, but –– so I wrote this song called “Take Back the Night.” And the Take Back the Night march had asked me to be one of the performers, and it was the first Take Back the Night march, so I though, Ok, well then, I need to write a song called “Take Back the Night.” So I wrote a song, and it starts out a capella. The lyrics go, “Time’s ain’t like they was before / when night comes knockin’ on my door / I’d go among the trees / to feel what’s dark and heavenly. / No, time’s ain’t like they was before / when night come knockin’ on my door.” And then it goes, “No man shall beat his wife on Sundays / or with a stick larger than his thumb. / Napoleonic code says women should be beaten every day like walnut trees. / Women were owned, bought” –– oh, I forgot the other line –– “Women were owned, bought, enslaved, and slaughtered. / Our feet were bound, we bound our daughters. / No more will we deny / no more will we be in conspiracy” –– and there’s a lot more lyrics to it, that I don’t remember all, but then it goes, “We’ve got to say that it is men who violate” –– terrorize and violate, or something like that. “We’ve got to say, we’ve go to say it’s men. / Men abuse us, terrify us, drowned us at birth, burn us alive, rape and beat us, and they keep us, yeah, they keep us terrorized. / Can you remember ever feeling safe? / Do you remember only feeling scared? / Yes, we’ve got to, yes, we’ve got to / take back the night.” And then, towards the end, it says, “It may not be all men, but you can bet, / it’s always men who own the night. / When you go home tonight, / some man may try to take your life / and you’ll have to fight.” And it repeats the chorus. So, when I was in the Toshi Reagan band –– Toshi Reagan and the Agitones –– we did my songs and Toshi’s songs, and we did covers, and I presented this song as one that I would like us to do, and one of the band members refused to play it. And I will say this, Toshi did stick up for the song, and it wasn’t Toshi. Toshi did stick up for the song. The other band member said that she didn’t want to offend men, and she thought that the song would offend men. And I said, “Well, ok, these are the men that rape and beat us, torture us, drown us alive, burn us. I don’t care about offending them,” you know. “Well, all men don’t do that.” I said, “And so, at the end of the song, I say, ‘it may not be all men, but you can bet it’s always men who own the night.’ I’ve taken care of those guys who might get their feelings hurt, alright?” And she’s like, “I won’t do it,” you know. And Toshi was apologetic, she says, “You know, I can’t force her to do the song.” PLUSS: How long did you play with Toshi? POLLET: Honestly, I don’t remember. It’s when I was hitting drug bottom. I came into recovery in 1985, and I was playing with Toshi in ’85, so, it might have been three years. It was somewhere between two and four years, that’s all I remember. We had some great gigs. One of my favorite was in Hartford, Connecticut. We had the best sound system, and that’s –– when you play electric music, that’s one of the most beautiful moments is when, actually, you have good monitors, and you can hear all the band’s instruments, and all the vocals, and all the harmonies. That was a really good one. Now, I will say this about my using drugs. One of the things that sent me to my bottom is when I did a couple of gigs and I was too drugged to really –– I was terrified at the gig that I was going to forget everything, and I kind of messed up in ways that the audience wouldn’t know, but that the band knew. And I only ever played that way twice, and for my whole time of using alcohol and drugs, I never used when I performed. It was always outside of performance, and it was always associated with dating. I was such a nervous little dater. I had to drink. I had to drink to date somebody. Or I did noth –– or I wouldn’t drink at all –– I wouldn’t drink or do drugs –– I’d be with you for two years, dry. You would be drinking, but I would be dry, because I would –– I had this voice in my head saying, you can’t keep this relationship together if you drink, you know that, so I wouldn’t drink. So, relationships would keep me dry, you know. And music kept me dry, you know. But –– see, this is another thing –– every woman I courted, I courted her using drugs and alcohol. But then, when I’d get in the relationship, if it lasted, if it was going to last, I quit drinking. So these women would meet me and think I was one way, and then I would be like –– well, I never told anybody I can’t use drugs and alcohol because I won’t want to have a relationship. I can’t do both, you know. PLUSS: Do you have any more to share about the Take Back the Night rallies? POLLET: Well, one thing is that they were very exciting, you know, it was a big deal. Marching through the streets, and actually, you know, saying that we deserve this. I mean, who –– why did we not think of this any sooner? You know that, yeah, excuse me, but –– you know, in my song “Natonal Tears,” one of the lines goes, “Women want to dance crazy, feet touch the sky, eat pasta where ––” oh no, that’s not the line. “Women, take your children for a walk in the park at night. / Let the moon trickle down on a naked baby’s backside.” And that’s what that’s about, in that song. So, yeah, it was very exciting, and one of the affects that that had in Washington, D.C. is that men started getting together and talking, and at night –– and I only know white men that did this, white, straight men, that did this, but maybe others as well –– what they agreed to do was, if they were walking down the street at night, and a woman was coming towards them, they would go to the other side. It’s like, ok, good, do that, you know, and that’s what men were doing. And I have first hand experience with that, and I was like, cool, you know, and I was like, is this actually going to happen to me? And it did. I was like, good for you, buddy. And I’m sorry that it has to be that way, but good for you. As long as, like right now, that’s what’s going on, thank you. And, I guess that’s –– I sang my song for, I think, two or three Take Back the Night marches. That’s about all I remember of it. Honestly, I don’t even know if they still have them in Washington. I haven’t seen one advertised in a while. PLUSS: Yeah, I don’t know either. What about your work at Food for Thought? POLLET: Food for Thought Restaurant. Food for Thought Restaurant opened in DuPont Circle in the –– ’73, I think it was. And I worked there from ’76 or 7 until it closed in ’99. And initially I went in as, uh, the janitor, that was the first job I got there. They called it “clean up person.” And it was a healthy foods restaurant. Not vegetarian, but it had vegetarian things. But the beef was, you know, healthy beef, and you know, healthy, conscious. And it had this art on the –– local art on the walls, a bulletin board for housing and all kinds of advertisements and things –– selling things –– and a stage. And so I did every job in that restaurant, and eventually became the manager. Second under the owner, Bobby. And still, even when I was the manager, did every job in the restaurant. I was being the manager, doing sandwiches, and I did all the booking. And as a booker, I booked lots of lesbians, and that became a thing. And then, you know, I booked Melissa Ferrick, Mary Chapin Carpenter for years –– but she’s not a lesbian, she performed with us for years, and I’m very proud to have been a part of helping Mary Chapin regain her performance footing, because she went through a very hard time. She was having inner personal struggles about performing, and I shared with her some of mine. I said, “We do go through this,” I said, “But you are great, and you need to keep doing this, so take a break, just take a break, and then come back, because –– don’t ever doubt that the audience doesn’t love you, the audience loves you. You know, you are pure honey, so continue it.” And she took her break and came back, and she thanked me, she said “It was really important to me, that talk.” And I was like, I could help somebody, you know –– actually say something to help somebody. And then what a gift she’s been with her music, you know. So, we had Melissa Ferrick, we had Hunter Davis, we had the Washington Sisters, we had Sister Spit, we had Toshi Reagan and the Agitones, we had Squeeze Louise, which is a local women’s band in Washington, we had my band after Toshi in varying stages, Lisa Walker, local lesbian performer. I just got as much l –– you know, because then the lesbian world knew that I was booking there, I got a lot of press kits from lesbians around the country, and I honestly can’t remember all the people. Some of our claims to fame, though: Shawn Mullins, actually is one of our claims to fame, a guy. He did like a couple of really big hits, and he used to come up, and I thought he was really good. I said, “Shawn, any time, just keep coming up,” and then a few years later he had a couple of big hits. It was like, good for you, dude! He’s a really nice guy, you know. Um, but you had to pass the basket at Food for Thought, so it was not easy for everybody. We had lesbian brunches, I started this lesbian brunch thing, and Betty played at those pretty frequently. Betty was local to Washington, so we had Betty all –– that was before they moved to New York. I also joined this comedy troupe called the Public Interest Follies. And so they –– oh, and that’s another one of my political affiliations –– is the Public Interest Follies. They competed with the Capital Steps –– who were the big, known, Washington comedy troupe –– and the Public Interest Follies competed with them, and excelled past them, you know, until ending. But I was with them for two or three years. And then, we performed in Food for Thought for special occasions. So I was really trying to help the women’s music scene with my –– with our stage. Now, Bobby was honored by the gay community. One year when they were honoring people in the community that’s been –– impacted the gay culture and really been beneficial to the gay culture. They called him up to the stage, and he asked me to go with him, you know, so –– not for any gay thing, gay-phobia or anything like that –– but just because he wouldn’t have –– without me, he wasn’t really inclined. He says, “Well, you are really, almost more a part of this. I just own the restaurant,” you know. So he got up on the stage and they said, “Bobby Ferrando for Food for Thought Restaurant.” It was like yeah! This was at gay pride, right –– it was a big honor for him. So that happened. We had a big punk scene in there, and a lot of the punk girls with their bands, like The Nike Chicks, a lot of bands in the ’90s, and I even think Bikini Kill played, I’m pretty sure. And, gosh, so many of them, I’m just not thinking of the names right now. But –– as well as jazz –– we had Sweet Honey in the Rock, which isn’t jazz, but it has –– some of the women in the group sing jazz, and I was thinking of that. And when we had our closing party, Mary Chapin Carpenter came back, and with Bill Danoff. Bill Danoff wrote “Country Roads,” that John Denver sang and everybody thinks wrote, but Bill Danoff wrote it. He’s in the Starland Vocal Band, they’re local to Washington. So it was a –– we had a big show, but we had to keep it kind of hush-hush so we wouldn’t be overwhelmed. So we just whispered to everybody, “Mary Chapin’s going to play.” We didn’t, we couldn’t advertise it, you know. So the place was full –– it was standing room only –– but controlled, and it was great, and I videoed the whole thing. And it was sad. It was a big piece of our community, and it’s gone now. A big, you know, lesbian, gay, everybody Left, you know, meeting place. Even for the Mensas, we had Mensas every Friday. Like we’d come in, and –– it’s missed, it’s very missed. Ok. PLUSS: I’m interested in your relationship with younger gay and lesbian artists. You mentioned Bikini Kill and Sister Spit, and I’m just interested in how –– your interactions with them, and –– POLLET: Ok. Um, well, there’s kind of a gap there. I think, really, most recently, I have become affiliated with Girls Rock in D.C., and as a guitar teacher. I’ve just begun that association with them, and I’m really –– I’ve been teaching rock and roll in the summer for years now, and I didn’t know Girls Rock existed. PLUSS: I don’t know what that –– POLLET: Well, Girls Rock, google it. Girls Rock is just what it sounds like, it’s an organization –– it’s like around the country now in different cities –– where, you know, women rock musicians get together and they sponsor a summer camp. I think it’s a two –– it’s either a one-week or a two-week thing –– where the girls come in and play all kinds of instruments. They get the female teachers to do the teaching, and then there’s a show, like –– one of the big clubs in Washington is the 9:30 Club –– so they organize these girls to perform a few songs, and then they have a big show at the 9:30 Club, a big Girls Rock show. And so I signed on to do it this summer and then I had a conflict of interest, which was that I had to drive somebody across country. And so I hope to do it next year. But, I mean, that’s really the super younger generation, in that regard, but um– PLUSS: Is that affiliated with the Rock and Roll Camp for Girls, or is it separate? POLLET: I don’t know if –– know the –– this isn’t– PLUSS: Or is it just the same? POLLET: I’m not sure if the Rock and Roll Camp for Girls is the same as Girls Rock. PLUSS: Ok. POLLET: And so my relationship to younger musicians has been pretty nonexistent except for that. I mean, well, I’ve been in the Washington scene for so many years now. A lot of people get out of the scene as they grow older, you know, so everybody that I know in the scene is younger. I mean, the whole Dischord thing and Ian MacKaye were all friends of mine, and they’re all younger than me –– although Ian just had a baby –– well his wife had a baby –– and a number –– and I teach those kids, they’re like in pre-k and stuff, and kindergarten. Those are my students now, in Fillmore Arts Center. I teach them music, which is funny. I have Alec MacKaye’s daughter Ava (SPELLING?), that’s Ian’s brother, and I’m sure I’ll get Alec’s (DO YOU MEAN IAN’S?) kid at some point. Jeff Turner, from Gray Matter and Ignition, just had the b –– they just had a baby. Dante Ferrando, I teach his daughter Keilee (SPELLING?) –– he’s from, he owns the Black Cat Club, and he’s Gray Matter and Ignition. And I’ve known Dante since he was seven. But I know all those kids, and in fact Jeff Turner –– who was in Gray Matter and Ignition –– he was the recording engineer for my National Tears tape, because he had a studio. WGNF, he called it, or something. And he’s helping me with the re-release of National Tears on CD, because it was tape, and with my new release –– which will probably, probably be called Come Alive –– that’s what I think its going to be called. And that’s based on a new song that I wrote which addresses transgender issues, and gay/lesbian issues, and it rocks! And you can go on my website and listen to it if you haven’t already. And um, so, I mean, you know, (sigh), I draw –– kind of other than that –– I mean, I can’t say that I have some big relationship with younger females, I mean, I just –– like, Spike, for example, she moved back to Texas, and she was in like a local band. But I mean, these younger kids that are younger than me now, they’re in their thirties, do you know what I mean? So there’s a 20 year age difference, but they’re in their thirties, so they’re not kids anymore. So, younger than that –– the kids that I know that are that young –– are in performance art, as drag kings. The people that I know that are in their twenties today are all in some way related to gender issues. They’re not performing. And I’m really trying to get them –– I really want my new band to be inclusive to gender-variant people, and I don’t know how that’s going to work –– I mean, not work, but how I can find the musicians who –– it’s so specific. A friend of mine said, “Tiik, you’ve just got to, like, stop, and just do the band,” you know. And plus, you’re not allowed to advertise like that on craigslist –– there’s things you can’t say. Well no, for apartments. For apartments, you can’t, but maybe for a band you can. Anyway, the point being, I’ve been very cautious about how I advertise for what I’m looking for (laughs). PLUSS: How do you –– what are your feelings about the makeup of a band, and –– why is it important for you to have –– POLLET: Yeah. See, one of the ways to make change is to put it in everybody’s face. And I put myself in everybody’s face just by writing the music and performing it live. And so I put my ideas in people’s face that way. And it’s in a musical form, and people go home singing things like “Take back the night,” you know, or “Come Alive,” Linda started singing the chorus after I played it for her today on the web. And the chorus goes, “Hey baby, come alive,” or something like that, and she was going, “Hey baby, come alive.” But preceding that are these lyrics about, you know, “All he wanted was to be a girl,” and “All she wanted was to be a boy,” and some pain involved with that. So I want people who are gender-variant and open about that to be a part of something visible. I want to provide the opportunity for someone who wants to be visible to be visible, you know, in a musical context. And I know some of the ideas, especially from my industry friends, about –– you know, that can hold you back. Number one, finding it, but finding it in the correct package, and this that and the other, it can hold you back. And some of my spiritual friends are sort of like, you know, let –– let what comes to you –– accept what comes to you, do you know what I mean? Don’t be so rigid that you can’t just let what comes to you come to you, because that’ll be the most right thing. And it’s like, why can’t I just put out an add that says, “looking for FTMs, musicians,” (laughs) do you know what I mean? And then they come to me. Listen to my music on the web, if you really like it, come to me. So, it’s kind of –– I don’t know, it’s some sort of weird territory for some people. I’m getting people saying things to me who love me and care about me that are not resistant to the idea at all, but somewhat resistant to me trying to find that. It’s like, you wouldn’t be resistant if I was just looking for lesbian musicians, so I’m just not sure what the –– what the little flak is that’s coming up. And I don’t want to be, like, trying to sabotage my own career by setting some kind of standard that is too hard to get. So, finding lesbian musicians, is that easier than finding FTM musicians? I don’t know, you know. Maybe I’m going to find out that it is. So, but at the same time –– and then, am I open to male to female? Yes, everywhere except at women’s festivals. Like, Michigan doesn’t want that and won’t –– won’t allow that, and I want to play at Michigan, so– PLUSS: How do you feel about Michigan’s stance on that? POLLET: Their policy? You know what? I’m in favor of it. And this is my position on that: Michigan was created for womyn born womyn to have a safe place to heal and enjoy each other and bond, and throw off their own women-hating issues, self-hating issues, and that what it was created for. Over time, as, you know, male to female and female to male –– is more open, and more known, it’s become an issue at Michigan because some female to m –– male to females have attended Michigan and been found out (motions quotation marks), and some women have been upset about it. Well, Michigan’s policy is this: this is a festival for womyn born womyn. We trust you to honor that, and we don’t look between your legs. That’s the policy. So it’s a kind of a don’t ask, don’t tell policy. And I’m fine with that because I just don’t think everything is so linear and polarized. And I think that’s a very male-dominant kind of way of thinking. Things are really more spiral –– spiracal (SPELLING? I’M NOT SURE WHAT WORD YOU WERE GOING FOR) –– the real, natural flow of existence is spiral. So, to have a really polarized –– I think they’ve got a good sense of, you know, if you are so much like a woman –– and I’m sorry to say it that way, but to me, a woman born woman is different than a man born woman, and I mean, if you want that –– if you want to be a woman born woman, you can’t, it’s just –– because it didn’t happen, so that’s all, that’s all I have to say about that. I cannot tell anybody anything about a male born person’s experience, who is now living as a woman. I don’t have it. All I can ever say about sexuality is what it’s like to be a woman born woman who has passed as a boy. I’ve never passed as a man, and I won’t unless we do some real hiding (gestures towards breasts). But that’s all I could talk about, and so that’s fine. And I, personally, as a woman born woman, I do not want male born persons who are currently living as women in my woman born women space. I don’t want them there. Now, my reasons for not wanting them there are emotional, and I’ve already told you, I’m a post-traumatic stress person, at the hands of men. So, I’ve got some deep safety issues that have had a lot of healing. Nonetheless, regarding Michigan, I don’t want them there. The females to males can come, you know, because I understand that in a different way, and I have –– my heart is open to that in a different way. My heart is not open to male to females at Michigan. Maybe one day it will be, but it isn’t now. And I want to be respected for that. And Michigan wants to be respected for that. And that’s one of the things that really shows the maleness of it to me. It’s like, are you crazy? And really, honestly, that’s my take on it is, are you nuts? I mean, would you try to insist yourself into an all-black festival if you’re white? Would you try to insist yourself into an all –– and what if it’s a full-blood, like for me, there are full-blooded events that I can’t go to. I’m not full-blooded Native American, and my percentage –– which I did have my DNA done, so I know what my percentage is, and I’m excited by that. Because I was like, I’m going to get my DNA done. I just need to have it, I don’t have tribal papers, so I’m getting my DNA done, and I did. I’m like, cool, ok. But my percentage is, I’m more white than Native American, you know, so I’m not full-blood, and I can’t go to full-blooded events. And I am not about to get into any ridiculous political argument about insisting myself into that. I think that’s arrogant. And I might be wrong, but I think that arrogance comes through a white male way of thinking of having that privilege. And it’s like, they’ve told you the rules, what’s your problem? Ok, and I’ve heard the thing –– I mean, the response to that is that this is a person who feels they were born a person –– born a woman in the wrong body, and so for them, they’ve always been a woman. And I think, well that’s good. I mean, I have no argument with that, but your body was male, so you weren’t a female-bodied born person. Then –– and this is what really infuriates me, and so I am on my little podium –– is to insist that a woman is something other than what I think a woman is. And there again, I’ve got men telling me that they know what a woman is, like –– I was born with a woman’s body, and I have a woman’s being in me, that also has it’s like levels of, you know, maleness, and I have testosterone inside me and everything, but I’m a woman, it’s that simple. And look, maybe in some other lifetime, I was a man, but one lifetime at a time –– I’m a woman, ok, so, it’s real simple: at a womyn born womyn’s festival, that’s what I want with me there. And little men boys can go –– little boy men can go, you know. And, so to tell me that my experience of being a woman is the same as your experience of being a woman, when you were born in a male body, to me is absolutely crazy, you know, and that’s a part of what’s going on in this dialogue. And I think that’s another rape of women –– it just is crazy to me. The way I think of it is: you, in your male body, with your idea of you are a woman –– love that, do what you need to do if you need a sex trans operation, and then live as a woman, and love yourself, and live that way, and be that way, and know that when there’s a womyn born womyn’s festival –– which means you were born in a female body as a woman –– that, basically, you’re not welcome there. And go be welcome in all the other places you can go, because there’s plenty of other women’s festivals who welcome you. And Michigan’s the only one that doesn’t. So why do you insist on taking this one place away from the women who have this –– it’s like, you’ve got to have this too? It’s crazy to me, you know what I mean? So, ta-da. PLUSS: I think this tape is going to end, so I’m just going to stop it there and put in the last one. PLUSS: Um, yeah, I want to actually go back to the question I just asked you, about your attendance at Michigan, and other women’s festivals. POLLET: Ok, alright. I attended Michigan the first three Michigan’s, and previous to that, I performed in my band –– well, I’m a little confused, was it Lizzy Tisch or BeBe K’Roche? It might have been BeBe K’Roche –– we performed at the San Diego Women’s Music Festival, that was in nineteen seventy –– probably two, or three. PLUSS: We can look it up. POLLET: Three, or four. And then, when I came on this side, and got with Toshi Reagan and the Agitones, we performed at SisterFire –– in fact, one year we performed with Ferron –– well, the same year she performed, we performed. And then after the show, we all went bowling. And Ferron was a hoot. She had on some sort of tuxedo outfit, or something. We went bowling ten-pin in Wylie Park, Maralyand –– well, actually Delphi, Maryland –– they’re right next to each other –– and then, I guess, we came out of the bowling alley, we closed it down –– I guess we had been drinking, it was midnight or something. There was a full moon in the parking lot, we were the only cars left, about five of us, so we sort of made like a wagon train circle, we turned all of the car radios onto the same channel, and we started dancing. It was really cool. And last night, when I saw Ferron, I reminded her of that, and she remembered it. And then we did um –– I’m sorry, I’m forgetting the name of it –– I want to call it the National Women’s Music Festival, but it’s in, it’s –– I’m sorry, I can’t think of the place where it is. It’s inside this school, they have it every year. We played there the year that the Washington Sisters performed there, and Casselberry and Dupree –– they used to sing with us sometimes, with Toshi Reagan and the Agitones. Um, I want to say Cleveland, Cincinnati –– did they have it –– PLUSS: We can probably look it up. POLLET: Yeah, wherever that one is [The National Women’s Music Festival was held at the Indiana University campus in Bloomington, Indiana at this time], I’ve done that one. Now Michigan –– and this is another thing that annoyed me –– one of the early years when I went there, the BeBe K’Roche that wasn’t BeBe K’Roche was performing there. And I kind of blacked out about that, I really don’t know what I did. I’m really fuzzy about it, I think I was in high PTSD with that. Well because really, it was like all my friends were on stage, you know, everybody I knew, and I wasn’t welcome –– it was mean. So the next couple of times, I performed at Michigan on some of the lesser stages, I don’t know what they call them. Now everybody all has names for all of those stages. The Round Robin Stage, or whatever. Oh, let me tell you something –– this was very sweet. I got very sick in 2003 –– it was my junior year in college and I got very sick, and –– this was at Corcoran, and my major was photography, which I am proud to say I graduated with honors and awards, both. My senior thesis, Girls Will Be Boys, won awards, some very prestigious award, and I got an original photograph, it’s like an investment now for me, it’s money –– famous photographer. But I got really sick, I got a digestive disorder that stripped my digestive system of friendly flora, and I spent nine months in nausea and building up the friendly flora again. It was like, I had to liquefy all my food, it was awful. But in the beginning, nobody knew what it was, they thought it was cancer, I had a colonoscopy, all these things. So I went to Michigan –– I was like, let me just go there, I haven’t been in years, maybe they can help. And I went, and I started to feel better. When I left, I felt really good, you know. Really, it was very healing for me. And when I came back, everybody said, You look great, you’re like, what happened? I said, “I went to a very healing place.” Well, while I was there, some people found out that I was there. And they made this announcement on the stage, We understand that the original member from –– original founder of BeBe K’Roche is here. And people were like (claps hands and cheers), applauding, and I was like, that’s me. Nobody asked me to come up to the stage or anything, but –– but then, I had put my name in the little open mic thing. And as far as I know, they’re supposed to choose those names just randomly –– like when you could play –– but I got chosen and I got a very good slot, and I was wondering if that was random or not, but I didn’t care. So I played, and it was really cool, and I found –– they asked me to do “Kahlúa Mama,” that was one of the big ones from the album. You know, we did “Kahlúa Mama,” the real BeBe K’Roche, we did “Kahlúa Mama,” and I do have that recording that we did, which is different from, –– it’s similar, but different. It’s the same, but they added some things that, I think, messed the song up. It was much more jazzy when we did it. But anyway, so they asked for that, and I did that. But then I did a lot of my own new music and everything, and it was just really cool, I had this little fan base around me, and –– young lesbians who had never heard of BeBe K’Roche, and a lot of women who were fans of the band and were excited when they found out. Because they saw my name on the list, and somebody had put “BeBe K’Roche” next to it, and they were like, Ah! That really made me feel good, and then the next day at breakfast, I went to sit down, and these women that had seen me asked me to come over and please talk with them. And they wanted to hear everything, like, where did everybody go, why did the band break up, what’s the real story, you know, and I told them the real story. And they wanted to know all of it, you know, it wasn’t for any “they did you wrong” thing, wasn’t anything like that, it was like, what happened? Because they were fans, you know. And some of them only knew the band when I was in it, some of them only knew the band with the album, and some had been through both. So that was really cool. And I intend to go back, with my new work. And they’ll have me. The minute I put it out, they’ll have me, and I’m glad about that. And I’ve actually tried –– thought about a BeBe K’Roche reunion. Virginia’s still alive and well, living up on the east coast, in the north. Jake’s alive and well somewhere, very happy, and Peggy’s not doing so well, so –– but we could get Bitch to play bass. Ooh la la, that would be amazing, BeBe K’Roche with Bitch. Bitchy K’Roche. BeBitch K’Roche. I should tell her that, that’s funny. So, that’s about it for the women’s festivals that I can think of, I might be missing some, I really might be. PLUSS: That’s ok. POLLET: And I am, I’m thinking of them now, oh yeah, I don’t remember what they call that one, the one in the north –– the Northeast Women’s Music Festival, something like that [Northeast Women’s Music Retreat]. PLUSS: We can look it up. POLLET: Yeah. PLUSS: I did want to ask you, you said that you attended the first three Michigan’s, and then you just went back, and I wanted to know if you sensed a difference, or has –– POLLET: Yes. PLUSS: Or has Michigan –– and other women’s music festivals –– have they changed? POLLET: Yes. Well, they’ve changed with the times, obviously. But it’s bigger, it’s on different land. It’s more diverse in what it, you know, what it offers. You know, I was just staring straight into the camera, and I didn’t even know it, and then I saw, I said, you’re staring straight into the camera, I was like, oh. You know how you talk with somebody, you’re thinking –– but I was thinking at the camera, not even realizing, oh that’s the camera, don’t look at the camera. Anyway, so, now I just did –– I forgot what you said. PLUSS: We were talking about, just the changes in the– POLLET: Changes, yeah, ok. Bigger, but also more diversity in age, more diversity racially, more diversity in music, and more diversity in crafts. Ok, now they have leather and S/M things, whereas before it just wasn’t happening, you know. Now they have all kinds of music, it’s not just piano players with guitar players, and maybe one band, and somebody playing some sort of culturally folk, Black African music, and a drum circle –– which all was wonderful, but could seem tokenish –– but it wasn’t, it’s just all that we knew at the time. And now we’ve grown, and we’re inclusive of so many kinds of music now, and so happy to see punk, you know. It was great the year Tribe 8 was at Michigan –– it’s like, thank god. Although, it was controversial because –– well I don’t remember what the controversy was –– I think they had a boy in the band. It was some controversy –– or was it Lynn Breedlove claiming to be a boy. Maybe that’s what it was, I’m not sure. But anyway –– identifying as a guy, or something like that. So yeah, and they’re getting more diverse with their food, I think. Some people would say that’s not true, not at Michigan. I think –– but they’ve always –– politically –– had groups with the willingness to discuss racism. Whether it got anywhere, I can’t –– I honestly can’t tell you. And I think those things are really about the people who attend them, you know. All of the workshops at any festival, in the big picture –– you know, at some point the 101 monkey theory probably does happen –– there’s some critical mass. If you have 700 women’s festivals all at once, and they’re always talking about race and racism, you’re like keeling from that –– boom! Maybe it happens, do you know what I mean? Do you know the 101 monkey theory? Do you know what that is? PLUSS: Not– POLLET: It’s like, at some point, the scales tip, and all of a sudden, everybody’s doing something. People who didn’t even initially get taught it suddenly begin to do it. There were these monkeys that were washing the radioactive soil off their potatoes, on this island of monkeys getting studied, and these monkeys were in other places, and they didn’t have radioactive soil. But at some point, 100 of these monkeys –– and when the 101 one started washing the potatoes, the monkeys in the other areas started washing their potatoes, and they didn’t even have radioactive soil, right? And so that’s where we developed critical mass, there’s this idea about critical mass, ok, so –– PLUSS: I also want to talk about your –– how you feel about the word “queer.” POLLET: Ok, I think it’s a friendly little word, I like it. Now, what it means to the people who say it, I’m really not up on it. I mean, I have friends who are queer-identified, but I’ve never talked to them about why they say that, do you know what I mean? So you could probably tell me more about queer identification than I could tell you. I know that, where I’ve gotten to in my life now is I don’t argue with people about much, in the sense of, I have no reason to challenge the use of the word “queer.” I don’t challenge they gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer, I don’t challenge any of it, you know. And I’ll tell you why: they’re all words that are asking for respect and power –– well, you don’t have to ask for power, you have power. Power is a given, and this is a misconception in our world. Power is a given. This expression “why do you give so much power” to those people or that or whatever –– in my world, that’s impossible. You don’t give power, you have it. I can do something stupid and regret it later, but you didn’t give power, you know, it’s just something people have, it’s not something you give. Anyway, so I just think it’s fine, all the words –– maybe there’ll be a day when the words will have their position and we won’t say the words anymore, I don’t really know. But, I know initially, when I first heard the use, I was like, Yeah! Use it, say it, you know. And now, I’m just like –– though probably another one’s coming, you know, and it’s going to get longer, so if we can all remember the acronym, we’ll be fine. And I already heard one recently, I can’t remember what it is, but there already is another one after queer, and I –– and you may know it, I just can’t think of what it is, I heard it in the last month. Um, whatever, I don’t think it –– I did, I heard of a new one. PLUSS: Um, I also wanted to just ask you about your relationship with the word “feminist,” and if it’s changed, if you identify that way. POLLET: Alright. When I first understood the word “feminist” was in the ’70s, and it was –– when it came to me, it was a dirty word. And it was rich, white women, who had some political control issues, you know. It was kind of, they think they’re all that, or whatever –– they’re going to try and tell us how we’re supposed to act and behave. They’re going to try and tell us what is the right way to think, what’s important –– something like that. Then, I realized that, well, again, there’s this class, race prejudice thing that goes on –– so they’re getting dissed by some people, and is that really fair? And I think it comes from fear and jealousy, and I think, well why get on some fear and jealousy bandwagon, why not just do what you need to do? So, rather than dissing a word and a group of people who are trying to work for change for the good, do what you need to do, not –– what you need to do is talk with them, and say, You know, this thing you’re involving yourself in, this one piece of this feminist concept you’ve developed, this actually steps on the toes of lesbians, or this steps on the toes of black people, and we need you to think about that –– do that. So that’s what kind of started happening, is people started becoming willing to –– why are we in-fighting? People were saying, ok, somebody wants us to in-fight. That works in the favor of Republicans, that works in the favor of the powers that be, so let’s stop the in-fighting. And then –– that was I think in the ’80s –– and then the whole racial divisiveness kind of really got big, and I actually don’t know what the healing there happened. At some point, however, “feminist” was not a dirty word, but then “feminist” came to mean “lesbian” for some people. I found that out. Once some people were trying to ask me if I was a lesbian (DO YOU MEAN FEMINIST?) in the middle ’80s. And they meant, But you’re a lesbian. That came to light in a more private situation, because they were asking me in a more public situation, Are you like a feminist, or ––? So, and initially, that wasn’t the thing. Initially the feminist, in the ’70s, as I recall, they were accused of being lesbians, you know, and then lesbians got that, and started adopting the word, and then they were lesbians –– but not also. So –– and today, what I’ve seen –– and you may have seen this too –– is I’ve seen much more of an embrace of the word in its true sense. It’s almost like it’s taken some time to come back what it really meant to people to begin with –– you know, it’s like let’s drop all this ridiculous arguing and understand what this is, you know –– whoops! (knocks something over on table next to her). So, and I think that’s exciting. The way I’ve seen the word used in the last five to ten years, I find like, kind of exciting and right, you know. PLUSS: Would you ever call yourself a feminist? POLLET: Well I have called myself a feminist. I mean, it’s one of the things I’ve called myself. And today, without like reading some actual definition of what we think a feminist is today, I probably am a feminist, as –– well, actually, we used to say “lesbian-feminist,” you know, that was like –– I just remembered that –– we were called “lesbian-feminists.” PLUSS: That was actually going to be my next question, because people have, and people still use that word in a historical context, and I was just wondering if you did identify that way. POLLET: Yeah. Oh yes. We were lesbian-feminists. I don’t think we ever were feminists, actually. Because that was the whole thing, was separating ourselves from this bad rap for feminism. It was like, ok, then we’re lesbian-feminists, and this is different in some way, you know. PLUSS: Ok, um– POLLET: And then we were lesbian-feminist separatists. (laughs) Where are you going? PLUSS: Do you think you ever stopped being a separatist? POLLET: Oh yeah, definitely. Definitely, I’ve stopped being a separatist in the space I live in, because I’ve had male roommates. But I’m not –– I’m still a separatist at Michigan, except regarding baby men. So yeah, I mean, for me, separatism was a very important need to heal. You know, I just, (sigh) I needed it in my living space. Oh, well, I was never a separatist anywhere except my living space. That was my separatism, was my living space. Um, I wouldn’t know how to be a separatist except in one, in one place I can control. I mean, in my car, no, this is a separatist car, you can’t come in. And my motorcycle, no man. And my tandem bicycle, forget it. When they start making tandem rollerblades, that’ll be hard. But yeah, for real, so really, you could educate me, how could you be –– you could work in a separatist job, I suppose. But you know what, somebody would get you. Some law would get you, because, I mean, it’s even hard to just have a woman only club anymore, and a men’s club, and you know, a men’s football team, it’s like, somebody’s saying, Oh, you can’t keep us out of here and whatever, you know. I think the only place I could be a separatist would be in a private place, by law. So that does have to be a home, I guess, doesn’t it? PLUSS: What has been your relationship with gay men? POLLET: Well, initially, my first, my relationship with gay men was, I thought they hated me. And so in retaliation, I thought I hated them. So I never went anywhere near them, because I didn’t really choose to be around people that hated me. Then, I had to be around them because they, they in –– (laughs) inserted, they infiltrated themselves into my workspace, so I had to be their boss. And that worked out ok, except for the ones that had anger –– hated that –– don’t like nasty, angry gay men. And, but it helped me learn about how to deal with anger in sane ways, and so I’ve come through these –– now, I adore gay men that are my friends. As a group –– I don’t have any prejudice about a group. I don’t adore lesbians, you know. But I have gay men, singular gay men that I absolutely adore. I am no longer afraid of gay men, I no longer think gay men hate me because I’m a woman or a lesbian. I know they do, and that’s different. There are gay men who have gone through issues like I had issues, you know, and god love them, goddess love them. I don’t –– and if they ever work through it or whatever, it’s not my thing, it’s their business, you know. I prefer to not make it my business, but sometimes they do, so, you know, our issues bleed out of us onto others. But –– oh gosh, I just adore my friend Shane. He’s just the best person. We have this movie date that we were going on every couple of weeks. He picks the movie, I pay, I pick the movie, he pays. And I want to tell this, I think this is like really significant. This guy was –– I was in a meeting, this guy was sharing, a gay man. And I was looking at him, I don’t know why, for some reason, and he was sharing, and while he was sharing, I looked at him and I thought, He could be a woman. And this has never happened to me in my life. And I thought, Oh my god, he could be a woman. And then I thought, Do you know that if he ever wanted to transition to a woman, I would totally understand it? That’s the first time I ever thought it, because by and large, men who trans, transsexual –– transgender I understand –– but to transsexual, I just never got it, and I always thought, had this little like –– less and less weirdness, less and less weirdness –– but still weirdness. And this happened about five months ago, and I told him after the meeting, and he almost cried. He said, “I want you to know that I have always felt this really deep connection with you,” and he says, “And I don’t always say things to you, but I just, there’s some really deep connection with you, and when you share, it’s so important to me, and I just automatically love you.” And I said, “Wow,” and he goes, “That you say that to me, it’s –– thank you, it’s really important.” Well, a few days later, I was at a show, and this drag queen came out –– and there was all these horrible drag queens. They were lip-synching, they were doing it wrong, they weren’t synching up, they were here and the music was here, and they kept trying to catch the words and it wasn’t working –– it was horrible. And this one came out, and he was fabulous, and I was like, that guy should be in show business, he’s amazing, and I loved watching him. And later on, he came out with his wig off, and he was my guy. I was like, Oh my god, I said, “Now –– you know, the thing that happened the other day, and then here you are doing this,” I said, “This is freaky.” But he goes, “Tiik, when you said that to me, I was like,” he said, “It helped me do this, you know, I always want to do this.” He goes, “I don’t want to be a woman, but I have this.” So that’s a like very transformative experience for me. I’m like, when did this happen? So, my relationship to gay men is just like any relationship to any –– anybody now. I take them as they come. Not that way. Take them as they are. PLUSS: Um, I wanted to go back to your relationship with your parents, and –– POLLET: Ok. My father was a musician, and he was a jazz musician for big bands and an arranger, and I grew up with music in the house –– jazz band, and going to sleep to the most amazing muted trumpet, I –– my favorite sound in the whole world today is the muted trumpet, you know (imitates muted trumpet). Oh my god, it just sends me into heaven. And so, my father unfortunately was an alcoholic, raging, and abusive, and there was a lot of pain there for us. But he did some good for a while, he played with Kay Kaiser, Jack Teagarden, and Ray Anthony. And Gary Moore was his childhood friend, and asked my father to be the arranger for his show, and my father would have been except for his alcoholic thinking and his alcoholism –– he turned it down. And that was a direct result on –– alcohol has an affect on him. And then, by the time I was eleven, my parents were divorced, but a lot of damage had been done by then, to my sister and my brother and me, all three. My sister’s the oldest, my brother in the middle, I’m the baby. She got the worst of it, Sonny the middle of it, and me the least of it. But I inherited my father’s musical talents, and it was extreme, and he was also and artist with drawing and things like that. I inherited all of his stuff. And, you know, my mother then raised us, and that was welfare, for a while. She was a waiter, and we started waiting tables with her when we were old enough to not infringe on the child labor laws. And previous to that, though, we were selling tomatoes door-to-door, anything we could do to help make money. And it was kind of scary, but we did it. You know, we were kids –– twelve, thirteen, something –– I think I started work at the age of twelve, selling door-to-door. Back then it wasn’t crazy like it is today, you know, you didn’t have to be scared, but it was still scary for us. And –– because you could still trick-or-treat back then, and you wouldn’t be getting razor blades, you know. So they divorced, and my mother raised us, and we were tap dancing for years, she was a good stage mother. One of my most precious memories is of my band in Hollywood, we were playing at the Ash Grove, it’s a very big deal, we were on the bill with a lot of famous people, we were like the unknown, local greats kind of thing –– highlight –– showcasing us –– and my mother was in the audience and I could see her. And she was sitting much like you are, at her own table, and she was at a raised table, which was actually –– was really cool, there was all these tables down here, but she was in a raised area, and I could see her from the stage, and she was sitting back there, boppin’ her head, tappin’ her hand on the table, and I will never forget it, ever, ever forget it. And she came to two or three of my gigs, and one of them was one of the worst gigs I ever had –– Virginia was out of her mind on drugs, and my mother and my brother came and I was totally embarrassed, and I had to explain to my mother that Virginia was feeling sick, so –– because we had to stop the show. She goes, “It’s a shame, just, it’s a shame, because you guys sound so good,” she didn’t know that we were all lesbians or anything, you know. So that was really wonderful experience for me. Years later, I tried to find my father, because he kind of disappeared from the radar. And I had some very weird experiences thinking I’d found him, and then the man turned around, and then it wasn’t my father –– so it’d be fun, a little docu-drama or something –– but it’s like, Daddy? And this man turns around, Huh? I’m like, Oh, I’m sorry, you know. It’s like, what does he look like? It’s years later, what does my father look like? And this guy, I really thought it was my dad. So anyway –– but I did find him. He wrote me a letter. I was living in Berkeley, he wrote me a letter, and then I eventually came out and reconnected with him. My brother and I reconnected with him, and we were there for him when he died. He died of cancer, directly related to his alcoholism, in a hospital –– so I was glad we could have that time. And I gave my father a guitar before he died, and I played for my father before he died, and we were playing –– I was playing and he was playing, because I brought my guitar, and I gave him his –– and I played with him, I was playing a lot of blues riffs at that time, and he was boppin’ his head, he goes, “I hear ya, I hear ya.” It was very, you know, beat generation talk, it’s –– but it made me really proud. My father said, “I hear ya.” I’m like, that was really cool. So, you know, as much as he was scary and frightening and he had a lot to work through, when I finally got into it –– children of alcoholics –– I loved him and I adored him, you know. Very love-hate relationship. Because he was brilliant, he was fucking brilliant. He really was, he would not have been offered that job if he wasn’t the caliber to do that job, you know –– with Gary Moore. So, and when I did my self-healing with my family kind of issues, I acknowledged that despite everything that my father did to us children as a direct result of his alcoholism, the gift of creativity that he gave me, and his humor, is something that I value. It’s like, wow, that’s really cool. That’s a really cool thing to get from a parental unit, you know, it’s in my DNA. And then from my mother, her strength, and her consistent ability to work, you know, I could never be like –– god, I have friends that go from job to job, and you know, don’t even want to look for a job. I don’t know how to not work. It’s in my DNA from my mother. She didn’t know how to not work, I don’t know how to not work. I don’t know how to bitch about a job. People –– my friends bitch about their jobs, my sponsors call me bitching about their jobs –– I don’t know how to bitch about a job. If I don’t like a job, I leave and get a job, another job, you know, and that was my mother, she never bitched about her job, she just would get a different one. I’d say, “Why’d you quit there?” “Oh, the manager was a jerk.” I’d say ok. If I found a manager who was a jerk, I’d quit. I did. I worked at the Orange County Airport –– Oh, I’ve got to tell you about Terry’s Village (SPELLING?). This was an amazing place. Terry’s village was very important in Orange County, Costa Mesa, kind of, California in the ’70s. Everybody went through there, and I performed there. Charlie D. and Milo were there, they were a big name that was there at the time, you can google them and still find them –– big folk act –– did a big song called “Movin’ to the Country” that Johnny Rivers recorded, back in the ’70s. A lot of people went through there, and that really influenced me because I honed my ability to play in public there. And previous to that, I had traveled around Europe as a teenager, and –– singing and playing my way around Europe. And at one point, I was in Paris, and I had a little French army brat runaway who was like interpreting everything, and this crowd –– I was singing Janis Joplin tunes –– and this crowd kind of stormed me, and they kept saying Janis Joplin, so I thought they wanted me to sing Janis Joplin tunes, so I kept doing it, because I knew all of her songs, and Patty –– and all of a sudden they were storming me, and she took me off into a little nook and explained to me that, they think I’m Janis Joplin. I said, “Oh!” Because I looked like her (motions towards hair). And she said, “You know, the only way we’re going to get them away from you is to tell them you are Janis Joplin –– you have to sign autographs.” I said ok, so I did. And they would leave, but they were, like, on me. I’m like, what are they doing? That was very funny. And then, years later, in the ’90s, actually the ’80s, a friend of mine came over, and I had a poster of Janis Joplin and Grace Slick up on my wall, as big as that (points to something off camera), and she walked by, she looked up, and said, “Hey, that’s a really cool picture of you with Grace Slick.” I’m like, “yeah,” (laughs). Before she left, I told her it wasn’t me, but for the –– well, I let her think it was me, you know, for the hour she was over. Um, anyway, so we did my family. PLUSS: Did you ever come out to your mom? POLLET: In a half-assed way, yes. I told her I was bisexual, so she knew that I –– I said, “I’m bisexual, mom.” I said, “I’m pretty asexual, but I’m basically bisexual. And I don’t have any girlfriend or boyfriend right now.” So before she died, I did say that to her, but I never came out to her as a full-blooded lesbian. And my first girlfriend –– oh, I told you that –– my mother accepted her as her third daughter. She told me that. And I broke up with that woman due to my own internalized homophobia. Took me years to understand that, but I –– we were together for I don’t know how many months. She was totally in love with me, I was totally in love with her, and one day we were riding our bikes on Venice Beach, and I saw horns grow out of her head. You’re talking about, you know, post-traumatic stress here, hallucinations, disassociation, I’m like, Oh my god, and I thought it was an omen. And then her face, like, melted, and I’m like –– I didn’t do hallucinogens, and I wasn’t on Acid –– I mean, I wasn’t on alcohol. I’m like, you have to understand, this is my life, I had to deal with this shit, like –– I shrank once, and I was like, Oh my god. I was walking towards my home, towards the BeBe K’Roche house, and Virginia was on the porch, and I was walking towards the stairs, there were two sets of stairs, six here, a sidewalk, and the ones on the porch of the actual house. And as I was walking up the six stairs here, I shrank, I got smaller and smaller. I’m like, What the fuck is going on? And as I was walking up the sidewalk, I was like this big (motions with thumb and pointer finger), and I was like, What the fuck is going on? You know, whew, and by the time I got up the stairs, I was back to my size again. I was like –– so this day with Jamie, I mean, I just freaked the fuck out. I couldn’t kiss her, I couldn’t look at her. She didn’t know what hit her, you know, I broke up with her, and she was crying, and everybody hated me, you know. And the sad news about that is, the Birtha girls, the Fanny girls, these are people who had power in the women’s rock scene back then, and Jamie was an up-and-coming actor, and I broke her heart, and, and it, and it was awful, you know, and so homophobia hurts people. I did not have a clue what was going on with me. All that has to happen for post-traumatic stress, to kick off mine, is for a big fear to hit me. So, my f –– it was a homophobic fear, you know, I knew I was lovers with a girl, and there was this voice inside of me, I’m sure, saying, What if this is wrong? What if this is bad? What if you’re evil? So there you have it. PLUSS: I just wanted to ask you a question about your website, and I think it’s interesting, all the history you have, and I just wanted to know if you think –– just, you know, why you chose to do that, if it’s a political thing for you. POLLET: Ok, yes, it’s totally political. I know that my life is a part of lesbian history, and I know that. I know that our bands were the first doing what we were doing in the women’s rock scene, and that BeBe K’Roche, even without me, was the first really electric band on Olivia. It was a big deal, back then. They were scared, really. They weren’t sure if they should try this. Really, it’s bizarre, but –– back then, if a woman played a saxophone, people thought she had a dick in her mouth. It was like, they couldn’t handle it, I mean, it was really, you know, archaic kind of times. And so I know the struggles that we went though. Clubs that hired us wanted us to wear you know, bikinis and mini-skirts, and we wore Levi’s and –– back then –– flannel tops and shit. So, I think it’s an important part of the history, and a lot of people don’t know it. When riot grrrls came along, I thought, how –– they’re not thinking that –– they don’t want to claim, like, a beginning here. Yeah, a beginning of the name “riot grrrls,” and a new surge of this for a lot of more young women, in a new and larger way, but they need to know that we were the ones that got all the shit. I mean, they don’t get the shit that we got. They get shit, but we got it worse. I mean, it was not easy being women playing rock and roll back then. I can tell you stories about how many guys in the industry, who were reputable and who I respected, told me I played pretty good for a girl. You know, and that friggin’ Elvin Bishop thing. I mean, this guy is like one of my heroes, and he comes to our gig, and he, during the break, asks if he, you know, “Hey, can I play your guitar?” And he reaches for it. And I’m not going to let him, because I don’t have extra strings with me, and I just politely say, “I’d prefer that you didn’t.” And he like pitches a fit. And he even says, “Do you know who I am?” And I’m like, Did you really just say that to me? I said, “I do know who you are, but I’d prefer that you not play my guitar. I don’t have extra strings, and if one breaks, that’s it.” And I know how he plays, I’m like, if anybody’s going to break a string, it’s going to be him, you know. I play too gentle to break a string, but he’ll break it, he goes (imitates loud guitar noise). So, others, I won’t name them all, but –– he’ll never see this, so. And he did it, so –– but um, I think it’s important to have all that history. You know, somebody’s got to tell it, and it shouldn’t be lost. So that’s really why I did it, and all of those women struggled a lot, and they deserve to be known and respected for their contributions. They affected a lot of people. The fact the Birtha even played their music helped me continue to play. I was really charged up by them, you know. And so my website is inclusive of all of that history. And still, I’m still building it, and I just re-designed it. Go look at it in like, I’ll say three weeks, but maybe even two, it’ll look completely different. I finally came up with a design I really like. Because I’ve been working on this, driving myself crazy trying to do a re-design, so –– and I’m going to put up a BeBe K’Roche site, and I’m even going to call Rosemary Butler back, from Birtha, and ask her if she minds if I put up a Birtha site. I know somebody’s running a Fanny site, because they contacted me to see if I had any photographs from back then. I don’t. I’m sure some people around me do, but I never got any of them. PLUSS: Oh, I just wanted to talk about going back to school, and –– POLLET: Oh, yeah. Ok, so there I was working at a restaurant and playing my music, you know, booking myself because I could, and performing with Lisa Walker for a number of years, as a duo, and then my own little duos with my friend Tia (SPELLING?), or whoever, my band. And Food for Thought is having financial struggles, due to increased rent, and the owner warns us that we’re going to be closing, so I need to look for a new job. So I had been taking continuing ed classes at the Corcoran in computers. In computers –– in Macintosh applications, Photoshop, for arts. Director, Photoshop, Adobe Premier, Infinity, 3-D programs, drawing programs, video programs. And I was doing really well in it, and I actually won an award for a 3-D I did of a flying saucer, a UFO thing, it was really fun. And um, they –– let’s see, I talked to one of them. The closing date for Food for Thought was announced by the owner to me, and I said hmm. And I mentioned it at the Corcoran, and they said, I know a place that wants a job, and it was next door. I was like, really? So, no résumé, I applied for the job, I got the job, so now I’m teaching digital arts. It’s everything I already teach –– it’s Photoshop and Adobe Premier –– it’s everything I already know, I’m sorry. And she said, “Design your own program, you do the curriculum, just do it.” And then I made a résumé real quick and gave it to her, because I got the job over the phone, because I came recommended by the Corcoran, she’s like, “I’ll take you,” because her guy just quit, just like that. So I got the job, like a week later, I was teaching, I’d never taught in my life. So I was really winging it, like, what do I teach, how do I do it? I’m teaching kids. And about two months into it, or something, she asked to see my college degree, or what college did I go to, what was my degree, or whatever, and I was like, “I don’t have one.” She was like, “Uh, they told me you had a degree.” “No, I don’t.” By then, I’d already been working for them, and had already helped them get a $20,000 grant because I was so productive so fast, that I put a little video together with the kids’ work. And she didn’t want to lose me, and I was completely good for their program at the Fillmore, so she said, “You’re going to have to get a degree.” She said, “I can keep you on as an artist in residence, but you’re going to have to get a degree, you’d have to be working towards a degree.” So I went to the Corcoran, and I said, “What can we do for me?” And they matriculated all my credits into their AFA program, because they had just started it. So I was going to be the very first Corcoran AFA graduate, in the year 2002, and then what happened is, evidently, some other girl got in it, so we were two graduates in our class, only two, and –– AFA graduates –– and then we matriculated that into the BFA, which I did in photography. The AFA was non-specific. The BFA was in photography, because they didn’t have a digital media degree yet. And in my junior year, they had a digital media degree and I tried to figure out if I could get into it, and the only way I could get into it was to add, like, two more years to my college, and I’m like, I’m graduating next year, I’m not going to go for three more years, you know. So that’s the story, and I graduated with honors, and awards, with my Girls Will Be Boys black and white photographic series, which you can see on my website. And, got my degree, and now I have to pay it off. Got any money? I am looking for a rich benefactor to pay that sucker off. PLUSS: I think we’re running out of tape, is there any –– are there any other things that you wanted to discuss? POLLET: I don’t know. I think I hit the things that I thought were important –– I thought the Take Back the Night mention was very important. Lets talk about, at least for a second, influences. PLUSS: Yeah. POLLET: On me, like that Janis Joplin was a huge one for like coming out, and then –– it started my dialogue in my head, and I had already tried to make my sister not gay. I had already gotten in trouble at school, in my sexual education class, for saying that it’s ok to be gay. Boy,I got in trouble. But then she let me out of trouble, you know, she said, “Just, never mind.” She held me after class, she was going to fail me, she says, “You know what, never mind.” I was going to get– PLUSS: When was that? POLLET: In my sexual education class in 12th grade. I made a remark about it was ok to be gay and blah blah blah, and she was like, asked me to stay after class. And I wrote something on an exam about it and she gave me my exam and it had an E on it. I was like, well how did I get an E? And she was like –– she just did it on purpose because I said it was ok to be gay. And then after the talk and my –– she said, “Just, never mind, go home.” And so I went home, and on my report card, I had an A on my exam, which is what I got on the exam. I think she freaked out and put an E on it –– you can’t go around saying gay is ok, something. So that actually happened. But influences in music were Janis Joplin and then, um, of course the Beatles was huge for me. But then, there was a lot of Motown influence, a lot of the Supremes, Diana Ross and all that, Mary Wells, all that Motown influence. And then Jimi Hendrix was a huge one. Then Santana, like a really like –– that movement in Santana’s music, I really love that, and when I think of my music, it’s the movement in my music, the rock sort of movement in it –– it reminds me of what I feel from early Santana. I wasn’t like big with any heavy metal or anything like that, but then like, Chrissie Hynde came out with The Pretenders –– big influence –– then Siouxsie and the Banshees. This is all later, but it really kicked me further. Nona Hendrix, which –– she left LaBelle, and Patty Smith, totally. Initially, she was a little too Jim Morrison for me, but then I got into her. Because I saw Jim Morrison in person a couple of times, and he was just too drugged for me. People thought he was such a genius and everything, and I just thought he was like a, you know, slobbering addict, you know, that needed to stop using and then try to sing, because the shows I saw him at, he was so –– and then, X-Ray Spex came along, and Poison Girls, and then –– and then things like Tribe 8, and Four Non Blondes, and people kept doing things, you know, so my enthusiasm and encouragement to continue is always you know, skyrocketed. And now, my current inspiration is Bitch. I’m like, totally give her credit for a new level of inspiration. And it’s mutual, and I’m very excited about, you know, back and forth, sending each other –– I just gave her some of my music the other day. So, and Ferron, of course, big –– you know, she just goes right in here to the heart with her music. Dylan was a big influence, but Ferron just knocked him out of the ball park, you know, I really got into him, and then he was gone. Nina Simone was–..