 DOMIENIK: Did you like being here? Maria CUERDA: Yeah, but I didn’t live on campus. I commuted from Williamstown, so I came from a long way away. It was far. But yeah I loved it. DOMIENIK: It’s a luxurious kind of life isn’t it? CUERDA: Yeah. Completely. I mean- DOMIENIK:Your job is to think. CUERDA: What? DOMIENIK: Your job is just to think. CUERDA: Yeah, I know and I had felt-before I had just worked a lot minimum wage jobs. It just felt like such a luxury. You know? It was great. DOMIENIK: In what way? CUERDA: It was just fun, you know to be thinking! DOMIENIK:Yeah CUERDA: To be in an environment that encouraged that. It was great. I loved it. I had a blast. I majored in Latin American literature. DOMIENIK: Oh, okay CUERDA: That was really fun DOMIENIK: Who were some of the people here that you, that really influenced you, that you enjoyed taking classes with? CUERDA: Marina Kaplan was probably-[laughter]-yeah, you know her? DOMIENIK: Yeah, I know her. CUERDA: I think she’s retiring soon. Yeah, she’s incredible. She’s just really smart and really sort of open minded. Yeah. funny. DOMIENIK: And a lil bitter- CUERDA: Bitter? Well, bitters okay. There are a lot of reasons to be bitter. [Laughs] I’m sorry, that’s just a joke DOMIENIK: [laughing too] oh no, I completely agree. Completely agree CUERDA: Except for I haven’t been here for 18 years so she was probably less bitter then. DOMIENIK: Maybe that’s true, maybe that’s true. So My name is Lynnea DOMIENIK, I’m here with Maria CUERDA, we are doing an oral history for the history class 372 feminist oral history. Just a little introduction for the Sophia Smith Collection. Um, so, why don’t you tell me a little about where you spent your childhood, your adolescence? CUERDA: Okay. DOMIENIK: Just to begin CUERDA: Alrite, I grew up in a town, well Tiburon, California, it’s in Marin County-a very beautiful sort of privileged place. Um I lived there till I was 18. So-that was um a great place to grow up. Uh, you know it didn’t seem like it was a special place when I was growing up, but it obviously is. Although I could never afford to live there now laughter..sort of happy I got away, cuz you know you think its the real world but its not. So, yeah. DOMIENIK: In what ways did it feel special? CUERDA: Oh its just physically beautiful and you know it was safe, place-you know-its also a weird place-I think-because there’s a lot of money there-and I think, I don’t know if you’ve ever seen the movie The Ice Storm, but I always think of that movie when I, or when I think of my childhood I think of that movie. There were a lot of parents who had sort of, parents of kids my age then who had grown up in the 50s and probably grown up in a very sort of or culturally or socially repressive atmosphere and then the 60’s happened and they were like 40 and they thought God I have to have a good time, now I can, you know. All the parents were running around I think a lot and the kids were running around too. I always thought that, I always thought that in some ways, I don’t know, in some ways its sort of a scary place because you’ve made it if you’re there you’ve sort of made it. And I always thought that set up sort of a weird dynamic with people. Because, maybe it becomes harder to deal with the everyday problems most people have. DOMIENIK: So sort of with the idea of making it, you don’t want to leave, because to leave is to say: I’m no longer making it? That kind of thing? CUERDA: No not in terms of leaving, but in terms of sort of, I mean, I’m sure my perspective is skewed and weird, and most people wouldn’t think this, but just in terms of sort of maintaining an illusion, I’ve always sort of thought of the West Coast, I mean, as soon as I moved to the east I thought, um, you know you go there and everyone is so, kind of happy, but maybe they don’t have a choice, cuz if you can’t be happy there, like, where are you going to go? [Laughter] you know. So I think maintaining the illusion of this good life, is, can be tough. DOMIENIK: Kind of stepford wife-ish [movie reference]? CUERDA: A little bit. You know maybe. And I don’t know. I think there’s a lot of pressure when you’ve grown up in a place that’s beautiful and you’ve worked hard maybe. Or maybe not. And you have this nice house and you live in a beautiful place. There’s a lot of pressure to keep that up. DOMIENIK: From every side? From your parents from your family, from school, the fabric of it? CUERDA: I guess. I guess. I didn’t feel that way as a kid, because my family was really different. I was raised by mother and my grandmother. Both, um, you know, my grandmother was born in Spain and my mother was born in Spain and went to El Salvador with my grandmother. Then they came to the U.S., so they are immigrants. Two women. They both worked as secretaries. You know. We didn’t have a lot of money. But um, so and they didn’t think I should go to college. They just have no plans for me at all. [Laughs] yeah. But I also think that at that time there wasn’t the same pressure on young people that there is to day. College education is so expensive. Then you could go to Berkeley for you know 500 dollars a year something or 1000 maybe. And you could go off and have a good time and find yourself if that’s what-It wasn’t so serious necessarily. And Especially where I came from, there’s this perception that when you grow up, that’s what you’ll have your whole life, you know there’s not a sense that you’ll have to maybe struggle as much to get things-Sort of a happy world, the kids are going around smoking lots of pot-the parents probably were too you know. [Laughs] anyway DOMIENIK: This idea of finding yourself. That seems really prevalent now with all this liberal arts education. Was it, did your family have that idea that you needed to go out and find yourself? CUERDA: No, no although, my family didn’t, although I think at that time in the culture where I lived, there was a lot of this sort of consciousness raising, feminism, you know thinking about self fulfillment in a way that could be seen as very selfish but also something you know that was happening in the culture at the time. DOMIENIK: What did your mother and grandmother think about all of those things? Oh, just ridiculous you know self indulgent probably. The thing you do is just go out and get a job. You do good just by doing that. You can make it. You know and um yeah not a lot of-I mean they weren’t that way anyway as people. They weren’t people who were self-analytical. Well my mother is still alive. But not very self-analytical. Not into trying to think about things, figure out things for themselves so much. Just do what you have to do to get through. DOMIENIK: Mhmm. I mean that seems to makes sense after moving around so much. CUERDA: Yeah, i-yeah uh-I think its also of that time, you know, as well. being from a different culture and maybe, I don’t know, from the church or something, you know I don’t know. I don’t know. But. DOMIENIK: What was it like growing up there and being different as you said. CUERDA: You know. I didn’t mind being different. I like being different. I probably didn’t realize that we were different, you know. I mean my mother at that time when I was growing up you know was divorced which was kind of different. But those things didn’t bother me, you know. I’d prefer to be different. I don’t think I perceived us as that different anyway. I think she did. It was hard for her. I think she felt sort of isolated from people of being divorced. DOMIENIK: So that was more of a marker of difference than speaking Spanish and being an immigrant? CUERDA: Probably, yeah. I don’t I think they were sort of seen as exotic, but I think that they were accepted. This was an affluent community sort of very white community too. But I don’t think, I don’t know, I didn’t see, there probably were but I didn’t see that there were sort of unwritten unspoken rules about who’s in and who’s out. You know. It sort of seemed, maybe I’m wrong, but based on economics, sort of if you’re of that class, your in, you know? It’s sort of upper middle class too. I realized later cuz right after I graduated from high school I moved to Spain and lived in this place where there were all of these incredibly wealthy people from Europe living. I realized like how um what I’d grown up was somewhat of an illusion. But also this huge difference between people of great wealth and sort the hoi polloi like us. And just the regular upper middle class people. DOMIENIK: Just because there was such a disparity between the wealth where you were living in Spain and in Marin? CUERDA: Oh yeah, this place I lived in Spain. My mother got a job there, in the south of Spain. She had always threatened to go back to Spain. I had dramatic fights with her. So she did. And she got a job at a resort in the south of Spain at this place called Sotogrande. And um. The people who owned, it was sort of a resort, people owned houses you know. And, there was a hotel, a little hotel. But there was a beachclub, There was a pool and polo club and tennis club and golf and lots of famous golf courses. And the people who lived there were incredibly wealthy. And um. They were really pretty different from what I was used to. They wouldn’t even talk to me. You know, I was walking around in my grateful dead t-shirt. Just happy you know. So it was really different. DOMIENIK: Were they Spanish, the people living there? CUERDA: They were from all over, but a lot of Spanish people too, yeah. Incredibly snobbish, you know old world sort of medieval kind of idea about class. Very strident ideas classwise. You know they had maids. And from, like the San Miguel brewery family. And this family, and that family. All these heads of industry, or titled people like who had done nothing their entire lives who expected to be treated you know like royalty Just based on that. So interesting. DOMIENIK: So they were okay with the franco regime? CUERDA: Probably, oh yeah. Probably. Yeah I would say most of them probably were. When I was there Franco had died already. But I was also there when the first election happened in Spain. DOMIENIK: That was in the early 80’s? CUERDA: that was-70-well I got there in 76, so, and then left in 78. So yeah, DOMIENIK: How did people talk about that? CUERDA: Well I didn’t really talk with those people cuz I didn’t socialize with them. I ended up meeting and falling in love with my husband who was Spanish who worked in the same office my mother worked in. So you know, he was totally anti-Franco. And I don’t know that it was, I don’t really know, I mean was 18 so. But I don’t really know that it was okay amongst certain people to talk about those things. I think people were still really careful. We were friends, the people who worked at this resort, like my mother, my husband, and the waiters, people in the restaurant or people at the beachclub they kind of talked freely, although I’m sure there was still some reluctance to talk about some things. They were all against Franco and really excited at the first election. And hated all the people that lived there-laughter. Pretty much. DOMIENIK: So were they involved in any type of organizing or student action around that? CUERDA: Not that I know of. I mean this was sort of an isolated place in the middle of Spain. People came from small towns. I mean if they did, I didn’t know about it. They might have but I kind of doubt it. Yeah, I wasn’t aware or anything like that. DOMIENIK: So it was more just the discussions that people were having. Did this influence your political understandings at all? CUERDA: Yeah, I’d say my husband did cuz he was very anti-Franco. Learning about everything that happened, going to the town where he had been born. Which had been like a feudal thing. Where a few people owned all the land, the people who lived there would have to come into the town square every morning and look for work. The mayordomo or the landowner would come and pick you up. It was totally based on favoritism. If you were a loudmouth you would never get work. And that town had been the site of an anarchist uprising in the 30’s. It’s learning about all that. Just learning about that. DOMIENIK: And people going to the plaza still happened in the 70’s? CUERDA: Oh no, I don’t think so. I don’t know. He was talking about his childhood, he’s a lot older than I was so that was probably in the 40’s. DOMIENIK: So that gave you a context for the work you do now? CUERDA: Yeah, probably. Yeah. Um. I think that, you know I was always probably, sort of pre-disposed to be rebellious. Personally rebellious kind of person. Learning more things about history and injustice. And all that. DOMIENIK: You like to ask questions? CUERDA: Sorry? DOMIENIK: You like to ask questions? CUERDA: Yeah, yeah I think so, yeah, even though I don’t always wait for the answers. Anyway. I’m not very quick. DOMIENIK: What was exciting about being in Spain? CUERDA: It was just great being in a foreign country. I loved living somewhere else. Just being in a new place-I fell in love, got married, had a baby. People say: god you did all of this: you moved to a new country, got married, had a baby in such a short amount of time, that must have been hard. But it didn’t seem this way. It was fine. And you know my husband was very sort of cosmopolitan. We’d go out and Have good food and traveled around in the countryside. It was exciting to just be starting my life or something. Living in a place that was different. It was just fun. [Laughs]. DOMIENIK: Was your son born in Spain? CUERDA: Uh-huh. Yep, he was. He didn’t automatically get my citizenship cuz I was 19. So there was this stupid rule-he wouldn’t get my citizenship automatically. DOMIENIK: American citizenship? CUERDA: We ended up coming back to California after 2 years. We ended up having to get him a green card. DOMIENIK: When he was 2? CUERDA: Yeah, oh yeah, mmhmm. DOMIENIK: Why do you, so a green cards aren’t necessarily just to work? CUERDA: No its residency, he probably could have gotten as visa, no but to be a resident you have to get permanent residency-I think my mother had to sponsor him. No he probably got it easily I just don’t remember it’s just is so long I don’t remember, my husband had be sponsored by my mother or something. DOMIENIK: What was it like coming back to the U.S.? CUERDA: Yeah, it was fine-I don’t know. It began a time of some economic struggle for us. Difficulties. You know. We couldn’t afford to live where I had lived before. That was okay. You know for me I was open to it, it was fine. Both started having to work. Struggled to pay the bills in a way we hadn’t in Spain. We lived in housing that was provided to the workers. So living was a little more carefree. But you know that’s fine. DOMIENIK: Did your husband find comparable work to what he had done in Spain? CUERDA: He didn’t want to do that. He had sort of been selling real estate, he had a law degree, very educated with an MBA. He wanted to find work as a carpenter. I think he eventually found an apprentice. Kind of an odd character. Wasn’t interested in living a conventional life in terms of work. So you know we struggled a bit to make ends meet. I worked too. I worked in a dental office as a receptionist and I was a scrub nurse. I worked in a market as a checkout, or as a cashier. I worked as a dishwasher for 1 night. It was a Mexican restaurant. Yeah it was really awful. DOMIENIK: What happened? CUERDA: It was just really hard work. At the end of the night you have to wash these huge pots that have been you know filled with refried beans all night and it was really hard and mop the floors and the owner is standing over you and saying: okay, lets go [snaps her fingers] and I was like: fuck this. And I didn’t even ask for my money, I just left. I’m not going back. You know I did stuff like that, which is okay. It never felt like we were going to go down or something. But we had to work. DOMIENIK: So you said that in Spain the illusion of your childhood became clear, or would you say it was more clear once you started working? CUERDA: I don’t know that I would say that there was this illusion about my childhood, is that what you’re saying? DOMIENIK: You said there was something about the illusion about the place the happiness. CUERDA: Oh. Well I saw it coming back, I think I always thought this is a weird odd place. But not understanding why. But definitely coming back from Spain, after having lived outside of the country, I saw things with fresh eyes. You know, stupid stuff. Walking down the aisles of the supermarket thinking like “why do you need a whole row of toilet paper” this is ridiculous. And used to things on a smaller scale and thinking about how the US is in a lot of ways uncivilized. Economically. Thinking more about class probably. And realizing, having grown up never having to worry about money that much. Then coming back and having to maintain a family. Living in a different part of Marin county which was for the lower income people. Yeah you know just starting seeing these things. Yeah I think I was probably seeing a lot more. And thinking about class issues in general. Which is something I don’t think we don’t do when we grow up here. People are so isolated in general. Poor people are isolated in one place and wealthy, middle class people. Just leaving the country and coming back. Just learning about fascism. Which is something that, I was always very sort of democratic and hated Nixon and all that. But going to a place where if you don’t pay attention to what is going on you could get killed. But not having any idea of the level of suffering that there is in the world. And the civil war in Spain was pretty intense and awful and all that. But that definitely changed me I think. And then you come back to a place where everyone is happy. Which is great, it’s good to be happy you know. Not, I don’t know. The thing I always say is that people would rather not to think about politics or not care about politics and people only do when they have to. Because they have no choice, there is some pain, there is something going on. I think you need to be vigilant. Or else you just get run over one day I think or someone else gets run over. Prefer not to care. Its odd that Our society as its become more comfortable has led to more apathy and more selfishness and less caring about what’s going on in the rest of the world or for things you can’t see. I think that makes sense psychologically. People just want to live their own lives and that is what everyone wants. Some people just aren’t as lucky. DOMIENIK: it’s interesting coming back from the Dominican Republic. The environmental movement has really really taken off. Sustainability, eating healthy and organic. What you’re saying about apathy, I definitely see that. But I think people also, when something directly affects them and see how it affects them, they get really into it, especially when it affects their daily health. CUERDA: Yeah, yeah, its great. Sustainability and food issues. My son is getting his phD in. oh god, I’m going to embarrass myself on film. I think it’s an urban planning degree. But food is his issue. Specializing on meat now. DOMIENIK: Meat? CUERDA: On meat. Sort of studying issues-don’t ask me more, I won’t be able to explain it. And he’s very into the idea of sustainable food, quality food and local food. And sort of challenging you now the paradigm that is set up now with industrial food production. DOMIENIK: Do you talk to him about the people who are picking the food? Migrant workers. CUERDA: My son? Probably, I talk to him. For 10 years I did the farm-worker advocacy. So I mean, yeah, I talk to him. Probably. He knows. Its funny, in things he’s studying and thinking about, its sort of, I’m doing, I’m sort of involved in the things he’s thinking about. On different levels. So it’s sort of interesting. DOMIENIK: Dyanmic duo. CUERDA: He says: I should just study what you’re doing instead. DOMIENIK: What was it like being a young mother? CUERDA: Pardon? DOMIENIK: What was it like being a young mother? CUERDA: It was great. I mean, although confusing. I don’t know I think it’s probably better to wait, you know, but I wanted to be a mother. It wasn’t a mistake. And you know it was something that I was really really happy about. I don’t think I was that prepared you know or that good of a mother all the time. To interviewer: its okay, its okay! DOMIENIK: no that was sort of a “who is?” CUERDA: right yeah, but I acknowledge I had no idea- I loved being a mother. And being a young mother was okay. I mean, um, yeah, it was good. DOMIENIK: Did you encounter a lot of cultural assumptions or stereotypes of young mothers? CUERDA: What do you mean? DOMIENIK: I don’t know, I think a lot of times with education there’s talk about teen pregnancy rates, teen pregnancy rates, like its negative for women to be having children when they are young. It’s a classed thing, I just wanted to know if you encountered those different attitudes towards being a mother. CUERDA: I wasn’t sort of in an environment, where, I was in my little family, so I wasn’t in an environment where people were talking and thinking. So if I encountered things it didn’t bother me. I didn’t have a whole lot of friends. If I encountered stuff it didn’t bother me. But I do definitely think that the reason that I wanted to have a baby partly was because I had no idea what I was going to do. I didn’t see my future. I hadn’t thought about going to college, I was an okay student, life school, but I cut half my finals because I knew I was going to graduate. I knew I was going to Spain. I was a big goof off. There was no kind of in my family: oh you have to study. Never, there was never talk with me about my future. I didn’t know what I was going to do. I was looking for something. I was looking for meaning. And I think that’s what a lot of young mothers do, what young people do when they have kids. I work in Springfield and Holyoke, and there is a ton of teen pregnancy. On a simplistic level: people are looking for meaning to create their own lives, or have control or something, maybe. So I didn’t encounter any of that. It’s been weird, being a young mother, as Sasha, my son’s, gotten older, it’s been interesting. A single mother too, I always felt on the outside of these normal families, who were you know sort of living in suburbia, had stable lives. Okay to be different but also recognizing… in my head, perceiving not having the “normal” thing. Which sometimes- DOMIENIK: That’s interesting. Was it significant at that time that you didn’t have a college degree? CUERDA: Um. [pause] I don’t. Probably not. Like I said I wasn’t really in circles-I had sort of lost contact from my friends from high school. So they were all off in college. Actually I did get together with this one woman who was just like: “you’re crazy, what are you doing, this is a mistake.” And I was just like: go away! I wasn’t in a place like Northampton, where there is sort of more of a cultural norm or something. I was in this town called Novato in California which is very suburban, just on the edge of farmland. I didn’t know people, I had one female friend there who lived there for a couple of years. I don’t know that I was bothered so much by prevailing assumptions about what I should be. I think I had no idea. I think part of the sort of the difficulty of being a young mother and the anxiety I had personally was: what am I going to do and I going to stay inside for the next 15 years, is this it, what am I going to do and feeling a little trapped about my future. How the hell am I going to get out of the house once in a while. Trying to imagine what I was going to do and how I was going to do it, and having no idea. DOMIENIK: Getting out of the house, so were you working at that time? CUERDA: Yeah I was working, but how was I going to find what I loved? So yeah I was working. I worked in a dental office, and a supermarket. You know, that was good. But yeah, so it wasn’t the kind of thing of: if I had a college degree I could get different kinds of jobs. People I lived with, it wasn’t- DOMIENIK: It wasn’t the kind of thing that if I get this college degree, I could get different kinds of jobs, your idea of, finding what you loved to do, wasn’t tied to getting a college degree? CUERDA: Cuz that would have opened doors? CUERDA: In terms of did I think of getting a college degree in order to- I don’t remember thinking that. We came out to Massachussetts in 1981, I moved to Spain in ‘76, 5 years later. That’s not that much time. And yeah by then I was thinking I want to go to college and I think Joaquin, my husband was encouraging me to do that too. I remember thinking: I can’t do this, I’ll fail. I thought that every single time I tried something new. And I do things and I’m always able to do it. DOMIENIK: Why did you come to Massachussetts? CUERDA: We were sort of bored I guess, or thinking this is boring where we are probably. Joaquin’s children from his earlier marriage and they lived with us and his daughter was friends with a family in Novato and they owned an inn in the Berkshires so they were looking for caretakers and we said: we’ll do it. We drove out here with our car, got rid of most of our stuff and just lived in that inn for a couple of years. Which was, you know an adventure. Just looking for a change of pace. It was good. DOMIENIK: This is hard for me-I’m a really vocal person and I wanna: mmhmm, yeah, mmhmm. But I can’t- CUERDA: [laughs] That’s too bad. DOMIENIK: So you said on the phone that you didn’t consider yourself a feminist. CUERDA: Oh well I don’t know if I’d say that. But I would say that feminism hasn’t been the sort of driving force of my life, but I’d consider myself a feminist. It’s sort of a very interesting topic to me. I grew up in a house with two women who worked and supported the family. And they were so anti-feminism. Which is so ironic you know. Whereas many of my mothers friends who were more affluent and didn’t work they were really into feminism. So that always puzzled me. I don’t know. Puzzled me that they would be so threatened by it. So kind of angry about it. They just like men and totally buy into patriarcy basically. But definitely a feminist and feel like things are not equal. Things are a lot better, but, I don’t know if you have more questions about that. DOMIENIK: Why did your mother and grandmother felt threatened? CUERDA: They probably just didn’t want to alienate men. They are so centered on pleasing men. And they come from a culture that is like that. And I see that with the man I’m with now. Not through him necessarily but watching Spanish language television, its still all about pleasing men. Sexy women in bathing suits, DOMIENIK: No hair, CUERDA: Its disgusting, so appalling. But its funny, now its sort of got this: women are free to do this spin. So its okay, those women are choosing to do that. That culture, Latin American or even Spanish culture. My mother’s cousin in Spain, who I had been sort of close with, said to me once, and she’s my mom’s age, so close to 80, said: I can never understand why a woman would want to be in politics. When the socialist government came to power in Spain, there were female ministers of something, minister of state thing. She was like: I’d never understand why they would want to do that. I didn’t want to explain it to her. It’s amazing you know. Part of it is cuz that they wanted to please men but part of it was that they wanted to please men, part of it was that were independent too. They didn’t need a sort of validation that came from feminism maybe. Because they were supporting their family. They were doing that. They paid a certain price for doing that, it was hard, and these other women who haven’t had to do that were complaining so much and not sort of recognizing the price you pay too, for having that burden on you of being in the work world. DOMIENIK: So these women were these Betty Friedanish women were kind of exoticizing working? And the ability to be independent in that way? CUERDA: I don’t know. I can’t say what they were thinking. I’m thinking of one friend of my mother’s Suzanne, there’s two. a couple of them had never worked. DOMIENIK: Just one moment. -stopped to change battery DOMIENIK: So we were talking about patriarcy, feminism and how your mother and grandmother interacted with the feminists in your area. CUERDA: I was going to say something really interesting and I forgot. DOMIENIK: It will probably come to you. CUERDA: Just that whole sort of conflict between women who were actually out there working and those who weren’t-oh, I know! Just that the women who weren’t working, a couple of friends who never worked in their entire lives, they just never had to. I think they admire her a lot for doing that. But just this really interesting dichotomy between, staying home. They were doing other things too. They weren’t just sitting around or whatever. They were taking classes and doing art and getting involved in social movements. You know they were trying to shrug off the assumptions about women who stayed home, too. So they had more probably to grapple with more what my mom and grandmother who were out there working anyway. My mom and my grandmother who were just out there anyway and probably weren’t pre-disposed to rebel against inequality in the work place. Very fearful I think. Rebellious and stubborn and strong, but also fearful that they depended on their job so much, there was just no one else to depend on. Less likely to start alienating people or something. Especially men [whispered]. DOMIENIK: Seems very based on class status. CUERDA: Yeah! Yeah, yeah. I think so. But culture too. I think that sort of, that whole thing I was talking about with people my parent’s age. Hitting 1968 and being 40 and Thinking like: I had to walk around with poodle skirts and now I can walk around naked. [DOMIENIK laughs] That whole liberation thing. I don’t think that ever affected my mother and grandmother at all they didn’t see themselves as having shackles that had to come off. Although my mom was pretty liberal in lots of ways with me. That little girls should be a certain way. DOMIENIK: Have you had a lot of experience with machismo? You were saying you watched all these Spanish language television programs and living in Spain and the work you do. CUERDA: Oh sure, I mean yeah, how can you avoid it right? It’s everywhere. I remember when I first lived in Spain. I was lonely, I was happy and all that, but I had no friends. I remember I was walking on the beach and some guy came up and talked to me and we talked for a while, and it was great and I was like, okay, bye. And a few days later or a week later I was walking on the beach again with my husband and I saw that same man and I said: Hi, and he totally ignored me. Because I was with a man. And I was like what is that about. I told that story to my boyfriend now and he was like: That’s what I woulda done. DOMIENIK: Because he was only interested in being with you. CUERDA: Yeah exactly. It’s everywhere. It’s the work world. Its everywhere DOMIENIK: So you talk about your mother and your grandmother, or stuck in that place. I don’t want to say got out of it exactly, but how are you different from that? CUERDA: Huh, yeah. Well I always felt rebellious and very free-spirited. But I’ve internalized it a lot. Internal struggle about sort of being bad all the time. Feeling like I’ve been a bad girl. Doing whatever I want to do basically. It’s been a process for me to evolve to a place where I can see myself as okay where I can see my impulses or drives to be a free person, is good. I definitely have these voices in my head that my mother works to continue cultivating- It’s hard you know. But its one of the nice things about getting older. Just accepting who you are, or knowing who you are. I think I was also able to do that because I spent a lot of time alone in the last 10 years maybe. I mean not alone, all the time, not in my work, at home. Personally, I’d been in relationships but not long term or not here, cuz I had a boyfriend who lived in another country for a while. But all that time alone, it felt like my world was more controlled. So being in a relationship now, it’s not always that easy. DOMIENIK: So it’s about the impulse thinking about yourself and your interactions and playing that against what you learned at home? CUERDA: I think I’m also not a conservative person in lots of ways. Politically obviously not, but in my way of being in the world. Sort of a loud mouth. Exuberant. It’s funny. When I go, being in Spain as an older person, an older woman I see how I’m like that too. I have this personality that’s very argumentative and loud. That likes to have fun that way. And not reserved, quiet person. That’s just my nature. I’m more like my father personality wise. He’s sort of like that too, its crazy. DOMIENIK: So are you in contact with him? CUERDA: He’s dead. He died in 2001. But I had been. I hadn’t been in contact with him very much when I was younger. He and my mother had this really awful, awful divorce and he was married 6 times. So I’d see him and all that, but I was always on my mother’s side, like she was the wronged party. It was when I grew up, when I was 18, I said its time I see who this person is. An amazing person, and important person to me later on in life though I hadn’t been in touch with him when I was younger. DOMIENIK: Was he in Spain? CUERDA: In Spain? No, no no. married 5 times. In Synanon, which he called the kooky cult. Which started as a drug rehab place. Ended up just going nuts, trying to become a religion and buying all these guns. If my half-sister heard me characterizing it this way she’d be mad. [laughs]. But this consciousness raising community as well. A place of a lot of creativity. Being honest about who you are, what you come from, your problems. An AA thing, and facing up, whatever, your problems. Yeah, yeah, I guess so. My father was like that too, although I think he sort of felt, I don’t know if he just took it from that, He’d been a real sort of drunk, in his 20’s a functional drunk, but drinker, a carouser, a womanizer. And when he found Synanon, it blew his mind, and I think either he felt this way before, he felt shame was a terrible thing. We’re human, it’s okay. We need to talk about our things and not keep secrets, and you know its okay to fail. All those things were helpful to me. I can’t always practice it, but I think. Yeah. DOMIENIK: That’s a good philosophy. CUERDA: Yeah. DOMIENIK: So do you have any particular people or situations that shifted your thinking of thinking of patriarchy and men and being a woman? CUERDA: I think My experience working at legal services has been incredible. You know I’ve met just all these amazing women. All very strong and very feminist. Just capable people. My friend, Janis is really rebellious and angry and funny. She’s sort of the first person I’ve ever met who, she’s a lot like me. She’s loud and vocal and upfront. Very funny in what she believes is important. She’s a great influence on me, and in terms of being a feminist and seeing your place in the world. I think of her. I don’t know. DOMIENIK: How did you come to work in legal services? CUERDA: Yeah, Came to Smith, right, graduated in 1990, and I’d been on welfare while I was been here. And Christ, I’d had no idea. I started looking for jobs in the paper. My mother had worked as a legal secretary and my father was a lawyer, I don’t know how this led me to think I should work in the legal world, but I think I looked for jobs in law firms, and some of them were just really ritzy. But one of the jobs was a paralegal at legal services but one of the jobs I saw was in legal services I went to apply for it and it blew me away. I thought: this is perfect. DOMIENIK: What about that was so perfect? CUERDA: Sort of helping people, who were poor or really screwed up. I shouldn’t say it that way. It was a job as a disability benefits paralegal. So I’d be representing people who were trying to qualify for SSI disability benefits. So people who were disabled, low income trying to qualify for this benefit. CUERDA: Yeah you know everything springs from it that’s as far as I can say-just as sort of a metaphor, the validation that people are different. Just- DOMIENIK: And then manipulating that unconscious. Other people, to stay in power. CUERDA: hm. Right. DOMIENIK: What we think of as normal. CUERDA: Right. Its really interesting the thing I loved, I studied Latin American literature when I was here, there’s this sort of idea you know, Marina Kaplan had this idea, maybe it was some analysis of stories I read, came from her, came from things I read, can’t remember. This idea of this Freudian or Oedipal triangle or something. So for the Latin American sort of educated person, who is typically bound to be someone of the left who sort of rejects the dominant culture which has been sort of authoritarian or corrupt, that intellectual person sort of knowing they are part of a white paradigm that was responsible for the genocide of the native people so just that weird relationship. But also this thing where you reject conventional reality because it’s all a lie. My boyfriend now he’s Mexican. In Mexico, nothing that is given as an official version is ever taken seriously. Never. [emphasis] That is just an incredible way to live. You know, where you don’t, where all official reality is rejected. So what’s left? This hidden thing where people are living and moving. That’s not- people’s real views are kept hidden, or maybe they’re not because people are talking about them all the time. So they are talked about all the time. Just this huge Difference between official culture and what people are perceiving that- DOMIENIK: What is dominant culture? CUERDA: Well, what we’re told by powerful people what we’re told to perpetuate their own power. DOMIENIK: Yeah that’s interesting- So, SSI benefits? CUERDA: So yeah, where were we? The job just appealed to me. I think probably before I got that job, I’d been involved in a lot of these sort of solidarity movements with El Salvador and Nicaragua and doing that stuff. After I split up with my husband I lived with a group of people in Williamstown, one was a professor at Williams, one was a former student at Williams, and they were friends and we all moved in together. They were all sort of interested in labor issues. The thing that is so weird, I had always sort of focused my liberal thought on other countries- or things our country was doing to other countries like El Salvador and Nicaragua. And I had not thought that much about what was happening here. I think that I came to feel like after my work in these solidarity movements, which wasn’t that extensive, but-in some ways it was easier to sort of focus your political work or outrage or whatever on things that were happening in other countries cuz it didn’t force you to challenge your assumptions or easier to romanticize: these people are our heroes over here, they’re so good. The thing that really brought it home for me was that in Pittsfield I had been involved with this group that set up a sister city relationship with a town in Nicaragua so we brought a delegation of people from Nicaragua to speak. In that time I think the Sandinistas had lost the election possibly. These were Sandinista people, but they were no longer in the government I think, anyway a lot of them had been Sandinistas probably. and what they really wanted to do was go to the mall and buy electronic equipment and that’s what they wanted to do they wanted to bring it home. They wanted to bring that stuff home. And I remember the white people, the gringos thinking: this is outrageous, this is corruption! I remember thinking: like, I have a coffee grinder, I have a vcr, I have a tv I have a cuisinart, why can’t they? And its sort of like they hope these people will be our ideal humans, that they will show us the way. But they just wanted to be like us, or not like us. But you know, and I thought that was so disgusting that they would judge them on this standard they don’t even use to judge themselves. So I started to think, god these people, idealizing who these people are, and what’s happening down there. And what is more interesting to me are not these simple stories of good and evil but what’s really happening. And what’s working and what isn’t working. People are annoyed by me because I say it too much but when I go to trainings, when I go to conferences, or do things where I’m really thinking about my work, I want to learn about what didn’t work, not these fantastic experiences. I want to learn about the stumbling blocks along the way. When did you totally fail and what did you learn from that? I think you learn so much more about the failures. People want to present it like this heroic struggle and nothing is ever like that. And that’s not informative to me. I felt like I really started wanting to learn more about what has happening here. I felt, especially after I started working at legal services-that poverty here in the U.S. is something that so many progressives here don’t want to look at. Causes them to challenge their own assumptions. I more and more felt like I wanted to be doing something here that wasn’t just a feel-good for me. It is a feel good sort of, it feels good to do it, that wasn’t sort of about living an illusion. Well, its your time to ask a question, I’ll stop talking. DOMIENIK: that was really good. It reminds me of what you said earlier about some of your mother’s friends idealizing the independence of your mother: and not having that. Sort of same, like we’re going to bring people from Nicaragua, who are really living the struggle you know and we love the struggle but they don’t really like how it looks or something… CUERDA: Uh-huh and its so interesting because, I imagine or I guess in the way they were looking at those people they were thinking: struggle is ennobling, that struggle is noble, and that-whatever-these people were sort of, not better than us, but you know had been through something because of this struggle that made them better or something. I feel-I think our culture has a sort of feeling that way about struggle, that it’s good for you that it makes you into a better person, but man when you see people who are struggling and suffering. You know it doesn’t, it like ruins their lives, you know and it fucks them up forever and it breaks all their relationships, or their ability to have relationships. You know. It’s not good. It breaks people. it-no. And so it’s so dangerous and stupid to be romanticizing people who have it hard. You know. It’s just, not true, that they are somehow, I don’t know, that their suffering. it’s, I mean, a Catholic thing maybe, you know, maybe that’s what it is you know, or some sort of a religious thing, if you suffer, you’ll go to heaven, or something, I just think that’s bullshit. DOMIENIK: mmhm. And its this American pull yourself up by your bootstraps kind of thing. CUERDA: right, well, that’s like a total myth right. You see it working with farmworkers. These are people, So much of my work before was with people who were disabled. In our office, and now I represent people who are trying to prove that they are qualifed for welfare benefits. These are people who are not working and there’s all this shit thrown at them, that they aren’t worthy, that their scum that they’re parasites, you know, blah blah blah. Then when you look at people who are working, like farmworkers, they are working really, really hard, and they get paid nothing and their bodies are broken by the time they’re 40. And then they have nothing and then they get thrown away they have nothing, here’s your ideal right, here’s your hero-or something- who is working really really hard and isn’t going to get anywhere. They are going to die poor. So I don’t buy that for a minute anymore…nope. If you work hard enough you get somewhere. You just have to be really lucky. Or have someone have helped you. DOMIENIK: You were, solidarity work is such a catchphrase. Working in solidarity. What does it mean to you. What is genuine being in solidarity with someone. The solidarity movements work with Nicaragua was all about romanticizing…and CUERDA: well, Yes and no, it was also about you know, trying to send a message to our government about supporting human values. But its kind of an interesting question because it brings up the issues of charity v. organizing or something. For me solidarity is …for me what a lot of what I’m doing now is solidarity work with the immigrant community. Trying to create consciousness amongst other people of what is happening to them. Of how inhuman it is, and trying to put a human face on this group of people that the government would like to characterize in totally unfair way, in a not true way. Trying to humanize sort of what had become a symbol of criminality or laziness or people taking our jobs. I think that’s important to do. We’ve been doing quite a bit. We started this medical clinic. At Brightwood Health Center. With Marty Nathan who I mentioned to you. And you know, raising a lot of money in the community for food to give away to people, and for medical care. And all of that is really, really important. But there’s these really interesting things I think about in terms of yeah, we’re bringing services and aid to a group of people who really, really need help. But sort of, are their other ways to think about working with the community that involves more than just giving them something. DOMIENIK: And what have you concluded, what are your thoughts? CUERDA: Well I feel like with this group of people, trust is, it’s hard to gain people’s trust. I think that it’s okay just to give things to people that they need. Like food and that’s okay. But I think, its, I have complicated feelings about it, if I think of them as sort of the subject of some sort of project I want to do then I’m using them. In human services, there is this dichotomy of working with your clients as human beings and having your interaction with them be something that is respectful and humanizing and hopefully they learn something and don’t feel so isolated and marginalized by their experience, by that personal interaction. But at the same time, if litigation is a tool to make change for people in ways that help them survive economically they are our pawns in that struggle to make change and so in some ways we’re using them. You know. And in some ways, but you know. DOMIENIK: For the greater good… CUERDA: Yeah, yeah. But I feel the same sort of way when I’m talking and thinking of the immigrant community because I’m thinking of them as sort of an object of, to organize, to do work with them that helps them improve their own situation. In a way that’s sort of, because I’m an outsider. DOMIENIK: what is the role of outsiders? Not in your context. What do I mean. In solidarity work, what is the role of North Americans who have either learned Spanish here, or don’t know Spanish, and working with Spanish speaking populations. CUERDA: In the U.S.? Working with them? Yeah, I don’t know. It could be a whole lot of things. What I think of when you ask what the role of outsiders is, I think witness is one thing. Be able to bring someone else. I believe strongly, its not something I’ve gotten into a lot, but that anything someone does with a different community who is sort of marginalized or needs help, or something like that, it needs to be, you know, hopefully, and it should be, something that comes from the group, not just from you, because then you’re just reproducing the dominant culture. White people make all the decisions. Feel like you know the thing that I always think about as my fantasy, that I’d love to do, simple little silly thing, it’s not a huge fantasy, is start a women’s group. You know, with these women from Mexico and Guatemala who probably who have never been exposed to, you know, for me, just sort of dealing with sexism in that community, its all very interesting to me, there are women who are 15, not getting married, cuz people don’t do that that often, and going and hooking up with someone to start a family. 14. Now even. Dominant images of that culture are so sexist at least that I see on television here. I mean. Yeah. It must be so interesting for them to come here, and they are working, well I do see people who are very sharing in their roles in earning money for their households and caring for the kids. I do see that too. But it would be interesting to think about that too. And talk to these women. DOMIENIK: How would you… CUERDA: Yeah I don’t know. It’s not something I know how to do. You have to talk to people, and find time. So-I don’t know, I don’t feel particularly that I know the expertise, so that’s why I haven’t done it. Because I don’t sort of, know how to facilitate group things and whatever. So I don’t know if I’ll ever do it. It’s just a fantasy, god it would be so fun sitting around and talking about stuff in a safe way that really sort of explores the common things women are dealing with. And maybe I couldn’t, maybe I’m too different. I don’t know. DOMIENIK: Do you feel like you’re having those kinds of conversations in a safe way already? CUERDA: With the women? Not really. I do feel like people trust me quite a bit. But not really. Its weird, it’s very weird to me that this culture, or what I’m seeing of it, in many way mirrors the culture of my mother and my grandmother-I’ve learned a lot about them-or my mother through interactions with this culture. Because my mother is very secretive. She doesn’t think it’s appropriate to share personal things publicly, and she’s not an analytical person in the way she thinks about her life or what is happening. She hasn’t been that way--too loud, too sexual, or something, inappropriately, flirty. I’ve never thought that’s the way I am. I’m just an outie. I just want to talk to people. And doesn’t like- the idea, of having a very closed façade. And that is culturally what I see in the immigrant community too. Even with people I know pretty well, my boyfriend’s family, generalizing, but there’s a graciousness; there’s a formality, very hospitable but there’s a real barrier and sort of lack of kind of reality in there somewhere. So when Luis sees me with me and my friends, we’re all like “blaaahh,” being- saying whatever we want to each other, making fun of each other, being very open with each other saying whatever comes into our heads and being very personal, and he’s like: wow, that’s amazing, that you have such- confianza, which doesn’t translate to confidence, but trust right, amazing that you have so much trust. And I have a feeling that even among families that it’s not like that. In Luis’ household, amazing that its, Luis’s niece is living there, and she’s pregnant, and she didn’t even- I mean-she’s a little overweight, but she didn’t tell people she was having a baby till a month before, and I thought: how can you do that? How can you be pregnant and not tell people? Your family? [Laughter] So that is very similar. DOMIENIK: Mmhmm. It runs really deep. CUERDA: So, deep, you mean hidden? Did you, you felt…I shouldn’t be asking you questions. DOMIENIK: We can talk later. [Laughter] CUERDA: Anyway. DOMIENIK: Um-So you, you said that you like to talk about stumbling blocks or times when you failed. Do you have any examples of times you tried to um, let the uh, like, the impetus of the movement come from women or people themselves that you were working with? Does that make sense, that question? CUERDA: No. Try again… DOMIENIK: Two things that you said. You said that you believe: Organizing I don’t know what word you used, should come from people themselves and not from the dominant powers. So how have you experienced that? CUERDA: oh [laughs] oh god. yeah I don’t know. I can’t say. I can’t think I can’t say off hand that it’s sort of gotten there. I think that in the work I do, I do this legal work which I one thing. Where I have all the expertise and they think I have the power to fix problems and sometimes I do and sometimes I don’t. But then this other work I do, that’s sort of more organizing its more with the community, it’s different and it’s in that setting that has more of a movement with a goal, and the other place too but if it’s not about charity the goal is that the group starts to do the work and identify the goals and work towards the goals, have it be sort of something that affects peoples lives as a process, you know. I can’t say that it’s been successful over here. It’s a process. It’s a slow process. It’s been a couple years, two years since it started and it’s been really, really really slow. So. I can’t think of sort of specific things where you know I’ve seen something happen, I mean not that things aren’t happening that I don’t see things that are happening in that community on their own which I have nothing to do with. I mean I’m sure women getting together and talking and figuring out ways, there’s a lot of entrepreneurialism going on where people are cooking food and selling it and people are sharing child care and people are doing all sorts of things they need to do to survive. Doing it with other women or not. I’m sure there’s a lot going on and its just invisible to me. DOMIENIK: So you’re an advocate for the north end as part of the legal services job. CUERDA: mhm, yeah, yeah DOMIENIK: Tell me a little bit about that. CUERDA: Yeah so half the time I do benefits work. Which is welfare cases, mass health cases and stuff like that. The other half I work with this neighborhood, so I have to hook up with organizations in the neighborhood and say: hey, what can I do for you, send people to me, call me, its okay! Build a trusted relationship which works sometimes and doesn’t work other times- And then you know, cases being referred to you, all sorts. From different organizations that I know nothing about, so I learn about them, trying to find them representation or someone who does do that kind of work, one of the issues is family law problems the range of things come my way. So its fun, you’re not doing just one thing all the time you’re having a more whole process. That’s been great. I think I’ve been doing it since 2005. So 3 years. I think I’ve done a really good job. I get a ton of referrals. I’ve done all this sort of organizing work with pioneer valley project, and immigrants see me a lot. I get a ton of calls from immigrants. We’re trying to move our work towards areas that’s more about organizing, to figure out solutions to problems like crime, which is a huge problem for immigrants. Immigrants are a big target of crime. DOMIENIK: From people outside of the community? CUERDA: Mostly yeah. Most don’t have bank accounts walk around with cash in their pockets and they get robbed all the time. You know. People are waiting for them, to jump them and say “give us your cash”. On a Friday afternoon after payday are robbed really a lot. DOMIENIK: That’s so interesting. In the context of all of this fear of immigration that happens in the media, that we need to be afraid of immigrants because they are taking stuff from us, stealing our resources. CUERDA: Totally. And isn’t that like totally backwards. And not just for that reason of being robbed, but because they are doing all the shit jobs that no one else wants to do. And suffering a lot because they are so scape-goated and scared all the time. DOMIENIK: Whats the other organization you work for, the one that you started two years ago, or that started two years ago? CUERDA: Pioneer Valley Project. I don’t really work for them, I work with them. They are really cool. I forget, but they are based on this model of organizing. Which I think is sort of like what Obama did. Its faith based. So what they do is they organize various churches. And also with labor unions. they get their members from there. Then they go into those communities to look for projects. They are a lot about listening. Doing really slow deep organizing. Communities themselves taking the lead. With the organizer just being the support person, not the driving force, in sort of: what the goals are, how to get there. So yeah, I started working with them because they had asked me, a couple of guys, some members of this church, came with Fred Rose, this organizer came to my office to talk they asked me to come to at this community forum, meeting thing where they were going to present people as resources to immigrants on different issues. I don’t know if I went to talk on, Immigration rights, know your rights, how to be safe, that kind of stuff. And I went to that thing and then they invited me to come to a meeting. Started doing all this stuff. First organized around food. Trying to do listening projects to hear what their priorities were. In terms of things we could work on together. We sort of veered off a little bit. That didn’t go anywhere in some ways. So we just started working on this food project and getting food to people in winter. DOMIENIK: So its 11:50. CUERDA: uh-huh. DOMIENIK: um. Do you have any things to say that I haven’t talked about? CUERDA: Is this all of it? DOMIENIK: Could we do another week? Next Monday would be great. CUERDA: Sure, yeah. Yeah. “End of Interview no. 1.” “Interview no. 2 with Maria Cuerda, Wednesday, November 19, 2008” DOMIENIK: Are you still working on the food project? CUERDA: Uh-huh, yeah. Starting to get that going for this winter. And trying to think about whether to start a bigger food project.. Get a grant and trying to institutionalize it, find a site. Maybe do a co-op or food buying club. Lots of chaos at work with all the funding cuts. Ups and downs on that front. DOMIENIK: You mentioned last time that there are women are doing entrepreneurial projects, around food, and stuff, would that be, do you work with them for the food project? CUERDA: yeah, immigrant women, tend to not all, but some of them, cook and sell their meals to people. And actually, I guess this is another thing that has happened since we talked. Fred Rose at the Pioneer Valley Project, who I work with on this organizing stuff in the North End, he came to me and said we’re having this awards dinner, we have a yearly awards dinner for 200 people, do you think you could get a group of women to cook for it. I said, yeah! I called some women and we’re hopefully gonna get some advice on how to cater for 200 people. We’re going to get some people together and we’re going to come up with a menu and they are going to pay us and that will be really fun embarking on a little enterprise. To see how that works. So I’m really excited about that. DOMIENIK: Yeah that sounds really exciting. CUERDA: And I love to cook too and that will be really fun to do a big project like that and see how it works, a cooperative effort. DOMIENIK: And who knows where that will lead? CUERDA: Yeah, maybe some business for people. And we are going to use the kitchen of the church, the meal is going to be there. DOMIENIK: Could you tell me a little bit more about the Pioneer Valley project? CUERDA: Yeah, its an organizing project in the valley. There are things like this happening all over the country. Where it’s faith-based organizing. So there members are churches, community agencies and labor unions. They are members. Through those groups they work on various projects that those groups are interested in working on. They also pick yearly issues like: youth issues, or crime issues, or education issues. They’ve done just really, really grassroots, semi- small projects but that are really cool they did this project where they organized a project in some of those schools in Springfield to help parents get more involved in helping their kids with homework, getting parents involved in the homework process for kids. They’ve developed some sustainable low income housing, I think they either built or took some houses and re-did them and then sold them to low-income people. And uh, they’ve done a lot of other stuff. The way I’ve been working with them is just we started this little project with immigrants in the North End. Through a church with people in the North End were interested in working on these issues. It started really slowly, we had a community, where we offered the immigrant community information about their rights and programs they were eligible for and that turned into these weekly meeting listening exercise or project, where we asked immigrants and immigrant leaders: what are the problems in the community, what would you like to work on. Out of that came A couple of issues: Childcare needs, work really long hours, they don’t have transportation, the childcare arrangements they were using were very informal, unreliable, maybe the quality wasn’t good. Paying $50-60 a week per kid, which isn’t bad, compared to what other people pay but for them it’s a huge expense. They were having trouble qualifying for subsidized childcare, all these ID issues because though they aren’t citizens, their kids are. We worked on that. That was kind of painful and complicated. And went no where and was a disappointment to the immigrant community, Where’s the childcare you promised us? But that sort of went nowhere. But then we started the food project through that. Buying food at the co-op and giving out free food once a month. We’re also working on crime issues. Immigrants are the target for other people in the community because they carry a lot of cash they don’t have bank accounts. They’re afraid of going to the police, and even if they do they get threatened. We’re starting to work on a neighborhood based project. Different levels. Working on helping people be safer individually. One is to tell them where they can go to report stuff, create some bridges between police and police and police-community organizations, so they feel like they can trust the police. Immigrants are terrified of the police, right. And try to create some bridges there. And educate the police. Cuz they tend to think immigrants are this big problem because they are driving around without licenses. They are drinking and driving and it creates a lot of paperwork for them. And set up a neighborhood watch thing with other people who live in the neighborhoods who are concerned with that crime too and want to be part of an effort of have one or two people be the go-to people so that when the crime happens, they can be the liason with police. Immigrants call the 911 number and there are no Spanish translators. It’s a mess. And crime is a huge issue in Springfield. Immigrants are robbed like all the time. They go to these places to cash their checks, or to send money home and people are there to rob them. DOMIENIK: Who robs them? CUERDA: Not really clear in general, Puerto Rican people. I think. Could be sort of a hate crimes aspect goin on here too where people are just targeted based on where they’re from. DOMIENIK: Do you see yourself as an activist or an organizer in all of this, or is there a difference? CUERDA: I think there is a huge difference. I mean I, I think of myself as sort of learning to organize. For me the difference is activists sort of have rallies and have signs. And organizers try to work with the community, develop capacity in the community, take the lead from the community about what they want to do and act as someone who can facilitate, grow an effort, without taking the lead and disempowering people by being the leader themselves. I don’t think I’m-I don’t work as an organizer, that’s not my job. My job is legal work to represent people in legal matters, but then I have these other projects I work on. I think that I’m learning about organizing people to. I wouldn’t say I’m an organizer, I’d say I’m part of organizing efforts, to be a resource. I struggle a lot with learning. Being someone who knows a lot, has a lot of capacity based on my experience doing other projects and not wanting through my enthusiasm, or wanting to help, to take things over and have a counter-productive role. And doing things, because it falls on the white person all the time who takes the lead, but its weird because, its hard because the immigrant community has, have very little education, they are in a foreign country, undocumented, very afraid to interact, really need mediators a lot, they are very shy, they don’t trust people, and so I think its something that really has to happen in slow stages, and trust the people who are working with them, so that they feel open enough so that they can say what they think, they can contradict us, give us information even if its not what they think we want, and they tend to think that things can be solved easier than they can. And also, I think that, I don’t know, but I have a hunch, that the structures of their culture, their society back home are very authoritarian in lots of ways, and the way politics unfolds in Chiapas for example and they have these political bosses who do the bidding of these political people who are just totally corrupt, people have tended to depend on a leader, to sort of give them your vote or something else in return for favors, or access to people who have power who are then going to deliver something to you. I think there are examples of cooperative enterprises and other kinds of things that are developing, more democratic, more based on the cooperative model. Most of the people who are working don’t have that experience. They look to us a lot so it’s slow to build up all those things that are necessary for an effort that really integrates them into the process. But I think also I do do activism, go around and talk about what’s going on in the community to educate people, there is a role for engaging with whatever, mainstream culture, with what is happening in this other place. Maybe part of being an organizer too. But I think in the past I did more sort of activism work and I started to realize there are limits to that. It’s deeper work to try and be involved in the community. And not try and take over the process. DOMIENIK: Do you have any specific story in how you’ve been successful in that, in when that trust has been built and you can see people are becoming leaders? CUERDA: Well, yes and no. One of the people who is involved, he’s different from everyone because he was an organizer at home. And so I don’t know if this is a good example, He’s a leader so maybe its not a perfect example. But he was the one who in the beginning that said: people are hungry. They need food. I think there’s maybe something in motion now, this food thing. This catering job. Where I called women I know, “hey do you wanna do this? Do you have people you know? It would be great to have a group of people who know each other, so that there is trust in the group and people can be really honest about what they think.” I think it could work well. The first woman I called, Alejandra, is Luis’s sister in law, and then I’m going to call his sister too so its already women I know, so its crossing some boundaries. We all work together to unload the food, to make the packages. We did a diaper give away in the summer for the women because we couldn’t do the childcare, so we thought we had to do something materially. And it’s always a group effort to make the packages, but its not like, driven by them. So yes and no. Mostly no. DOMIENIK: Tell me about romance in your life, in a variety of ways. CUERDA: Oh god, Oprah: tell me about romance, Nicole Kidman. [Laughter] DOMIENIK: You mentioned before about your mom that she would always say that you were inappropriate that you were too flirtatious or something. So tell me a little bit about that. CUERDA: What? My love life? DOMIENIK: Every intimate detail. No, the separations of it, how it influences your work, how it defines your feminism. CUERDA: Huh, yeah okay. In my 20’s I was just sort of a mess, had a lot of stupid, really bad relationships. So my mid-30-s to 40s I was just like: no men. I’m happy alone, this is great. I just want to focus on raising my son and bring some order to my life. And figure out what I was doing in terms of my relationships. In terms of my idea of sort of what I need to live and work. I always felt like I didn’t need to be in a relationship to be happy, in some ways it was a source of confusion for me. What I wanted. Mistakes I’d made. Sometimes too much trouble to be worth it –I can see you nodding. My goal for myself just in general is not to become stagnant and to become a better person and to work through my issues. And challenge myself to not get stuck. And I’d often thought: oh I’m so happy by myself, but am I just going to get stuck in a rut, but am I avoiding the things that are more challenging. I sort of ideally thought: oh wouldn’t it be nice to have a soul-mate, a buddy, a partner. That is my idea of a good relationship where we have a vision for the world together and we work on that together and- I’d never been closed off to relationships, I like men, I have a good time with men. With Luis it’s been really, really challenging. We work together a lot. He comes from a culture that is really, really restrictive. He comes from my mother’s culture. He says I’m flirtatious too. And I don’t think I am. I think I’m exuberant. I like people. I like talking to people, it’s not a sex thing. I guess I’m just-so yeah. Its great, it’s amazing to me, being with Luis, and that we work together all the time on these different projects, its incredibly helpful to my work because he is from that community. It’s a bit dicey with my job, because all though he’s never been a client, it’s a little weird to be involved with someone who is part of this project I’m doing at work. My friends know but I keep it from the management of where I work, it’s sort of a little secret. Its great working with him because he has insights. We struggle a lot and talk about how he’s a leader and how that can affect other people coming in and being leaders. He’s a good guy. He wasn’t corrupt, he’s not corrupt. I see through him, this is about work, but I see through him, how sort of the way things are done, back there, which is a lot based on patronage or knowing someone who will do a good deed for you in return, or access to power through someone who is, well anyway, so we talk about that a lot, its really fun, its wonderful its amazing to have the person I love who I’m committed that I’m sharing my life with to work with on all these incredible projects. He’s really sexist [laughs, and holds her head] His cultural cues are based on life in Chiapas, where most women aren’t doing the kind of thing I’m doing which is buzzing around the community and talking. DOMIENIK: Hold that thought. DOMIENIK: Okay. You were buzzing around the community. CUERDA: Yeah so, that’s a real challenge, it makes him insecure you know that I’m running around so much, that I am a certain way. He doesn’t get it. But, at the same time, I feel like we’re real partners. I think that’s part of the attraction for him too, the way we work together. We’re friends. We’re partners. Trying to figure out these new things. It’s fun. It’s fun. But it’s really challenging sometimes. So I don’t know if that answers your question, but it’s great in general to have this relationship that’s really fulfilling in lots of ways: we have really good chemistry, we have the hots for each other, we have a good time together, at the same time its really, really challenging, its good for me trying to become a better person after living like a cat lady for a while, so that’s fun. DOMIENIK: Is it a type of protection your mother always telling you to not be a certain way, to not be flirtatious? CUERDA: Probably, probably, I think so, yeah. A lot of what she said to me, those attitudes came out of fear, I think partly too, she grew up in the same culture sort of that Luis did, totally different class wise, but you know, women just didn’t assert themselves, or something. I’m very aggressive and I’m very proactive I’m a mover, I like to do things, I challenge people, and I sort of say what’s on my mind, which makes it hard for me sometimes, people don’t want that, but anyway. I think that that style is just of her generation is just not quite appropriate or something or I don’t know. So I think it’s a little bit of both, you know. DOMIENIK: how do you think you can challenge that fear? CUERDA: With her? DOMIENIK: Or in general CUERDA: Fear of? DOMIENIK: Fear of things she doesn’t know. The way you were behaving. Maybe it’s not a good question. CUERDA: How can I challenge her to sort of accept- DOMIENIK: The sexism you were talking about, people being different from how they expect them to act. Moving away from sexism- CUERDA: With her my strategy has had to be I just don’t tell her a lot of what I’m doing. But I think over the years she’s come to appreciate me as a woman, sort of as someone who is very interesting and doing interesting things. I think she kind of admires me, I think its okay. On this interpersonal level, I just can’t tell her things. Which is hard. Like, that I could be laid off or something, that’s not the kind of issue we were talking about, or issues I’ve had with men I’ve had over my life, or issues in my life, I just can’t share that with her. Cuz I think she is coming from a place of fear, things she says just aren’t helpful, it just raises fear in her. I just don’t, it’s too bad, it would be nice to… DOMIENIK: That’s what friends are for. CUERDA: Yeah, yeah, right. But I don’t see her as a friend, but I do have friends I can do that with so its okay. DOMIENIK: Did you speak Spanish with her growing up? CUERDA: I learned English from her…oh where did I learn Spanish? Where are we? [Laughing] But I learned it when I went to Spain, I mean I heard it a lot and I took it in school. I had an ear for it anyway, I heard my mother and grandmother like fighting in Spanish all the time. Hard to pick it up from the floor, listening to the floor below [gestures her head as if she is pressing her ear to the floor to hear a conversation] “What are they talking about?” DOMIENIK: Do you think that affects your work? How you, the fact that you picked it up later in life? CUERDA: Um, no. The Spanish? Yeah, no. I mean, I feel like I’m really fluent now, I picked it up later, spoke it at home for a while cuz my husband was Spanish then didn’t really speak Spanish that much 1990 when I went to work at legal services in 1990, then I spoke it all the time cuz my clients were Spanish speakers. But now I speak it all the time at home and at all the time at work, so I’m really fluent. So people always ask me: where are you from, they can’t really figure my accent out and why I speak Spanish so well and look the way I do. DOMIENIK: You mentioned last time that while you were at smith, you were on welfare. CUERDA: Yeah- it was hard. My marriage broke up, I went on AFDC. Yeah it was hard. I was really broke. I think that I got $500 a month. It was weird being at Smith College, I commuted. I lived in a house with a group of people which was great. I could afford to live that way, it was a struggle financially, but I got through it. it was kind of, being here –hand gesture- such a place of privilege, I didn’t know there were women who were here, and I just met them from working in the community, who also were on welfare when we were here it would have been nice to know them and talk about having no money and being so fucked up- I don’t mean that. Oh my god I have no money and a kid and trying to get through school. If you earned you wouldn’t qualify. It didn’t make sense to me to risk that. What you could earn and still maintain your benefits. I didn’t have the tools, and now I do because it’s my work. I would have liked to work in the summers, I wasn’t working. I was at home, that was good, but it would have been nice to earn a little money for what we needed. But I was so scared of doing that so I didn’t. So while it was tough financially it still felt like a luxury to be here. It felt that much more important and wonderful, it felt like a privilege, you know, I felt like it was just such an incredible opportunity, and I was having so much fun, like it was this whole new world, of ideas and the work and learning how to do it well, and enjoying it and being totally turned on by what I was learning. And you know, it was so incredible to have the opportunity to be here, I felt like it was such a luxury, it was like that, it was like going and having a great massage, it was just so great in every way to be here. So though it was hard financially it was totally worth it. Didn’t feel like a terrible struggle or whatever, it felt like a happy time. DOMIENIK: Does that influence how you do your job now, that you had that experience? CUERDA: Oh completely, cuz totally I relate to what my clients who are on going through that are on AFDC, their total fear of the welfare department, powerlessness in the face of that bureaucratic mess. Which, lately with the Patrick administration is getting a little bit better. A lot of case workers have this attitude that it’s their money and how dare you. So not really a supportive atmosphere. So yeah, I feel like I’m a much better advocate. Part of being an advocate for me is the process I have with my clients because they see me as their access to power. To get people to fix their problem, or to have me fix their problem or something and including them in the process and trying to humanize the process for them and validate just like how awful they feel because they are being blamed for their own problems. They are being told that they are parasites, it’s mostly women with children, right? The system tells them that by accessing this benefit to live, that they are just parasites. Or that their stupid because they are single parents or they’re teen parents. There’s not a lot of support culturally for people who are in that situation. So its great to try and validate what people were feeling. To say: that’s wrong. You’re right, I know you’re telling the truth. And the whole- it’s just incredible the way that the system is set up. It sort of assumes that the person on welfare is a liar. You know because, now there are all these sanctions that are in place, this stuff didn’t exist when I was on AFDC, you could go to school for 4 years, and get benefits, now you can’t. Now there are time limits and you can’t do anything more than a 2 year course, and there’s work requirements. And school doesn’t count-one year of schooling counts but after that you have to go to school and work at the same time. And it could be 30 hours a week. So a single mom, in school, working 30 hours, you know it’s insane. There are all these sanctions that happen. And if people don’t comply with one of these rules-people tell me, well this is what happened: I tried to call my worker and left her messages, to tell her that I was sick, or that my child was sick or that my car broke down so I couldn’t get to my job and the assumption is always: you’re a liar. And I feel like the system does a lot and says that any reason for not being able to do ABC: It’s you’re a liar, it’s your fault, you’re not trying hard enough. Plus, to survive on benefits. The amount people are getting the same amount I got 15 years ago. 1986-90 or earlier 84-90, something like that. For a mother and a child, or a father and a child, its $530 a month. You get food stamps too, and health care, but still, how are you going to pay your rent? The system is so insane and expecting to survive on that amount of money so they have to find money, it turns people into liars because the only way to survive is to scam the system in someway. How else are you going to do it? It’s something I don’t really like to talk about publicly because it gives ammunition to the people who say: oh yeah, they are just lying to get on this benefit but the whole system is rigged to be so insane and awful. I mean there are immigrants who are working they have no social security number, they a They aren’t supposed to be working, but they need to be working, that’s why they are here. They are afraid to report, it sets up this really awful situation for people. DOMIENIK: And people solidarity work some people glorify that work as that’s what we should- CUERDA: As enobling. DOMIENIK: Yeah. CUERDA: This little book called wartime lies, by louis Beckley about growing up in Poland in WWII as a Jew, it turns you into a liar, you were always running and scared, and how it sort of warps you as a person, you internalize it. That’s what happens to people. I think its clearly a totally different situation. That was genocide, this is not genocide. But. People are bringing that kind of culture too to where they are just outsiders, so there is no reason to ever trust any institution at all, you know? DOMIENIK: Do, is the fact that Obama just won, does that have any effect on the perceptions people have about the feeling of being on the outside here? CUERDA: I think so, I mean, I would guess. I mean Luis and I stayed up, and he doesn’t understand English that well, and he was so excited. He doesn’t really understand the history of race in this country. But I know I talked to him about it and we watched movies, I don’t think he grasped how huge it was in that context. He was really inspired, I think a lot of people feel that way. It was amazing, it was great, it was incredible. As things start to roll on though, he’ll be seen as just another insider maybe, but lets see how much he can bring people, or have people feel like they are part of the solution. That dynamic, I see this all the time in my office. People with power don’t want to include people without power in solving problems. We’re trying to deal with this awful crisis where we are losing lots of money. They don’t see staff as sort of the team to work things out. They don’t see us as part of any team, there’s staff, who whatever, we’re doing all the work. But that same sort of dynamic, they feel challenged, insecure, by all our knowledge, by all our experience, by our strong opinions, by our vision, which is many times, not all the time, but many times but based on our work with the community but if ideas are flowing from us they see that as threatening, they don’t want to give us access to decision making, that’s crazy. And I feel like the same, if Obama can pull off something where things are flowing, but set into motion dynamics where ideas are coming from people who are actually doing the work, ideas to solve problems, that’s good. Whether he’ll continue to view sort of power from sort of an outsider perspective is still the big question. DOMIENIK: It’s interesting that in your job, in the job you’re an advocate for people who are on the outside but you are facing similar power struggles that they are in an organization that is putting itself out there as a solution or a better model. CUERDA: Yeah, yeah, its really sad, you know its partly because of what happened with the leadership of our organization. You know, where someone who isn’t a legal services person and doesn’t have that history that perspective that what we do should be driven by what is happening on the street. And of course maybe it hasn’t been driven that way for 20 years, for 30 years. But in some ways it has or can be. Boy. That’s the way with lots of agencies. Where, it’s partly because the need is so huge, agencies sort of end up barricading themselves to get their work done. What they have done, done. It is so overwhelming what the need is dynamic is. That dynamic exists everywhere. People who have power, most of them are mediocre thinkers, that’s how they got there. What is so great about this country is there are so many people who have been able to do things. But in organizations it often seems like the people who rise to top are the mediocre ones who suck up and who don’t make waves-[burp] Excuse me-and are more conservative in their style and kind of wanna maybe, they’re- I don’t know. It takes something special to be a leader. They don’t often set up a dynamic or something that is dynamic within an organization where there is a lot of sharing of ideas and solutions situation. Where I am, I’m totally shut off. Advocates are totally shut off from the people who are deciding what we do, how we do it, what money we’re going to look for. They don’t even know what we are doing. So anyway. I hope this doesn’t become public because they were already would love to get rid of me. DOMIENIK: You can get go through this and say what you don’t want to be public. CUERDA: In ten years it would be great. [Laughs]. You know, when I’m retired. DOMIENIK: What is that, the sunshine clause? For laws, or documents- become public after 15 years or something? CUERDA: Oh yeah, oh yeah. DOMIENIK: How do you all deal with that the people you work with, the other advocates? CUERDA: Well we have a union, which really, really helps, in some ways. We have a contract. So being in a union, so in some ways, well you know. I think the creation of the union in our work place, I wasn’t working there when it happened, but it set up a certain separation. It offended management when it was done, they were hurt, it created ways for them to shut us out too. They didn’t have to, I mean, if they had values, and I think some of them did before, collaborative values, values around consensus, not total consensus ‘cause we’d probably never get anything done probably. If you had those values, I lost my thought, but, they sort of did have those values- there was some sharing of decision making, they way it worked before was more collaborative. When the union happened, it allowed them to sort of shut us out more, That’s the contract, management rights in the contract. Creates this adversarial situation. I think we, the staff felt like they had to do this, cause the way things were working, it just wasn’t working well for them, they needed to get together to bargain. Now, if we didn’t have the union, we would be dead. Even with the union, it’s really hard. Because our director has power to make decisions, and it creates a forum to try and discuss them, and negotiate, but its incredibly painful because she takes everything totally personally. Its really interesting. She’s a woman. And I’m not saying it’s because she’s a woman, but she takes any sort of difference of opinion as criticism as an attack. We’re advocates. That’s what we do. We advocate for what we think is right. Or, and, she can’t stand it you know, so if we didn’t have a union, now we’re negotiating sort of How to avoid getting half of our staff laid off and setting up a package that will get concessions by staff, working half the time, furloughs, giving up certain things, benefits. It’s so amazing because the brains are so much on our side of the equation. staff is so smart, and creative and coming up and getting information on the way things are happening other places, there’s an incredible talent and creativity in our staff. That they are just not using. It’s really sad. If we didn’t have this bargaining team, that was spending so much time on this, management would never have been able to come up with these ideas. DOMIENIK: What’s your international? CUERDA: Its UAW [United Auto Workers] DOMIENIK: Are there other members, legal staff from other parts of the state that are in your local? CUERDA: Yeah I think all the unionized programs in Massachusetts are part of the UAW. We’ve had meetings, all the legal services people are part of the UAW. DOMIENIK: UAW is huge- the grad students at UMASS. CUERDA: Yeah, so its great to have a union. Boy. DOMIENIK: Do you have a role in the union? CUERDA: I’m on the executive committee, I’m a steward for the Springfield office. So yeah. DOMIENIK: Mhmm. That’s cool. CUERDA: I have to sort of learn about it too. It’s just like being an advocate. You have the contract which are the rules. When you’re a legal advocate you have the rules You have the situation over here, you’re trying to reconcile it to solve the problem. DOMIENIK: How long have you been a steward? CUERDA: Um- 2 years, I think? Yeah, I don’t-our union president is in our office too and she’s amazing, incredible. The steward is the person people come to talk about issues I do a little bit of that but she does that mostly, and that’s okay. The steward is the one that works on resolving grievances. She does that mostly. So that’s okay. You know. I do have a role, and I do things. And I’m on this executive board where we strategize and work on issues and come up with things to propose. I worked on the language in the contract when we were renegotiating our contract and doing that now to come up with proposals to save jobs. Doing that now. Feel sort of like I’m learning. I don’t feel that capable at it. But that’s good. DOMIENIK: People always talk about unions, after becoming part of the union in their workplace become sort of empowered. Do you find that that’s true? CUERDA: Mhmm. Yes and no. there are limits to what you can do as a group. Management, if they ultimately have the right to transfer people to other jobs. Management still has a lot of power you know. I feel like if it wasn’t for the union I’d feel completely defenseless. It depends on your management. With this terrible management we have now, it defends us. It’s what we need, but its not everything. Luckily too, she’s been so awful, staff has been totally united. So that’s good, cuz you know In times when things are tough, you need to have everyone together, and if people are when you have people looking out for your self interest only, it becomes tough. Especially in a time when there are going to be lots of cuts. Luckily, she’s galvanized staff so that we need to stick together to defend ourselves. So I don’t know if it makes me feel powerful, because its more a matter of trying defend yourself against people who never wants to read the contract and ignores the contract all the time. So I feel like it’s a protection. DOMIENIK: With legal services, or maybe with the work you do with pioneer valley project, Do you do advocacy on a state level to change legislation? I don’t do a whole lot of that, but I’ve gone to the statehouse and testified, and I’ve brought clients and do lobbying. In Massachusetts We have the Mass. Law Reform Institute, in Boston, which are these amazing brains who work with us, do a lot of policy work, do a lot of lobbying, work a lot with the administration, you know with the governor to fix things, to change things. To recommend things, to show how it could work. I do a lot of litigation to change the law, so you know if you change the law you can change policy. They are amazing. So we rely on them to do most of that. They are fed by the work we are doing in the field too you know? They support us with, we can email questions to the listserv. Like this is the situation, The rules make no sense, or I don’t understand them, they don’t make sense, I don’t know if I’m reading them right, they are badly written anyway. What should I do? Everyone will chime in, and they might say we should file a case on this, you know, it’s wrong. Or this is a good time- DOMIENIK: That sounds like a really symbiotic relationship. Working off each other. CUERDA: Yeah, yeah, they are so supportive and brilliant, and so much smarter than I am you know. That’s one of the things that’s great about legal services, it’s so collaborative. Advocates are talking all the time about how to solve problems, about how to push the envelope and get things done. Deleted section on the difference between law and policy. DOMIENIK: And then I think I have just one last question. You were talking before the difference, I don’t know just talking about charity, do you have more thoughts about that? Maybe the differences between, how something isn’t just charity, maybe it ties back to activism and doing specific actions and then leaving. CUERDA: Yeah. I can’t remember what we talked about before. I think in general charity is great, but it doesn’t involve people in creating solutions to problems. The food program is sort of charity But it’s a tool too. It’s a way to work with the community to reach out to the community, draw members out, to bring them in. And with that sort of trust or goodwill that you’re creating, trying to do something else. I think charity is great, it’s lovely. I feel like my legal services work, you know, I work in a neighborhood, and um, legal services work is sort of charity in some ways. I’m doing cases, I’m doing them for free, clients don’t pay for it, I’m solving their problems, and it’s free. And I can do that forever, the problems never go away. I can help you, and you. It’s like painting the golden gate bridge. I’ll finish and then I’ll have to start again. It’s endless. I’ll never meet the need and I’ll never finish having to do that same case over and over again. But if I work to try and fix the problem, but maybe you’ll get rid of the reason that you have to do all those cases. The most beautiful way I heard it put was from Marty Nathan. This was told to me by someone else so I don’t even know if it’s totally accurate. She was working as a doctor, I think in North Carolina. She realized that, this is a metaphor, she realized that what was happening, her patients, that there was a hole in the street. This is a metaphor right. People kept falling in the hole and breaking their legs. They’d come to the clinic, She would fix them up and send them back out there and they would keep falling in the hole, so she realized she had to fill the hole to keep them from getting hurt. Doing the charity work is great, but have to address the causes also, and that involves, not charity work but people working together to figure out the solution and political work. No totally. DOMIENIK: Do you have anything else that you’d like to touch on that I haven’t brought up? Or clarify anything from last week? CUERDA: No, I. I can’t really remember last week. [Laughter] I don’t know. Its great to be getting older, to see all these amazing women growing up. DOMIENIK: Thanks. CUERDA: It’s really inspiring, I have a lot of hope. DOMIENIK: Yes we can [slogan of Obama campaign] CUERDA: Si se puede. That’s the welfare office’s motto together we can, anyway. I think my generation, we’ve had to fight a lot of battles, and you do as a woman, and you do as a woman. You’re seen as bitchy if you’re too pushy or aggressive. And men are threatened by smart women. You know. And most people in power, in agencies, in the world I work in are men. And there are some great men out there too, you know? That I’ve worked with that I don’t have an issue with. But I still think women face special barriers. Just like Obama got elected president, this next generation will be able to push through and not have to fight so many battles. At least in terms of what their role can be. So that makes me feel great. DOMIENIK: Me too. Well thank you so much. This is Wednesday November 19. Again this is Lynnea with Maria CUERDA. CUERDA: And that’s the way it is. DOMIENIK: And that’s the way it is. That’s all folks. CUERDA: Doo, doo, doo (musical sounds)...