 Gill and I m interviewing Bonnie Smith in the ConocoPhillips Alumni Center on the campus of Oklahoma State University. This interview is conducted on September 19, 2008 as part of the O-STATE Stories Project. Bonnie, my first question is, can you tell us a little bit about your background, where you grew up, a little bit about your early childhood? I grew up in Bowlegs, Oklahoma, but I was born at Ada, Oklahoma when my parents were enrolled in school. I was born between semesters. They taught in country schools and would go to school in the summer working on their degrees. At that time, you could pass a teacher s examination and be allowed to teach. Also at that time, the teachers at East Central, where they were going, were paid according to the number of students they had. Mother and Daddy did not have a car, so it kind of limited us to the subjects they could take as to when they were being offered. So the band director there called Dad Fentem asked if he could enroll them in one of his evening classes. And they said well they d be glad to except they had no way to get there and they had a brand new baby, a son two years old, and a son four years old. He said, That s all right, just bring a quilt. We ll make a pallet for them. So that s really when I started to school. I started college first and that s also when I learned to sleep through class. Then from there we at that time we lived in a place called Bird s Mill, which is just south of Ada. Then my parents later moved to Seminole County. They had a small eight-grade school there by the name of Allen, which is not the town of Allen. While they were there, the oil boom hit Seminole County. There were no high schools. They had eight-grade schools but no high schools. The Boards of two of the different schools invited my dad to please start a high school at Bowlegs which would be midway between two communities, Allen and Thrace. So he started the 6 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith high school in 1926 and that was their home for the next 25 years. I graduated from Bowlegs High School in 1941 and came to the best college in all the world. (Laughs) The Cowboy Quartet and different ones with the entertainment bureau used to come out and entertain the high schools to recruit students. That was the first time I heard the Cowboy Quartet. I was very impressed. Was Ashley Alexander head of that at that time? No, that was long before Ashley Alexander. I believe A. Frank Martin probably was in charge of it then. Obviously you have a lot of pride, Bonnie, in OSU. But what influenced you to come to OSU? Well, my parents had worked on their master s degree up here again in the summer time. They never did get to go to a regular semester. They either went to extension courses or correspondence courses, Saturday or night classes. They both ended up with enough college hours to have PhD s. But they decided to get their master s here at OSU. I was up here I guess from about kindergarten age on, at different times during the summer, and just loved it. There wasn t any other school, as far as I was concerned. You were sort of predisposed for OSU? Not only that, when I came to college here I had some of the same professors that my parents had had. And they had already taught us a lot of that while we were in high school, of the things they had learned here in college. So it gave me a step up really to do that. So you came to OSU, what was your major, Bonnie? Home economics vocational home economics. Actually I worked up here in the summer between my junior and senior years in high school as a state secretary of FHO. I worked in I believe, the vocational home economics was at one end of the prefab and vocational agriculture was at the other end. I got a lot of really good experience there. It really, it was home. I lived in the dorm that summer and got a head start. That s good. Did you have any favorite professors or staff people that you remember that were especially good to you? I will always have a really soft spot for one lady in particular. Her name was Ruth Taylor. Mainly because when we would all go to class, we would be told when a certain examination was and we would have all of 7 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith the sections of that class seated and take the examination at the same time, and usually there was a different instructor with the different sections. Mrs. Taylor announced to the group that we were going to have this particular exam and it was going to be an open book exam. So as bright and smart as I was, I went to the library and checked out every reference book we had had that semester and took to the examination. Well one of the ladies, a teacher from another class, came to me and said, Ms. Emerson you ll have to close your book. That isn t allowed. So I thought, She just doesn t know what Mrs. Taylor told us. So I d wait until she turned her back and then I d open the books again. Then later in the year, when we were being tested more or less for certain honors, I was being recommended for one of the honors and the other teacher said, Oh no, she cheats. And Mrs. Taylor stood up and said, There is no way that Bonnie would cheat. She stood up for me until I got the honor. I ll never forget how wonderful she was to believe in me. And I truly had not cheated intentionally. I just because she called me in and told me what the other teacher had said. She said, Did you cheat? I told her what had happened. You announced it was an open book exam. So I took the books, and I looked at them. She said, It was my error. But I thought it was so wonderful for her to stand up for a student like that. Who was the Dean of Women at the time when you were there? Dean Stout. Stout. She was another one who stood up for me, too. And we were all scared of her. I don t know how tall she was, I would guess about 6 feet tall. And it was rumored that, don t ever wear red because Dean Stout thinks it incites the boys. So we all avoided red when we were going to be around Dean Stout. That first Christmas dinner she came to, here she was wearing a bright red dress, so we weren t afraid to do it after that. We all wore red when we wanted to. Do you remember President Henry Bennett? Oh, yes. What do you remember about Dr. Bennett? I remember that he was probably one of the smartest politicians that Oklahoma had. He knew how to work the legislature. Under him was when the 25 year plan was instigated. And that was 25 years that we 8 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith would have certain buildings built. If I remember correctly he came from Southeastern Teacher s College in Durant and brought with him Mr. Tompkins. I think he brought Dean Patterson. He brought Dean Stout and Ms. Prosser, who really was the most brilliant woman up here and probably the most brilliant person. She ran the university. And what was Ms. Prosser s title? I don t know what her title was, but she had charge of all of the finances of the university. I remember when they brought the first computer in and set it up there in Whitehurst Hall and it was about if you divide this room in half, it would be about that size. She had a very stern expression and you would think she didn t have a congenial bone in her body. But she went all out to help anybody that needed it. She was a wonderful person. She really had a reputation of being pretty tough, didn t she? Yes, she did have, but she was soft hearted. One semester after World War II started we were asked to move three times in one semester. We would be told at 9:00 in the morning to be out at 5:00. That meant automatically that you skipped classes for three days and that s usually all you were allowed. And she was so cooperative in helping every student find a room so they could get their stuff out and get moved. She helped whenever we needed. She was very kind to all of us. You mentioned a little bit having to move; in what other ways was campus different here during World War II. Well, for the girls, it was wonderful, because they had moved nearly all the men out to go to service. But they moved hundreds of men back in. And that was why we were moved out of the dormitories, to make room for the armed forces that were coming in. Each morning they would have these groups of servicemen marching down the street, and of course the girls would all be on the side admiring them and choosing which one they might want to get acquainted with. But at that time they rented all of the fraternity houses for girls dormitories and they called them Victory Houses. I lived in V5 which was the Sigma Nu house. I lived there for two years. They had girls from Coast Guard, which I believe were called SPARS; the ones from the Navy were called WAVES, and they were all in uniform all the time. The men were in Army uniforms and I don t remember I know there were a lot of them that were ASTP. And they had a foreign language program that they moved native Japanese people in to teach Japanese to the ones that were in that. I believe that was the program for the Navy. 9 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith You said ASDP? A.S.T.P. And that means what? Army Student Training Program. It was really rough too because during that time a lot of people lost people they loved very, very much. At that time also, a group of the men from OSU that were in ROTC were all taken on the bus to Fort Sill to be drafted and then returned. They waited here until there was room at Camp Roberts, California and they shipped all of that group out to Camp Roberts. After they got through with their training program out there, they were supposed to go on to Officer s Candidate School in Fort Benning, Georgia. But the war had escalated so rapidly that they did not have room for them at that time so they shipped them back to OSU. They didn t have room in any of the dormitories so first they put them in the stadium, underneath the stadium. Finally they were able to get the third floor of the fire station. They told the men that if they were willing to act as volunteer firemen, then they would set that third floor up for them as their dormitory. So that entire group then moved up there and they acted as volunteer firemen. What were some special things, in terms of supporting the war effort? Did you send letters, did you do certain things? Yes. And we were just like the men in service, we sent them several people We had special money raising projects of all kinds, and the thing I guess that is most memorable about it was the rationing program. We had ration books that had ration stamps in them. When we came to college each semester, we would turn our ration book in and there would be a stamp for sugar, fat or butter, I believe shoes, and then you were allowed a certain amount of gasoline, or people were that had cars. And the tires were rationed, gasoline was rationed. Then when we would go home for Thanksgiving or Christmas, they would give us a certain number of stamps back that we could use while we were at home. I guess it was difficult to get hold of silk hose too, wasn t it? Well actually, I m glad you brought that up. We didn t have silk hose, we had most of them were cotton at that time and had seams up the back. We had all learned how to mend the hose if you got a runner in them. But we also learned that if you could use pancake makeup on your legs, than you could have a nice tan finish on your legs and then you d take an eyebrow pencil and draw the seam up the back. (Laughter) And you saved an awful lot of money on hose, and you couldn t get them 10 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill anyway Bonnie, a little bit about your student experience at Oklahoma State, how do you feel about being the first woman Student Association President? I felt really good about it, truthfully I was very idealistic and I really wanted to accomplish a lot and felt that if the Representatives would just let the Independents alone, we could run the college. You mention the Independents, now could you maybe share some stories about the election process? Were there sort of some underground parties? Yes. Can you share with us about the campaign and the parties? There were. On the Independent side, we had a man by the name of Russell Holloway and a man named Ferrell Rogers that were notorious for their campaigning. They loved politics. The year before I came, Russell was well known for having held a pep rally down by Theta Pond and that was the center of Willard and North Murray, Murray Hall. He encouraged all of the girls from the dorms to come down. He addressed them as ladies and sorority girls. Well, our Dean of Women did not appreciate that, so he was punished slightly by staying on campus for a while. And then Ferrell also was instrumental in helping get everybody out to vote. He did this by secretly, of course by getting a crew out about two o clock in the morning before the election started the next morning painting on the sidewalks Down with the Independents which we all attributed to the Representatives So now, were parties I mean you weren t supposed to have parties, I mean so these were sort of clandestine parties? No, they were two just like the Democrats and Republicans. So they were the Independent party and the Greeks? No, it s called Representatives. The Greeks were the Representatives. Representatives. Okay, called the Representatives. Then there was an underground group called TNE. Maybe that s the one I m thinking about. 11 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith And it was supposedly not supposed to exist. I don t know who were members of it, but I do know that it existed because I had for many years one of their membership certificates that one of the members had left in his files when he went off to the service. So TNE stands for do you remember what it stood for? Theta Nu Epsilon. And it was supposedly now this is all hearsay because I don t think any women were allowed in but supposedly they were able to get the top men in every organization secretly so that they were able to control the elections. They did the vote counting and things like that. Now you ran as an Independent. Yes. Was it a close election? No, in fact the day before the election, one of the top Representative men and one of the top Representative women invited me to go have a Coke with them over at Swim s. They said if I would please run on their ticket they would make sure that I would get elected. As cocky as I was, I said, No, I m not going to run on your ticket and I m going to get elected anyway. Because we had the most votes. We did win. But we all had a cause. We wanted it to come out right. Did you have a campaign slogan? Or did you have some platform? No, just vote Independent. We had a good time. What were some of the favorite student hang outs at that time? Swim s was one and it s on the corner more or less across from Eskimo Joe s. Now, I believe there s a student bookstore maybe. Downstairs they had a small dance floor, certainly a juke box. They had a fountain and sold school supplies and drug supplies. And the kitchen and then upstairs, I believe Buss or Buster Swim and his family lived there. Then there was a place called Brooks. And I don t remember which it was first, Brooks or Miles, but it was next to the Campus Theater which was right across from the fire station. It was really preferred because it was newer and larger and had real good food there too. But they would have bands such as Tommy Dorsey s band come in, and there wasn t a dance floor that I remember but it was large enough that everybody could fill up the hall and just enjoy it. 12 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Jimmy Baker came after the war, didn t he? He wasn t He was here before the war. He was before. His collegiate band. Did he ever play there? Yes. Well, excuse me. I don t know if he played there but he played at student dances. That was one way that the Student Senate raised money was they held dances in the old gym which now is the Architectural Building. Jimmy played there. Jerry Pool, Marvin Whisman and Earl Maples. But they were really good bands. It was always required that there be chaperones there. The Student Senators would take turns sitting at the door and collecting money. They would always try to get their favorite chaperones which were Dr. and Mrs. Wood. And they were wonderful people and very understanding. That wasn t Mom Woods, was it? Mom Woods No, that was a different one. That was stayed at the SAE house for years and was house mother. One thing that I wanted to tell you about the days before all the beautiful gardens around Theta Pond were built, that was just one big grassy, weedy place and a man, Byron Thompson, I believe. Byron Thompson, groundskeeper. He was in charge of seeing that it was improved. So they started to fertilize all that area. We were across the street from it in the Sigma Nu house and they did not have sidewalks at that time. It ended up being one of the rainiest winters we had ever had. Mr. Thompson would bring all of the chicken manure over to fertilize all that area. So the Sigma Nu house then automatically became known as the Sig-Manure house. (Laughter) So it was I don t know whether they outlived that yet or not. Beautiful gardens, though, and it was worth it. Well let s see, you were also a cheerleader, is that right? Yes. So this is quite a change Probably because I had the biggest mouth on campus. I certainly was not graceful. We did not turn flips and do all that that they can do now. 13 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Did you have the long skirts then? We had white pleated skirts below the knees and wore white satin shorts or tights beneath so nothing showed. We wore, they had heavy wool, white wool sweaters that we wore no matter if it were summer, winter, or fall you wore those sweaters. And you wore saddle-oxfords and white anklets. It was the style in those days, that the dirtier your saddle-oxfords were, the more they were in. Which years were you a cheerleader? I started in my sophomore year, which would have been 42 through 45. So was that Bob Fennimore s first year? Was that your last year? No, I believe he came he may have been there when I was a junior. He and Neill Armstrong came at the same time. So you got to cheer for them and watch them play? Oh, yes. That must have been pretty exciting. It was. One of the most memorable games was the one held over at Tulsa University when Glen Dobbs was the quarterback. It was really an offensive battle between Glenn Dobbs, Neill and Bob but we won. I also had a cowbell stolen at that game. This guy who was more than a little bit tipsy came up and wanted to know if he could just hold my cowbell. He said, I used to be a cheerleader there, and it would really mean can I just hold your cowbell and ring it. Well he took off with it. I wonder if he still has it. Now Mr. Iba was also winning national championships in basketball at that time, and we had a great football record. Well, in football, when I was there we won the Cotton Bowl. I believe that was my senior year. And the next year we won the Sugar Bowl, then they later won the Delta Bowl, I believe. It was a wonderful time to be here because we had a great sports program. So were you there for the 1945 Basketball Championship team? Yes. So you were a cheerleader there? 14 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Yes. So you had some pretty special years there, Bonnie. I did, and I thought they d never survive without me. That s the reason they were national champions and why they won the bowl game. Right. Well the year after I graduated I had the opportunity to be Mr. Iba s secretary and work on my master s at the same time. That s the year we won the second NCAA title in basketball and we also won the NCAA title in wrestling and the Sugar Bowl that year. That was why I just thought they couldn t do without me. But you know, the school has just grown tremendously since I left. So you were Mr. Iba s secretary? Yes. You remember Dorothy Bunch? Yes, Geraldine Bunch was his secretary that succeeded me. Yeah, that s great. Any other activities that you were engaged in or involved in that you remember? Some special memories that you have from your time on campus? I really enjoyed all of it I think. I was in several different organizations. What I liked the most I guess would have been sports because I enjoyed sports a lot. I guess the most memorable game that I was in was held at Taft Stadium or that I went to. Taft Stadium in Oklahoma City because it was when the gas rationing was taking place. They tried to put the game where everybody who could see it could go to it without spending a bunch of gasoline. And by the way, this was during the days where the cheerleaders found their own way to the Cotton Bowl and everything. We didn t have our expenses paid. So we had to catch a ride one way or another to get down to the stadium. The OU cheerleaders came over and wanted to know if they could exchange yells which I do not think is a good idea. But we did because we really didn t want to yell OU at all. When they led our group, then we had to go down in front of their group. At that time, when I was down on one of my knees for one of the yells, this big old beer bottle, it was the biggest one I ever saw. It looked like it came out of the OU crowd thrown at us. I did manage to miss that one. But I don t think they ought to exchange yells. They wouldn t be playing against each other if they wanted to be yelling for the other 15 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith team. But that was also the year that we had a center named John Gaddis who was the captain of the football team. The bet between the football teams was whichever team lost, the captain of the losing team had to push with his nose a peanut from mid-field to the goal line. We won and John enjoyed every minute of that. You d get a sore nose after a hundred yards of that. Oh yes, a sore everything. Well you I think maybe mentioned the off campus newspaper, called the Aggievator. Oh, it was a magazine. A magazine. What do you remember about that? I have one of the copies of it at home. It was clean but it was about as corny as you could get in jokes, but it was fun. I thought it was clean until after I got married, I realized that some of stuff that I took one way was actually intended another. So they put a lot of they had the O Collegian at that time and the Aggievator and the Redskin. And you could not qualify to run for office unless you bought a Redskin. The filing fee for any office was fifty-cents. And believe it or not it was hard to come by fifty-cents. Well, any special, you talked about some of your memorable moments, any embarrassing moments you remember in school? Yes, but they re too embarrassing to tell. Well, we said you didn t have to answer any questions if you didn t want too. Okay. You mentioned the fire house, living in the fire Fire station. Fire station. Now there was a fire house gang? Well fire station gang or fire house, either one. Now did you live there? No, that s where the men who had attended school here and gone to Camp Roberts and were waiting to go to OCS and that s where they lived. Because they had been on campus, they already knew most of the girls, so they had a better chance of getting a date with the girls than the 16 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith soldiers that were shipped in. Didn t they for several years have reunions? I remember one year a few years ago when they were Yes, we still do to a certain extent. But no, we have had reunions for many years. The first one I remember attending, it was very unusual because nearly everyone there, all the men had married a girl from OSU or A M. They had children that were attending here at that time. Most of them I believe all of them at the reunion had married and were still with that first wife. And that is very unusual. Now, with all these eligible guys, Bonnie, how did you wind up with Dennis? How did you meet Dennis? Well, I met him over at Brooks or Miles. A mutual friend brought him over to the booth and introduced him. And I thought, Gee, he s cute. But didn t want him to know it. But I never did rope him into a date until he was injured and came back, and I happened to be one of the first ones he ran into. So when did he come back? What year was that? He came back in 1945. 45. Fall of 45. He came on sick leave from Brook General Hospital. He d been injured and they permitted him to come back on sick leave to finish his degree, which he finished in 1946. Well, can you share a little bit, since you had a lot of leadership activities at OSU. I want to ask you, how has that helped you in times when you ve had the opportunities and activities outside of the classroom, how has that helped in your personal development and your life since you left OSU? You re obviously very much into leadership organizations and activities. Was that important in your development? I think probably the friendships that I made, Jerry. At one time, we were exchanging Christmas cards with maybe as many as 300 people from Oklahoma State and we felt very close to them. We don t exchange Christmas cards with that many anymore, because there s not that many of us surviving. But we ve remained very close and it s just The degree I got helped me with my first job, which was a home economist with Lonestar Gas Company. I did go ahead and get my master s in educational administration and counseling. But I found at that time the 17 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith only thing that was asked of me was what degree do you have; they didn t ask what it was in. So, the master s degree was valuable. In addition to your academic of course you probably had a pretty strong personality when you got out here, but did it help you develop as a person and your activities outside the classroom in leadership things you engaged in? I think the thing that helped me the most was our church, because I think there are a lot of things that students go through in their development that could either make or break you. The people at our church, I appreciated so much because if I was going through one stage that would be considered sinful For instance, at that time it was a sin to dance. And it was really a struggle to know what to do. But the people in our church were very un-judgmental, as far as the students were concerned. They opened their homes to the students, and I can remember many ice cream and cookie sessions of people that I realize now didn t have that much money. But all the students were welcome to come and I don t remember if I was ever criticized, nobody ever did it in a way that was hurtful. Also our minister was very good about recommending me for jobs after I got out. And friends to this day, now that we ve moved back, we still have friends in that church that I remember. For instance, one of the men that was in high school when I first started going there was a song leader and then he came on to college and has been a very successful man. His sister I think at that time was in junior high and she and her husband are two of the finest people I know. What was your church, Bonnie? The Church of Christ. And they re still that way, by the way. They have the association they called the University Center. They adopt different individuals will adopt children from the University Center and they can use their homes, washing machine, dryers, any help they need they try to do and they try to help them with scholarships. Well kind of transitioning away from OSU, can you share some of your personal history and some significant events in your life since you left OSU? As a freshman, one thing that was traumatic was the fact that we couldn t go home as much as we would have liked. And it was I can remember being just physically sick because I got so homesick. It was mainly on dark, dreary, rainy days, which it was on the day that Pearl Harbor happened. Most of us had never heard of Pearl Harbor at that 18 Gill Smith time. But we learned in a hurry. It really hurt for the boys that we knew, and the girls as well because a lot of the girls went into the service at that time, for them to be killed, or a brother or sister to be killed in action. But you were always so proud of them. I don t remember anyone in this whole town or in the state of Oklahoma that objected to having to do without sugar or shoes or butter or any of the things we take for granted. The only thing that was rough was getting gasoline to go home if you had a car. But most of us didn t have cars. By the way, I do have a solution for the parking problem here. When I worked for Dr. Echols who was in charge of passing out parking permits, only those who were handicapped or who commuted were allowed to have cars on campus. After you got past the war and you graduated from OSU, could you share a little bit of your life with us? Some things that you did, some of your professional opportunities and some I really my biggest ambition I guess, that girls didn t dare come out and say was to really marry the man of my dreams and have a family. I was fortunate enough that I was able to be a homemaker. We had our family and I was able to stay home. I did teach when we first got married until we started our family. And then after, on occasion, I would teach after the children were born. But my main goal was to stay home with them. Dennis became a geologist and was gone I guess the longest he was gone at one time was two months to Australia. And it was very important to us that we not raise our children by babysitters. They always had a home to go to, and also, we were in the middle of the bussing program at one time in Oklahoma City. But before the bussing started, there were not buses. So we had three children in three different one in three different schools. So by the time you got all of them delivered it was time to Jerry there is one thing that I will share with you too. This was before the days of integration. I do remember going home on the bus one night. The bus would stop along the way and pick up people that wanted to ride. And I remember outside of Chandler, and it was late at night, the bus stopped. This lady got on and was standing there in the aisle. I said, Wouldn t you like to sit down? because there was a seat right there next to me. The bus driver was very shocked. He said, Are you sure? I said, Well yes, the seat s empty. She was black, and at that time the blacks were only allowed to sit on the back seat of the bus. They weren t allowed to sit up in the other seats. But the back seat was all filled with whites. And he did allow her to sit there. But I m very glad that has changed. Just from a human point-of-view. 19 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Well Bonnie, you and Dennis have supported scholarships and funded other opportunities for students at OSU through the years. What s been your motivation for your philanthropy and how have you, in turn, been enriched by that? Our main motivation, I guess, is because we were treated so fairly, so wonderfully, and when Dennis came to school up here, he had a Sears Scholarship I believe for either fifty or a hundred dollars. Over that, he had to earn all the money that was spent. He drove the garbage truck for a while for 15 a month so he could buy razor blades and such as that. He worked on different farms here, the university farms. He held numerous jobs. And ended up being in Phi Kappa Phi. We both worked jobs. I believe the first year I was here, I worked for four hours a day for 25-cents an hour or 25 a month. My room and board at the dorm was 25 dollars a month. The next year, I got a raise to 30-cents an hour or 30 a month and room and board was raised to 30 a month. The next year I got a raise up to 50-cents. Room and board went up to 50 a month. So we know and appreciate what jobs mean to students. We believe in their working, but not excessively where they can t support their family or themselves without losing their health. So scholarships are very important to us. Does it give you a good feeling, Bonnie, knowing that you ve been able through these years to help students with their college and has that been special for you and Dennis? Yes. I think part of it, too, I remember what a struggle it was for my parents to get their degrees and raise a family with three children that were always needing whatever was available. And kids haven t changed. We believe anyone that s willing to come and try is entitled to attend. In your opinion, what s special about OSU? What does it still have to offer young people similar to what it offered you when you were going to college? I think it s the attitude that everybody has. I don t know of any place that has the atmosphere that we have up here and it s the attitude of the people. They re all friendly and when we first came here, one of the requirements for the freshman was to people on campus would say What do you say, freshman? And the freshmen were supposed to answer back Beat OU. Can we do it? And then, Yes. With a kind of an emphasis before the yes. Did they have the Howdy Week then? Did you say Howdy to everybody? 20 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Yes, we did. We really did. And I hope I have been treated so courteously here. When we were at one of the barbeque places here one night and Dennis and I have both changed appearances more than a little. He s on a walker, and I have shrunk at least a few inches; we ve had more than a few health problems. So we came in on this cold blustery night to get some barbecue. This young couple from school from here, were in line in front of us. They hadn t decided what they wanted yet. They said, You go ahead please. I said, Oh no, I haven t thank you, but I m doing just fine. I need to make up my mind. So when I got to my seat later, set the tray down, and went back to pay, the man there at the counter said, Yours is already paid for. I said, Oh no, I haven t paid yet. He said, The young people in front of you paid. I went over to them and said May I please pay for it? They said No, have a great day. She had on a soccer sweater, and I did find out, her name was Hillary Green, and I tried my best to find out, because there are three Hillary Greens enrolled here, but because of the privacy act I could not get the addresses of any of them because they re not listed in the phone book. They have cell phones. So I never could even write to them. But to me, that s typical of OSU students. In terms of leadership opportunities and student activities outside the classroom, do you feel that is important to students today? Oh, yes. You were very much engaged at your time. Yes. Do you feel that s important for students? I think it is. I ve learned, as you have as well, that you get more out of it than the people you help. They will have the satisfaction there when they have their own family and raise their own children of knowing that somebody who really cares about them is going to be up here. You ve managed to maintain a lifelong relationship with OSU giving of your time, your talent, your resources. Why have you been so faithful to OSU? We love it. We lived in Oklahoma City for about 40 years. But we found out that we were coming up here at least three times a week because at that time Dennis was on the Board of Governors and he had several meetings. We were coming to baseball games. We were coming to wrestling matches, football games, basketball games. So when we decided that we were growing a little bit older and it wasn t very smart 21 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith to be driving at night all that time, and he was assisting with the group that was raising money for Karsten Creek Golf Course and we were among those that were interested in getting a lot out there. We built our home out there, and it has been great, because he s 85 now and I m 84 and we still are able to drive to come in for the games at night. We would not feel that much at ease if we were in Oklahoma City. Because there are a lot men drivers on the road coming at you from the other directions. You really have to take your ease getting through those traffic attempts. Well, sort of a follow up question, but you and Dennis have been involved in the Alumni Association over the years, the Oklahoma City chapter there, the OSU Foundation and other organizations. Can you share some highlights of your activities with the booster groups, with the Alumni Association and Foundation, trips, different things, some highlights for you? That s one thing that I was thankful that we were able to do, when we were able physically to make the trips we got to go to several of the bowl games and two of the Big Eight Championships and we re glad we did it while we could. And had a lot of friends, made a lot of friends there that we would not have known otherwise. I have told you this personally, but we truly mean it. You did a fantastic job as Alumni Director. I appreciate the companies helping build this building, but I still think it ought to be the Jerry Gill building. I appreciate it, but this interview about Bonnie Smith. (Laughs) Thanks. One more question. Why is it important for alumni to stay engaged with OSU? Keeps them young. Keeps them young, great. No, if alumni are not interested, then why should the students be? I do remember this from cheerleader days on those times that they that there wasn t a very big crowd there. I kept thinking, why don t the alumni come back? Why don t they show some interest in this? After I got out and we were trying to finance our own family and money was tight because you seem to go through a time when you get a job, then you go broke for some reason or another and then you make it back again, during that time, you realize why people don t buy tickets and don t travel hundreds of miles to come back. But when the time comes that you can, you realize also that it s important to do what you can. I think that we have a big group here that truly love this school and they, I believe, are trying to do all they can to help and will continue to do so. 22 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith You mentioned some sports, but Cowboy sports have been a special interest obviously for you and Dennis. Especially, I think golf you mentioned. But where does your passion for sports come from? I had two older brothers and I tried to do everything they did. I found out early in life that if you could cry that it helped a lot. But on the other hand if you pestered them enough they would show you how to hit a ball. We had a neighborhood football team and my brothers and I were on one team and then kids in the neighborhood were on the other. My brothers taught me how to catch a football and run with it, and the boys in the neighborhood found out real quickly if they tackled me, my brothers would beat up on them. That wasn t fair was it? Well, it depends on how you looked at it. It was just a game. That s right. In addition to we eluded to some of this earlier with support to scholarships but in addition to sports are there other areas of OSU that you and Dennis have a special interest in? I m just really pretty interested in all of it. Dennis was fortunate enough on his first job, to go to work for Big Chief Drilling Company. He was hired by a fellow fire station gang member, Frank Lookabaugh hired him as the geologist. Then Frank s boss was Mr. Payne who had graduated here at OSU. He was a wrestler and I think the flyweight probably at that time. He adored OSU. He worked his way through completely. And then he had established Big Chief Drilling Company. We just loved OSU and Mr. Payne did as well. He had a method in his madness in that any time you asked him to do a favor, he would ask you to do something back. Usually for OSU. So we learned from him that it was a good thing to have. In your mind, what s the importance of sports to the University? I think that it really helps the whole group became as one. I kind of think of OU as the Representatives and OSU as the Independent. (Laughs) All of that group, I have learned too, since that time, that there are some good people that come from OU. But I think it just helps you come together as one body. How do you feel about our new sports facilities and the plans for the athletic village? I think it s fantastic, and I know that there are a lot of people that 23 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith disagree with me on this, but I think it s one of the best things that could have happened to the town of Stillwater. The improvement in that area they are all going to be proud of it when they re done. I think Mike Holder, he and Boone Pickens together, have done OSU a big, big favor. It couldn t have been accomplished any other way. In addition, how do you feel about all the building renovation going on and new construction for academic buildings on campus? I think it s fantastic. We come into town at least twice a day, and all of a sudden there will be a building there that we haven t seen before because that street has been blocked off. Then when it starts again, for instance the North Classroom Building, we didn t even know it was being built until it was already up. (Laughter) I just think we have so much to be grateful for. Have you ever seen a time in OSU history like this, when there s so much construction building and growing going on? It s really you can t imagine it unless you ve seen it. This building is another one that s a good example. As an alum of OSU, are you excited about the future of OSU under the leadership of our new president, Burns Hargis? I think he will be and is probably the best president we could have ever gotten. I think he will be the best one we ve had. And we ve had some fine ones. I think Dr. Bennett had a lot of foresight. I think that Burns Hargis has the ability to take care of the problem no matter what field it s in. I know in Oklahoma City, he did so much for that town. I would say more than any other man down there. Even in all that the Gaylords did and so many other people like that, I think Burns Hargis accomplished it for Oklahoma City without any self-praise and without any recognition of his own. Everybody down there loved him. I never heard one bad word against him. I don t know his wife personally, but she has to be a lovely woman. Looking back through the years, what are some of your special memories of OSU? When you were here on campus, but since, over the years, some special favorite memories that you have? Well, meeting Dennis. (Laughter.) You didn t have to say that just cause he s here. Actually, finally hearing him ask me to marry him, but that wasn t here. 24 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith He was a hard one to rope in. But I thoroughly enjoyed all of the athletics. I enjoyed all of the dormitories. I lived in three different dormitories as well as the Sigma Nu house and apartments and just got to know everybody on campus. Of course there were only about 5,000 students here at the time, so we could be well acquainted with a lot of students. Bonnie, what about since? Over the years you ve still had that connection for life over the 50-60 years since you left. Do you have some favorite memories from times and events since you were on campus? Since? After you left OSU? Well, we ve had just an awful lot of activities up here. But again, the friendships that we made have been wonderful. To see people like Mr. Payne who started out with nothing because I think his mother died when he was four years old and for him to be able to accomplish all he did, and keep helping people on down the line makes us want to be the same. I ve had two sons who have graduated here, and we ve watched the friendships they ve made. One of them still lives in Oklahoma. The other one lives in Texas. But they ve been able to be successful in their fields I feel because of the attitude that they had when they came up here to school. You don t have that attitude in all universities. I think that the one that they re able to develop here at OSU is one that will see them through no matter what field they re going to work, or what city they re going to live or what state. Earlier you mentioned that Mr. Payne and others that have been some people who have been special to you through the years, at OSU, but then after you left OSU they ve been significant in your life that you associate with OSU? Well my parents graduated, both of them got their master s here. My sister-in-law Noma Jean Nichols Emerson was here and I introduced her to my brother during World War II so that s been a wonderful, long relationship. And it just goes on down the row. It just keeps multiplying and the memories that we ve had have just been tremendous. Is there anything else that you d like to share? Any thoughts about OSU? You ve been associated with it in some many ways and so many different facets, but anything that we haven t covered that you d like to share? No. Other than it s just very precious. And I feel sorry for people that 25 Gill Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill have not gotten to attend here. I really do. It was a happy experience for me. It has proven to make a happy life for us. So I recommend that everybody try to get in here. That s great. ------- End of September 19, 2008 interview ------- My name is Jerry Gill. Today is December 8, 2008. I m visiting with Bonnie Smith in her home in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This is the second interview with her for the O-STATE Stories project of the Oklahoma Oral History Program. Bonnie, thank you for agreeing to another interview. You re very gracious. You re welcome. Today, we talked earlier but today I would like to focus on your student leadership activities. You were a history setting and incredibly involved student leader at Oklahoma State University, actually Oklahoma A M at that time. Right. And served as the first women president of the Student Government Association, then called Student Association. Now I m reading from the book of Who s Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges 1944-45: Student Association President, Student Senate President, Independent Students President, Varsity Cheerleader and Pepper Cheerleader, Hall President, Victory Halls Grand Council President, Future Homemaker State President, College Yearbook Copy Editor, Talbot Recognition Award, Mortarboard, Orange Quill Sponsor, four years women s athletic association, Student Entertainer four years, Band, FFA Queen, Champion State Bowling Team and on and on and on. And I just read part of that out of there Bonnie. Wow Did you ever sleep? A little. How d you do all that? The question was did I do anything but activities. I really majored in campusology and enjoyed every minute of it You made the Dean s Honor Roll, which I guess you had to have 3.0 or better for four years I noticed. 26 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Right. I want to set the record straight there too. That you did go to class and you did study. That I did. That s great. Bonnie, can you recall what motivated you to be that involved? Part of it, Jerry, was the fact that my parents had worked so hard to put themselves through college and to make sure that I had an education. I just wanted to make them proud. You obviously were competitive, Bonnie. Where did that come from? I had two older brothers. They thought I was a spoiled baby and I had to show them that I was just as good as they were. I wasn t, but I tried to prove it. No, they were very good about teaching me a lot of things. One of my brothers was really good in athletics and mathematics, and the other brother was very good in athletics and music and art. So between they tried to teach me what they had gotten ahead of me. Did you play sports in high school at that time? At that time it wasn t advisable for girls to play basketball so we didn t have it. We did have softball and tennis such as that. But not an athletic program like they have now. I really got involved in it when I came to college because there was a good program here. Out of all these activities, we described some of them, which ones did you enjoy the most? I guess all of them. I really did. Pick out some. What did you and I ll ask some additional questions later. You mean of the . Just of the activities generally. Not just sports, but the activities. Which ones did you get the most satisfaction and enjoyment out of? I guess it was student politics. Must have been, you were president of so many organizations 27 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Well, I had seen so many students that came to Oklahoma State and they felt like they were very inferior to everyone else. I just wanted them to know that no matter what, everybody had an equal opportunity and could accomplish anything they wanted to. It was my goal really for everybody to feel like they were as good as everybody else. I thought our university was just fantastic for that reason. What did you enjoy most about campaigning for office and what lessons did you learn from that? Competition was one of them. Again, there were so many rumors about what actually went on, and I still don t know what was actually true and what was not. But I just wanted them to feel like you could be yourself and accomplish whatever you wanted to. What were some of your themes? Do you recall your messages when you ran for Student Association and other you know the hall leadership and presidency and et cetera? Not really. Do you remember some things you emphasized? The only campaigning people did, we didn t have cards. It was kind of a game sort of thing. If we had an Independent meeting, or a meeting of the Independents, it would be in a room and it would just be filled. Of course the way the Independents felt was that fraternities and sororities looked down on them and they were going to be very sure that they weren t going to be looked down upon. So you were an Independent then? I was very Independent, yes. Did campaigning in those years, during World War II 43- 45, did you just go around and see different groups? How did you reach people if you didn t have you know you didn t have the internet, you didn t have a lot of printing and handouts. So how did you reach people? We had the O Collegian. You could write letters to the editor. It was kind of a competitive thing. Now the fraternity and sorority group was called the Representatives. So there were actually two political parties, the Representatives and the Independents. Anytime that we felt like we were not getting a far shake, we would go to their meeting and just volunteer to give whatever information that they d like. We had a humor magazine called the Aggievator. We could write articles for the 28 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Aggievator and the O Collegian, as well. They were very good about publishing anything that had to do with the campus life. It was fun. Did you have some rallies? Some meetings where you d rally Yes we did. And one rally in particular I was not at, but heard about the year before. And that was the one where Ferrel Rogers and Russell Holloway spoke. I told you this before, I don t know if it s been repeated or not, but Russell Holloway would have the group meet around Theta Pond. And he addressed a group of women that night as Ladies and Sorority Members . That didn t go over too well with the Dean of Women. So Russell was campused more or less for quite some time as a result of that. But it was just entertainment and really all in good fun. Did you have some slogans that you recall? Not that I recall. Other than just Vote Independent or Vote Representative , whatever side you happened to be on. Did you have a committee to round up the votes to get people to come to the polls? Well in the dorms, we were very active at that time. We d go around to be sure and the groups would meet in the dorms. A whole group would meet down in the living rooms of the dorms. You d kind of heard about how they had all been mistreated. Underrepresented. Get their ire up. All we had to do to beat them was to show up to vote. And they did. So you had more numbers. We did. So your party strategy was to get out the vote. And we had a very active town group too. I think the name of it was Tau Gamma which stood for Town Girls. So at one time the Independents held nearly well they did hold all the major offices on campus at the time. I know it changed after the war, but during the war years the Independents were very active. It was a very democratic time too. They all realized that the way our country was, that one person was as good as another. 29 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith At that time during World War II, did patriotism enter into some of your, at least indirectly, into some of your campaigns? Just about everything. I believe almost everybody in school had a brother or a relative, a father, maybe a husband that was in the service. We just went to all the trouble that we knew to provide for those that were in service. It was just an effort of everybody really in the state of Oklahoma and throughout the nation. There was no divisiveness at all. There were some organizations, I was trying to remember the name of them. It s like the Fifth-something. It wasn t Fifth Column, but they were supposedly communist. All you had to do to blackmail somebody was to even hint that they were communist. Now we didn t do that in the politics here on campus. But it was not above or beyond some of the local politicians to hint that somebody was not patriotic. It was certainly an effort by everybody to see that the boys overseas were taken care of. What did you learn about time management? If you were making at least a 3.0 grade point average while campaigning and holding these offices I learned that you do without sleep. You do what s most important to you, just as we do now. Made you really focus on things. Right. And to be very productive. I must admit that most of the examinations were studied in an all night study session the night before the exam. Because there were basketball games, football games and baseball games all those needed to be attended. Let me pick from two perspectives. First off, if I understand you lettered in tennis, softball, volleyball and was a member of the state championship Bowling Team. Is that correct? That s right. Can you share some stories about your athletic activities? Well the bowling thing was kind of interesting because you would go down to the bowling alley and have one sheet that you would fill out as you bowl. You were required to bowl a certain number of games. Then those sheets were turned in and they were entered against the other 30 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill colleges in the state. Of course they were certified by the people there at the bowling alley where you actually bowled. Where was the bowling alley, Bonnie? It was on Main Street. Main Street. I was thinking there s a furniture store there now. It was right across the street from Caf Bella. Okay. East side of the street. Mr. and Mrs. Carpenter owned the bowling alley. So it was an actual course that you could enroll in as far as physical education. Now, it doesn t say anything about my lettering in swimming I m sure, because on my diving final I hit a belly buster and knocked myself out. Had to be pulled out with a pole. So you didn t letter in swimming? I didn t letter in swimming But you tried? Right. So some stories, do you remember some in volleyball and tennis and softball? Who were some of the schools you were competing against? Well actually, it was more or less just local as far as we didn t actually compete against the other colleges. First place, you didn t have gasoline, we didn t have a car. That was why on the bowling it was done by mail on all of the competition there. It was really more like intramural. Sort of more like what we call club sports now? Right. Well when you weren t competing, you were cheering. Right. Can you tell me about your activities with the Peppers and the Varsity Cheerleading team? 31 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Right. Peppers These were different organizations, weren t they? Yes. The Peppers and the Aggiettes were the two ladies clubs that competed against each other but were very loyal to each other. And then the men s were the Ruf-Nex and the Hellhounds. Okay. This was like football, basketball games, wrestling matches. Uh-huh. They supported all the sports. When I was first asked to be a cheerleader, I was asked to be a cheerleader for the Peppers. I represented the Peppers Pep Club. And then the next I moved on up to Varsity Cheerleader and stayed in that until I graduated. And Varsity Cheer was more significant. I mean more of the official There were two varsity cheerleaders, first a man and a woman. The others were represented the different there were freshman cheerleaders, freshman girl and a freshman boy. And then the others were all the different pep clubs. Oh, Okay. So there s just one varsity cheerleader male and one varsity cheerleader female. That s right. Then a year or so later, I don t remember for sure on this, there were no men varsity cheerleaders because they d gone into service. So Lil Scanlin and I were both varsity cheerleaders at the same time. We practiced at least two nights a week, trying to get our regimen coordinated there. Did you have uniforms? Yes, we did. We had heavy white wool sweaters. The men wore a white shirt with the sweater, and then white slacks and white or saddle oxfords. The women wore the sweater with a white dickey that was a round collar and pleated wool skirts that reached about just below the knee, and then white satin tights beneath that so nothing showed that wasn t supposed to. Then we wore white anklets and saddle oxfords. And the dirtier the saddle oxfords, the more in style you were. What are some of your favorite games that you remember? One that I remember was held in Tulsa when Glen Dobbs was all American, and Bob Fennimore and Neill Armstrong were two of our main ones. There were several things that stood out about that game. 32 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith One was that we were not supposed to win it but we did. The other one was that one of the spectators came up to me and said Ma am I m an old cheerleader from Oklahoma A M, may I please ring your cowbell? I had a big cowbell like this. I handed him my cowbell and he took off with it. So haven t seen that cowbell since. Nor the cow. But that and the victory over TU was just great. Then I remember the one that we had at Taft Stadium in Oklahoma City against OU. I believe John Gaddis was the captain of the football team at the time. The game was held at Taft Stadium because of the shortage of cars and gasoline, and that was centrally located for everybody in the state. The bet between the two captains was whichever team won would of course get to cheer the opposite person on, and the loser was supposed to push a peanut from the fifty yard line down to the goal line with his nose. That one I remember. And John Gaddis later became a very prominent member of the FBI. He, of course, did cheer the OU captain on to push that a little harder, fellow Those were two of the outstanding games I remember. Did you go to the bowl game that year? We went to the Cotton Bowl. Cotton Bowl. That was also the days that the cheerleaders, if they showed up at a game, furnished their own transportation and paid their own expenses. But we did have free uniforms. We did get our sweater free. But we didn t get to keep it. It was passed on down the line, so it was pretty rare by the time it got on down the way. Did you have a good turnout at the Cotton Bowl? Yes, it was full, best I remember. Another interesting thing about that was it was of course during the war, and they had a ten o clock curfew for all the servicemen. They had a big pep rally down town by the Baker and the office hotels and the streets were just crammed full. Then, if we happened to have a date with a man that was in the military, the MPs came along and said It s ten o clock, you have to be off the street. That was different. Poured water on the party, I bet. Yeah it did. It broke the party up pretty quickly. 33 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Well let s see, also in your many talents, you participated in the student entertainment bureau. Yes. What was your talent? I m not sure it was a talent, but it was a hard to get in those days, I was an accordionist. You played the accordion? Yes. We would I believe our salary was 50-cents an hour that we were paid to entertain whoever wanted Oklahoma A M to bring a group of entertainers. I remember going to Cushing for one one meeting of the Chamber of Commerce, I think. One problem I never was able to overcome was making a face when I made a mistake, and I made several. Anyway, after my solo, then the MC said You may have thought that she made a mistake, but she didn t really. She just pinched her stomach with her accordion. What were some of the songs in your repertoire? Stormy Weather and of course we knew all of the military songs. In the Mood was probably the one that I played the most because it was one that Glen Miller made famous I think that year. I also accompanied one of the other student entertainers named Phyllis Berky. She was a singer, a blues singer, and incidentally took my place on the cheerleader squad after I graduated. Phyllis Berky? Phyllis Berky. She later married Howard Stratton. She died just this year. She was going her last year was the year that was the last year for the woolen sweaters, and she asked Mr. Iba if she could have her sweater. He gave it to her and she was going to send it over to go into the Heritage Hall? museum there. Heritage Hall there at Gallagher-Iba. Unfortunately she died before I was able to get the sweater from her. But her intentions were good and she was as good an Aggie as we ever had. So we described your political career as a student, your athletics, cheerleading career, entertainment do you ever look back now and 34 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill think about yourself as a role model for OSU women and especially student leaders? Actually there were a lot of them. Melba Osborne was my roommate for three years. She was head twirler. She and I still communicate with each other. Her ambition was to be able to hit the top of the ceiling at Gallagher-Iba. When she was performing she would throw the baton up real high; at that time the ceiling was lower than it is now, but there were a lot of dents in that ceiling that she put in there with her baton. She said there was one man, she couldn t remember his name, that would always greet her at the door and say, I ve got a dollar for every time you hit that ceiling. He could hardly wait to see if she was going to hit it again. I don t think she ever took the dollars, but she always tried for him. Well, Bonnie, in your mind, what is the importance of leadership opportunities and activities outside the classroom and the educational experience. I think it s probably the effect you have on other people. Those that are too shy to make a fool of themselves like I did on many occasions. The most lasting thing for me has been the friendships that I made, because at the time we were in school I would imagine the most students we had was between 5 and 6,000, so it gave you the opportunity to know so many people. I m still communicating with tremendous numbers. Wyotta Davis was a twirler, and Melba, of course. Dorothy Jameson had been I think she was the most outstanding woman athlete of the year she graduated. She had been all-state in basketball in high school. She s a very dear friend of mine. Her grandson is Dr. Brett Jamison who is an orthopedic surgeon. I was going to ask you if it was the Jamesons from Davis. I grew up in southern Oklahoma in Lindsey close to Davis. Right. I imagine you all competed every now and then. But she had a son John who is a dentist and was named to the Hall of Fame for Creighton University where he got his dental degree. Then they had well I think Dorothy had let s see John, she had two sons and a daughter that graduated here. It s just been really interesting. She was really competitive and her children were carrying that right on down the line. And they have really supported OSU. You hear sometimes about the conflict between academics and extra-curricular activities. You obviously balanced those two well, Bonnie, in your career. How do you see those mutually benefitting each other? Obviously you d say, you need to get the grades and get the education, is the other part of that important as well? 35 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Well, yes. My dad and mother were teachers. I could see the benefit of both sides there. One thing that I am a firm believer in is a student getting a job of some kind and to work on that job while they re going through school. I truthfully learned more from the jobs that I had than any one course that I had. I was fortunate enough to get to work as a student secretary in the college of education, and worked there for three years under Wilma Black who taught me how to type theses. We were allowed to use the typewriters there at the school of education on jobs when we were not working. So I would work at night to earn spending money typing theses. And I worked on student entertainers. But I got to know the professors there at the college of education, or school of education at that time. I guess one thing that I was fortunate was that my parents had gotten their master s here. Several of their teachers were also my teachers many years later. Now your degree was from the college of home economics, is that correct? My B.S. was in vocational home economics education. Then I got my master s in counseling and education administration through the College of Education. How did your leadership experiences at OSU influence you after graduation? As a spouse, as a parent, as a community leader? Well, fortunately I married a man who also graduated from OSU. We had many friends in common. He graduated in animal sciences and his work after we got married was as a veteran s agriculture teacher in southern Oklahoma, and many of the people that we were associated with in the field of agriculture. Also a lot of them were in sports that we knew here. He taught at Temple and one of the football coaches at Temple had been on the football team while we were here. Then later he became a geologist and went to work for Mr. W. T. Payne who owned Big Chief Drilling Company. Mr. Payne was one of the early graduates, I would say around 1918 up here and had worked his way completely through school selling aluminum pots and pans was one of the jobs he had. He truly was a self-made man, and a wonderful individual, and loved Oklahoma A M. Did your leadership development you talked about time management, learning about people are these things that served you well in life as you travelled down different roads? Yes. Again I can t take credit for being too successful on time management but it has really helped. We have three sons that are all graduate mechanical engineers and yet each one of them went into a 36 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith separate field later. One of them went into the oil and gas business, one of them stayed a mechanical engineer and the other is an anesthesiologist. I think with all the activities that they were in going through school. For instance, the Cub Scouts and Boy Scouts, and baseball and the football little league football. When you have three sons who need to be at different locations at the same time you learn how to change your schedule. You learn about time management again. That s about as time management as we could manage. Bonnie, probably as a parent you had some leadership roles in some of those organizations. Maybe as a Cub Scout den mother or different things. Right. Some of those things you would not have ever thought about helped you that you learned back at Oklahoma A M. No, but it s very rewarding now to see that our 10-year old grandson is in Cub Scouts and his dad is very active with him in all of those activities. What advice would you give to OSU students today, particularly young women, about being involved in activities outside the classroom and especially leadership opportunities? I would say do as well as you can in a classroom, but don t sacrifice what you can learn from other activities, because I learned a tremendous amount and again, lifelong friends from Future Homemakers. People all over the state that I first knew from high school and then through college. And then later as I got out of school, Marguerite Scruggs, for instance, was a student here at the time that I was in high school and then later in college. She s been a very loyal supporter of OSU and is still I was going through the book that listed the scholarships that have been contributed to College of Human and Environmental Sciences. It s amazing how many scholarships she contributes every year. I know that when I went to apply for a job in Dallas as a home economist for Lonestar Gas Company after I got out of school, they didn t ask what my degrees were in. They just wanted to know that I had a degree. They were interested in the activities that I had been associated with because in any job in the public, you re going to run into somebody that has a talent in one field or another and the more of those fields you can become acquainted with, the better off you re going to be getting a job. 37 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Bonnie, are you pleased with the opportunities young women have today for leadership and seem like the ceiling has certainly been expanded and raised for women students today. I am very pleased with the opportunities they have. I m old fashioned enough to there was a time, Jerry, when I was in college that I thought women really ought to be running the world, but I don t believe that now. Oh surely not I believe they have their place and if they try to take over the men s jobs, I think they re giving up one of the most valuable assets that women are born with. I just think that one reason that a woman should have a good education is so she can help her children be better and to understand what the world is all about. I just think that a woman s job is very, very important, but I don t think it s taking over the man s world. There s a lot more opportunities nowadays, aren t there? Oh there are. There really are. In both fields actually. Any thoughts looking back and I ll say this I know you wouldn t as modest as you are but you really had a spectacular career, leadership career in presidencies and offices and the things that you did in college. Any thoughts about you could have taken these and gone probably a lot of different professional areas, been a professional woman, had a career of your own? And certainly you ve had a very successful career and a wonderful life, but any second thoughts about the direction of your life and the things you ve done? I feel like I ve been very richly blessed and just had the opportunities that I had in school. I will say this, Jerry. As far as the offices that I held, my purpose in that was to improve the organization and make it the best one going and to work with the other people that were in that, and it was not for the glory of holding the office because I found out a long time ago if that s your purpose, then you re not going to accomplish anything. But I truly felt like we accomplished a lot in different organizations and I certainly tried. That is one thing that I tried to get over to my sons when they were participating in different organizations: if you don t have a purpose for that organization but have only the name of being the president, it is not going to work. That sounds a lot like Bonnie Emerson Smith. Well I truly believe that. For instance, with the Independents; I knew so 38 Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill many girls in the dormitory that actually quit school when they were not pledged because they felt like they were failures. I don t know what s happened to those girls that quit, but I know the ones that hung in there, regardless, turned into fantastic people. Even though at the time I thought Representatives were our enemies, with the many years that have passed I ve found out they re human too. Really some of my best friends. I just hope they forgive me for some of the things. Some of the campaign statements. Right. In conclusion, Bonnie, what today you ve seen changes in Oklahoma State University through the years. What do you say to young women today maybe daughters, granddaughters of friends of yours that are thinking about Oklahoma State University? What do you say to them about Oklahoma State University? You mean as they As prospective students coming to Oklahoma State University. I just don t think this school can be beaten. It s just fantastic. But I think that s probably true of any school, you re going to get out of it what you put into it. If you want to sit back and feel sorry for yourself, you re going to be going home very disappointed. But if you want to cooperate with your teachers I did find out that the teachers really are interested in their students and would do anything they could to help. I can think of one graduate assistant, for instance that taught a sociology class that I was in, and one night he invited our entire class to his home to have slumgolian and I hadn t heard of slumgolian, I didn t know what it was. At the time, I of course we call it beef stew or whatever. But he and his wife had really gone to a lot of trouble, and there were probably 30 of us. I didn t realize at the time what a financial sacrifice that was for him to have so many students because we all had great appetites. I just hope that at the time that I had enough class about me to write and tell them how much I appreciated it. But I ve appreciated it more as I have gotten older and my husband was a graduate student and we were broke with three children. I just couldn t imagine having 30 college students in my house because we had a very small house at the time, and feeding them all. That was just one instance of many kindnesses that I was shown by the teachers and the different employees of this school. Bonnie, anything else we ve had opportunities to visit and have a 39 Smith Gill Smith conversation on a couple of occasions. Other things that maybe we haven t covered, some things you d like to talk about or bring up that are special to you. There were several that were pretty special but I won t mention them. But no I think the special thing was getting the world s best husband and I would recommend it to any girl getting out of high school: come to Oklahoma State University because the men students make great husbands. Thanks. One thing that I would really urge anyone attending college is don t shut yourself up in one group. Be with those that you would like to be like, but more importantly be with those that you would like your children to be like because there is a future for everyone. The future is what you make it. I just think it s very important that you are able to live with yourself, that you are able to respect yourself. There are those students that really have had no chance at all but yet are putting themselves through school. I would urge everybody to get a job of some kind so they understand. For instance, when I first enrolled here, in the dormitories we all were required to buy meal tickets and we had breakfast cafeteria style, lunch cafeteria style, and dinner was semi-formal service. There was a host. In the girls dormitory, one girl would be host, one girl would be hostess. We were taught how to serve. The host was required to carve, learn how to carve and the hostess learned how to serve a salad and pass the plates to the right. So many students had never been exposed to proper table service, how to hold a fork. We were given a brochure that taught which fork to use, which spoon to use. If you were a host or a hostess what your duties were. The students that worked wore white uniforms and white caps to keep the hair out of their eyes. Some of the kids thought they were too good to be a waitress, and then later in life when it was necessary for them to do it, the person that was the waitress was probably their boss in later years. I was going to be a dietician until I saw how the kids griped about the food no matter how good it was. I thought, This is not for me. Of course chemistry had a lot to do with that too, and I wasn t too good in chemistry. But the main thing as a student is don t be afraid to explore at a different activity and especially don t be afraid to be a friend of a teacher and don t be afraid to be a friend to a student who obviously has no friends. If you go through that, I think you ll come out with an education that is very meaningful no matter what subject you take. 40 Gill Smith Gill Again you recall your major motivation for wanting to be so involved and you ve shared a lot of this in your stories here. Is there some passion that kind of drove you to want to reach out and touch other people and be engaged in so many things? Well, I was raised in an oil field community that I believe was five square miles. When we first moved there, there was no high school and my dad was asked to form the high school. And it was pretty much a farming community until the Seminole and Bowlegs oilfields hit. My parents had no support except themselves. I can remember that my mother taught the lower four grades in this eight grades school and my dad taught the upper four grades. The food situation it was during depression years and my mother asked each child to bring one thing that they had that they could spare. They might bring a potato, they might bring an onion, they might bring a tomato. But they would prepare that before school, whatever anybody brought. That stew would cook during the hours. I watched what those students turned into in later years. It was fantastic. They were heads of oil companies, huge oil companies. One man was one of the executives of the Tulsa Public Schools who s had several works published. His wife was one of the head counselors in the Tulsa Public Schools. The successes of students that have had a rough time growing up has really impressed me with how important it is to take advantage of the opportunities. Most of those students worked their way through college, after they had successful grade school and high school careers. The main thing again was just to see what decent people they turned into. My parents, again, my dad had a Model-T Ford and they raised a garden, so in addition to teaching, Mother and Daddy would load up the vegetables from the garden and go through the oil field community and mother would knock on the door and ask if they would like to buy some vegetables. That way they were able to support their family because teachers salaries were pretty pathetic at that time. I just feel like I ve been blessed so much. Another thing I wanted to explain or stress to someone coming to school don t be ashamed of your religion and one of the richest associations that you will have will be with your church. Stillwater has a tremendous number of churches that really cater to the university students. We have lifelong friends that we made through the church. So many of my friends had the same experience with whatever church they attended. Bonnie, summarizing a couple of things that you ve discussed in our conversations, that you ve brought up that motivated you to be a leader and be engaged as much as you were is you felt like people should reach 41 Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith Gill Smith their full potential and reach out to people and be engaged in relationship building is an important part of being sort of all they can be. Right. I think you indicated also that part of your motivation particularly for the political organizations was to help better those organizations and people in those organizations. Right. Is that a fair summary of those two statements? Yes. Again Jerry I had, and this was and I apologize for harping on fraternities and sororities, but we were from a very small town. We had two girls from our school. One of them was from a very successful family, the other one whose dad ran a filling station. It was all they could do to exist on what he made. But both girls, when they came up here all of a sudden they did pledge, but all of a sudden they became ashamed of their parents because they didn t have the background, the table manners, the dress, when in reality it was taking all their parents had to keep them in school with what they could earn. My motivation was for every student, no matter what their financial background, no matter what their educational background, was for every student to acknowledge that their family was so important. Unfortunately it happens that they just don t realize what their parents are sacrificing to put them through school. There again, sort of that cycle. Because one should really take advantage of the opportunity once they get to college to maximize. They really can, and it s their one opportunity to give back to their parents while they re able to do it. If they make a success of their college career, that s all their parents want. They want them to be decent human beings, patriotic and live a life that they re not going to be ashamed of later. That successful college student career, if you will, prepares them for a successful life afterwards. Right. If they live their life in such a way that they have self-respect, they re going to have success. So that s what my opinion was. I didn t always live up to it, but I tried. 42 Gill You did a pretty good job. ------- End of December 8, 2008 interview -------..