 Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr Today is Saturday October 20th, 2007. My name is Karen Neurohr and I am with the OSU Library and this is for the O-STATE Stories oral history project. We are at the ConocoPhillips Alumni Center at Oklahoma State University and it is Homecoming this weekend. Would you please introduce yourselves? I m Sheila Parr from Tulsa, Oklahoma. And I m Royce Parr from Tulsa, Oklahoma. Well, why did you decide to attend OAMC or OSU? What made you decide to go to school here? Yours is a better story. Well I was going to the University of Oklahoma and my roommate-to-be joined the Navy the week before we were supposed to be getting enrolled. So another good friend came by the house and said, Would you like to go up to Stillwater with me and enroll in college? Why not? So we stopped at a Texaco station in downtown Stillwater and asked where the University was. Since he was going to enroll in aeronautical, I just went to the School of Engineering with him. I was going to be an engineer of course, everybody was in those days. We had the same schedule, except we got down to whether we wanted to go to Army ROTC or Air Force ROTC. I had no idea there was a requirement. You had to pick one, and I was sitting there kind of thinking about it. Finally this sergeant says to me, he said Okay, let s put it this way, would you rather ride in a tank or an airplane? I picked the tank, and that s how come I became an Army officer. 5 Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr Okay. Well my uncle attended Oklahoma A M and he started Varsity Review, this was years ago during the depression years. He was a cheerleader What was his name? Howard White, Howard E. White. And the library has some of the published fight songs that he wrote, and we have some of them on record. They have some of his scrapbooks. But he, of course, was a varsity cheerleader and all I ever heard was from him and then some of my friends were coming here. I was the only girl and the first woman in my family to attend a college or university. So that was my influence there. What year did you come? 56. And you finished in? 60. And what year did you come? I came in September 53, and finished in January 58. What did you major in when you were students here? You said you were in engineering. But I switched over, finally, to geology Geology. cause I was going to go around the world and find oil. Oh you were? Which, I didn t. Mm, I bet that was an interesting career, though. Yes. Well, I majored in the arts and sciences, and had a journalism degree, kind of a double major. And then I went into education and became a 6 Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr teacher. I did my practice teaching at Stillwater High School. Oh you did? What was your field? English there, I did Sophomore English there. I had to stay on campus. I was a secretary-treasurer of the Student Senate. It was an elected position, so they felt that I needed to stay here. I was on the O Colly staff and I made 44 dollars a month at the Senate office. I made a little bit on the O Colly office and I had to do that to pay for my wedding dress. (Laughs) Oh, so how did you two meet? A blind date. Yes, he was a senior and I was a freshman and my pledge ribbons were not even frayed yet when I had my first date with him. He went ahead and graduated, and waited until he made sure I had an employable occupation before he came back and married me. I came back to campus from 58 to 60 as an Army counterintelligence agent and looked her up through my sister and started dating. We were married in May of 1960. Where did you live when you were going to school here? I lived three semesters in East Bennett Hall, and then I guess six semesters in Cordell Hall. And my freshman year I was at Murray, and then my other three years I was at the Chi Omega house. What do you remember about where you lived, or do you have any stories about what it was like to live in those places? I thought it was great food in both places. Oh really?(Laughs) I think I realized when I got to college that our table at home was not that great. I liked that and I liked the intramural athletics in the dorm, and I just liked the boys I met there. Where were you from originally? Elk City. 7 Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Elk City, okay and where were you from originally? Okmulgee. Okmulgee, okay. And I liked the proximity of Murray Hall. It was just right there on the edge of the campus, and of course the Chi Omega house was fairly close. I loved Theta Pond. I just thought it was so restful. I don t care what kind of a day I had ahead of me or what kind of day I d had, somehow it just seemed, Theta Pond was like a little oasis in my life, that always sort of centered me. That s a great story, and we re glad it is still here. Me too. How many years has it had soap suds poured in it? (Laughs) Did that happen while you were in school? Oh yes. Were there particular times that that happened? Usually around this time of year, Homecoming time. What kind of soap suds were put in? They would just pour soap suds, Ivory flakes or whatever we had back then, and it would just foam up. It was sort of ethereal at night when the lights were on it. They never really looked for the culprits. It was just part of tradition. What was it like being a student here? I was looking at the yearbooks and saw that there were dances up on the top floor of the Student Union. So were there a lot of dances that occurred on campus? She was the dancer. She was over there dancing all the time during her freshman year. Oh (laughs). Well one of our first dates, he was an ROTC officer and he looked terrific in uniform. And I was supposed to be escorted by him to one of their formal dances and so we have pictures of us on the steps. So there 8 Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr were a lot of ROTC functions. Then the ballroom was just a gorgeous place for dances and they would come in and decorate that. One year I helped the Kappa Sigs with their Mardi Gras dance, and my Uncle Howard who I mentioned was a student here, he sent me boxes of Spanish Moss for the fraternity to use to decorate with. I had them in my room at Murray Hall, and my roommate and I noticed there were little spiders all over the room, and they had nested in that Spanish Moss. For the next three years I think I was the most popular friend to them, because they always wanted that Spanish Moss for their dances. The ROTC dances, tell me a little bit about those. Well they only had one big one a year, but they had two regiments. I was a regimental commander in one of the regiments when I was a senior and they had a queen for both of them. So it was pretty competitive to see who got to be the queen. How was that decided? A regimental staff was four people. So we got to interview all of the beautiful women on campus. This was how it was decided. And was that group of women selected that participated? Each sorority on campus had one. Each boarding house dorm had one like Murray Hall, Willard Hall. So you had to interview all of them? Yes, it was a tough job. (Laughter) We used to dance on the top floor of the Student Union between classes. Oh you did? Oh yes, and we d have back in those days there were Coke dates. If you had a break in a class or we danced all the time. Of course the Jitterbug was the thing. So was that outdoors then? No. We did when we had orientation week, it was still open back then. It broke my heart when they closed it. So for most of the dances did you have live music or was there a jukebox? Where did the music come from? 9 S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr The Blue Notes were one group. Right. They were really good. And there was always a photographer and you ve probably heard of Doc Pruitt? Yes, tell me about him, though. I haven t really interviewed anyone that talked about him. Oh my, he was part of the tradition. He taught photography on campus and as a journalism major, I was required to take a class. I can t say that I used much of what he taught me. But he always wore a top hat, a black top hat and a bowtie and a dark coat. And he would come to the different dances or the sorority house, whoever was having a function, and he would take pictures of you as a couple and then with your friends. Then he would post them the next day or two and you would come and you would order them. But he was just a I still have just scrapbooks of pictures that Doc Pruitt took. What age was he when you were in school? It seemed like he was ancient but he was probably He was ancient but he was on the faculty younger than we are. so he had to be in his sixties probably. Yes. But to us he seemed So, everyone loved him and loved having the pictures. Yes, he s in the Hall of Fame here at Oklahoma State University. Did you have dorm mothers? For the men, they had dorm families, husband and wife. Oh okay, so what was that like? Well you had very little contact with them unless you were in trouble. Oh, okay. (Laughs) 10 R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Everyone was pretty behaved. You also had proctors on the floor. I remember one year my proctor was from Turkey and he had been in Korea and all he had to do was come and look at you and it got very quiet, he never had to raise his voice. I don t remember if we had we had to have had somebody on each floor, but I don t remember who it was. What was it like in the 1950 s being in school here, as far as world affairs? Were you aware of things like people are today? We have the Internet and receive news in so many different ways now, but what do you remember about that type of thing? Well, I wasn t aware of she mentioned communism before, if there was any problem on this campus until I got to the Army. I was an officer, counterintelligence agent, and I was assigned the University of Oklahoma campus, which had tremendous problems. Oh did it? They had about 400 Hungarian students on the campus and the root of the Communist Party had people that would come and tell them that they were going to enlist in the Army or Air Force, get in a certain unit, and if they didn t do it, they killed their relatives back in Hungary. But up here in Stillwater, of course, the students didn t know it, but there was a Colonel Gilcrest, and he was a retired I think Air Force General. He was on the faculty, but he was a contact for the FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation . He kept track of what was going on up here at Oklahoma State University. When I d do an investigation on a student, he was usually had graduated, had gone on to get a top secret clearance that s when I handled the investigation, I d always go over and talk to Colonel Gil, Gilcrest was his name, and see if there was anything bad. There never was. One time though I had an organization called Order of the Red Red Rose, and that sounded communist to my supervisors, so they made me go check it out. It was a men s Glee Club (Laughter). But as secretary-treasurer of the Student Senate, organizations had to register with us, and so anything that looked a little suspicious to me, I would contact him. The communist cell blocks were wanting to get a foothold on the campus, and it seemed that the most vulnerable groups like today it would be called Youth for Christ, that wasn t what it was called then, but any kind of a youth-oriented, or remember, a family-oriented Yes, that was the one 11 S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neuorhr S. Parr and they wanted to split up families and that sort of thing. We did have a couple of students we were very, very concerned about. One of them was the brother of one of my sorority sisters and we had to sort of diffuse that one. But we just had that cloud over us. We knew it was prevalent and it kind of gave levity to things, I think, on campus. I didn t think about that until just recently. Mm-hmm. Well this is Homecoming this weekend. What was Homecoming like when you were students here? Well, like this weekend we used to play Kansas State. And the reason was for Homecoming Kansas State had the worst football team in college football. And so everybody has always said this thing about, Tame the kittens, or, Tame the Wildcats. But of course about 20 years after that, Kansas State became one of the best teams in college football. But they used to joke that they played for more Homecomings than any football team in the United States. It always meant loss of sleep for me, because I was one of those people that liked to decorate and be involved. I remember one time we had a great big pumpkin on the lawn of the Chi-O house, and we needed a vine. So we went out to, what's the family, the oil company people here? Berry. Went out to the Berry s and asked if we could have some rope very large rope. Then we had to sit around at night and unravel the rope, and made it look very twisted like a vine, and of course then we had to spray it. We had to do all this stuff with it. But I remember that was one of the house decorations that probably cost a lot of us some better grades. And then one year I was on the committee for Homecoming and my job was to locate convertibles, preferably red ones. Red convertibles? Yes. Why red? They were sporty looking. They looked like a traffic infraction sitting still. Was it hard to find red convertibles? No. 12 Neurohr S. Parr Neuorhr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr No? No, not to we didn t have that problem. It wasn t as large back then as it was is now, just the Homecoming parade. Do you remember a lot of alumni coming back though, for Homecoming? Mm-hmm, and always Pistol Pete. Always Pistol Pete? See, the real Pistol Pete would ride on floats back in those days. So did you ever meet Frank Eaton? Probably. Yes, I did. Do you have any stories about him? Well when I was here, and this has been told by other people who think they were there also, but they used to have him over in what was then called the new Classroom Building, and talked to political science classes, or history classes about how early days in Oklahoma were. And one day I wasn t in the class, but I m pretty sure I was on campus that he drew his gun and shot a hole in a pillar. He was just it was accidental that he actually did pull the trigger, but they told them that he couldn t bring his guns into the classroom any longer and he didn t come back again, I don t think. And one of my best friends also named Frank Eaton that was his uncle, so there were Eaton s in college other than Pistol Pete. What do you remember about Frank Eaton, or Pistol Pete? Oh, he wasn t as big as I thought he d be. You know, he s bigger than life. And of course then we did the replica of him, it was oversized. But I just remember him riding on the floats; I think it was a covered wagon one year, and that he was accessible and that there was a real live Pistol Pete. Did the students really enjoy seeing him and kind of put him up on a pedestal at all? Not so much on a pedestal, I don t think. It was just that and you think 13 Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr these things years later but, how lucky we were that we had the real live person back then and that he had such a history, a legend about him. Were there other symbols that were in use at that time? You know we have Bullet now, but I don t think that you had Bullet the horse No. Okay, so were there other common symbols or anything besides just the Pistol Pete mascot? Well, I guess my military fraternities, the Persian Rifles, were the ones that started firing the cannon after each touchdown. That s right. It started in the 50s and it was a big deal to get on the cannon crew for a game. They played a bowl game in 1958 against Kentucky and some friends of mine hauled that thing all the way to Lexington, Kentucky. They got to shoot it one time in that game, which was the winning touchdown though. So you fired it when you scored once for each touchdown. Yes. Do they still do that? I don t think they do that anymore or do they? They might not. But they ve done it I don t know ten years ago they did it. Mm-hmm, they have someone that does the pushups. Pushups, yeah. But I think they fire cannons before they do that, let s listen today (Laughs). Okay (Laughter). Of course it s been 50 years since you ve been to school here. Society s changed, things have changed in the world, and its different now with the students that we get. We still have a lot of students from small towns, from rural areas. But if you could comment a little bit on the contrast, about what you see now with how it was when you were here. I d like to hear a little bit about that, the types of families or the places that the students come from, that kind of thing. 14 R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr We re speechless. You know I was just thinking, back then we were getting some students from Ethiopia and that was a really rare thing to see foreign students on campus. Now we had some graduate students who taught some of the freshman classes, and I remember that was one of my first encounters with people from other countries. But our connections with Ethiopia were getting stronger there. That was, for me, another level of experience. Many of my friends come from the smaller communities and the family values were very strong. I cannot recall any of my friends who came from single parent families. I think that made a huge difference. For us, it was a real status thing to be a four-year student. When one of the sorority girls got engaged or married early, and left the house after a couple of years, I know we had one girl who was a beauty queen, and we counted on her being Homecoming queen a couple years down the road, and she married her sophomore or junior year. We just thought, What a privilege to be able to come to college. Many of our families couldn t really afford it and to be able to finish and say we were four year girls. That was really an accomplishment. I never thought about it but that s right, it was kind of rare for anybody to go into the fifth year. I was one of the rare ones, but I had 28 hours of ROTC and I had to go to summer geology field camp, so my last semester was only eight hours. I think I had 147 hours to graduate. Did you just do the summer camp one year? Yes, it was a required summer camp in Colorado, and yes that s the only time we had to do it. So what did you do at the camp? How long were you there? Just a month. Just a month The camp is still there well in a way. It was almost washed away by a flood this last year and they ve rebuilt. But in those days it was a joint camp between the University of Oklahoma and Oklahoma State University and you had faculty from both of them. Usually, the fact that it was so large, that they ran it three different months. So you picked one month. That is what you did, so there were probably 60 people there at each time. Where in Colorado is it? 15 R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Canon City, Colorado. And that s near? Canon City is a fairly good-sized town. Its south of Colorado Springs, on the Front Range. So what were you doing for that month? Mainly field survey, learning to field survey because back in those days geologists still did that. They went out with what's called a planetable portable drawing board on a tripod with a sighting device and did the surveying and mapped the geological formation. Tell them about Dr. Naff. Oh, Dr. John Naff I should mention him to anybody. Any geology student is going to mention this guy, he was the most favorite professor and he had a photographic memory. We had about a 100 students, when we were seniors. We met at Old Central had a classroom out there. He came in and said the first day that he was going to call the roll, and wanted us to stand up, and he d never call roll again. So he d walk into class and he d look out over the audience, a 100 people, and say, Well so-and-so and so-and-so are absent. What page did we leave off on in the book? And we d say, Dr. Naff, we left off on page 461. So the way a paleontology text book is, with text on one side drawing on the other side, we d turn to page 461. He d go up to the blackboard nothing in his hands and draw the drawings in the same view that we were looking at them. And then the amazing thing, other than that, we would always have the class at eleven o clock in the morning and when he d give a test it was usually fill in the blank, 25 questions. So if you didn t know it in ten minutes, it didn t do you much good to stay there for a full hour. And when you finished you turned your paper in. As you turned your paper in, he was up there grading them. So after one o clock the game was, you went over and lined up outside of his office and he was sitting at his desk. The papers had all been graded and when you came to the door he looked at you and said, Well Royce, you missed number one, you missed number seven, and you misspelled Ordovician and you made a 91 Wow. that s how he did it. Twenty-five years after that we had a reunion of just geology students and he looked at me, he hadn t seen me in 25 16 S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr years, and said How do you spell Ordovician? Yes, and that s the kind of professors we had back then. Yes. His son was an OSU wrestler, Peter Naff, a very good wrestler. Dr. Naff was a former University of Alabama football player, a jazz musician, and worked for the Atomic Energy Commission during the summers just one of these fascinating people. And so we were watching this wrestling match and his son Peter was wrestling 177 against a very good wrestler from Iowa State that we had to beat to win the match. We looked and we saw Dr. Naff and his wife coming down to the edge of the mat, and when his son won it, he picked him up and carried him back. Wow, what a great memory. Do you have any professors that stand out in your mind? She just died, she was head of the speech department gosh I had her name on the end of my tongue. And I wasn t into drama or anything like that, but she was just an inspiring person. Some journalism professors were very inspiring, but I had the pleasure of working with Dr. Kamm. He was an administrator, and then I had contact with Dr. Willham through religious emphasis week. So I think the size of the college and accessibility to our professors and to the administration really was very helpful. Dr. Willham was president here, when you were here? What do you remember about him in particular, does anything stand out? I think he was, because of his position and his size, just to me he was just power, stability. I think he was a very much in control, command. I think he was very highly respected, don t you think? Yes. Yes, as was Dr. Kamm. Dr. Kamm s door was always open to students, and one night the students were going to have a walk out, because we d done something we thought we all deserved to skip class. So he invited all the student leaders to his home, and set down with us, and explained what happens to the lab classes and the little lab animals and that sort of thing when you walk out, you just can t stop things that are in place on the campus. And you have to be very responsible and very careful about your timing and that sort of thing. It was granted, he worked it through with us and explained to us the basis for decisions, then and in the future and I thought that was great leadership training. 17 Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr That is. They don t do walk outs anymore but a lot of people talk about them. (Laughter) Well, that was the few times we d win some big national championship, that was called for. Let s talk a little about athletics and sports. When you were in school here did you go watch the athletic events? Yes. When I was a freshman, tuition was 66 dollars a semester and that included free football tickets and half of the basketball tickets each student, they got us split up they couldn t get us all in there. But probably the most exciting basketball game ever here at Oklahoma State was 1957 and Mel Wright was the president of our class. He was also the guard on the team, and they were playing Kansas University and Wilt The Silt Chamberlain, and he was considered as completely unbeatable. He later went on pro basketball and is probably the most well known basketball player. But Oklahoma State was thought to have no chance. Ten minutes to go in the game they were still down ten points, but with three minutes to go, they were one point behind. So in the rules of the day, Mr. Iba decided they would stall the ball for three minutes, which they did, and the last minute just held it at center court. And at the end of that with less than ten seconds to go, Mel Wright dribbled once, shot it and made it walk out. Oh wow. And that was the night I decided to give my ticket away and stay home and study. The one time I missed a game (Laughs) Myron Roderick was the wrestling coach, had been on the wrestling team, and then was the coach. And he and his wife would chaperone our parties and he was lots of fun and about our size. Eddie Sutton was at the house a lot, dated one of our sorority sisters, and so like I said, the campus was small enough where you felt like you were a part of it involved. You had ownership, it was yours. What about championships in different sports and things, you were talking about that earlier? Lots of golf championships, track and cross country. Of course basketball, wrestling we were known for that. I don t remember about tennis, we didn t have a swim team at that time, track We were in the Missouri Valley Conference, much easier to win championships in the Missouri Valley than in the Big Eight, which we went to in 1959. 18 Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr Did you feel like the University put a lot of money into the athletic programs? No. No. We weren t aware of it, and our swimming pool was just pathetic. Oh was it? Oh yes. It was just really kind of embarrassing. We had, I mentioned we had student tickets for football, and if you could get a dollar for your ticket you thought you were doing pretty good, sometimes you got fifty cents. Yes. And drugs were not an issue at all. I can t think of any excesses. Of course we didn t have a lot of money back then and not as many people had cars. I don t think I ever heard of a student athlete having a problem with the law or with drugs or alcohol. Of course there was drinking on the campus, I mean not on the campus, but parties and that sort of thing. I was never in a compromising position with anyone who was drinking and driving and that sort of thing, but I was kind of a goodie-two shoes, so. (Laughter) Do you have any stories about the library? When I was, probably a sophomore in high school, I was up here on a band trip first time I d ever been to Stillwater. I remember the great big hole in the ground where they were building the library. I used to study a lot in the library, I thought it was great fifth floor. Fifth floor. I just felt like it was a sanctuary. It was so solid and I have always, always liked the architecture on this campus, this Georgian Architecture and how the buildings were all uniformly designed. And to see that garden area leading up to the Library, it just kind of compels you to study whether you wanted to or not. We used to have study hall there. Of course it was a great place to meet boys and other people. I m on the Friends of the Library board now, and when I asked my husband what he thought about me serving and he said, That is just a small way to pay back the University for all it s given to us. Well, that s wonderful. Yes, we need more people like you. Do you have 19 R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr any stories about Old Central? I had my geology classes there, and there were very few classes that were held in that building even during the 1950s. And what it was, the geology building which was right here, where this building is now. ConocoPhillips OSU Alumni Center We had big enrollment and I think we got to go over to Old Central because of that, for a class that had we had 100 in our class, that s just what we had. Isn t it wonderful that it s being renovated? Yes. I read about it today, some of the problems they were having. I think they should grandfather some of those requirements, you know, the doors are too narrow the accessibilities. People know that there are limitations. If they ve been to Europe, they don t do this for the famous buildings in Europe, the famous Cathedrals. I think that in cases like this, and there are others, they should grandfather them in and not destroy the integrity of the building because I m a brick hugger. I think it s such an identifiable building on the campus. And the fire station. And the fire station, oh yes. Yes. Do you have any stories about the fire station at all? Do you remember anything? Never been in it. Never been in it? Mm-mm, nope, never was a reason to. I m trying to see if we ve covered everything we wanted to try to cover today. Have I missed anything? There s one question on there about role-models? Yes. My role model was real unusual. My main activities outside the classroom on campus were really military. Raymond E. Tompkins, who became a lawyer, was the guy I kind of aimed to do what he d done. He was the drill sergeant over in Appraising Rifles when I was a freshman and I decided I d be that when I was a sophomore. He was a cadet 20 S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr colonel when he was a senior, and I was too. So always I don t think we really liked each other, but he kind of inspired me. He didn t stay in the Army for a career and I didn t either, but we had, among my friends I had two that were generals in the Army. It just so happened they got in the service at the time of Vietnam and were helicopter pilots, Robert Owenby and Bobby Joe Mattocks, and became generals because of that. As a journalism major, I ran for the Board of Publications not realizing that one of the things that we did was we were to monitor The Aggievator. The Aggievator is no longer in existence and was not my second year on the board because it was a little risqu . It was back when some of these magazines were first coming out Esquire and some of those and... Playboy. Playboy. We had locally drawn, student drawn cartoons, and I was too na ve. I didn t understand a lot of them so some of them got past me and they did get published. Then we were called by the head of the department and said that he had been called upon to advise us to diminish the publication of The Aggievator. So I had to be content with The O Colly and the Redskin. Do they still publish the Redskin? They don t. They don t. Well I was a Redskin Congratulate, one of my favorite honors on the campus. Did you have other honors or awards while you were in school here? Sort of. Okay, what was graduation day like, what was commencement like? I was in the Army in Baltimore and missed it all. Oh you missed it all? Yes. I ll never forget it. We were married the day before my graduation. And we spent the first night or the second night of our honeymoon at the OSU Student Union. I never thought in my wildest imagination that we would be staying there. And the big dilemma, the commencement was at the stadium and you had to put your name on a piece of paper that they were to read when you crossed the stage. My dilemma was to put my 21 Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr married name or to put my maiden name, and my parents were there so I thought, Well they sent me through college, so I used my maiden name and my married name. I ll never forget my graduation. Yes. That would have been a couple of very big days Yes they were. back to back like that. That s great. Well, what is it about Oklahoma State that sparks the loyalty from the alumni? Well, I think part of it is kind of being number two to OU in sports, and I think that brings us together more than they do down in Norman. Kind of a rally cry? Yes. Same thing and just the friendships that were made in those times. People that we double dated with, we re still friends. I ve used the leadership skills in my professional training all my life since graduation. And, of course, meeting him here changed my life. So it makes it special because it is part of your personal life, as well as your professional life. Do you have advice for current students or future students? Well, we ve got some grandchildren coming up and the oldest one, he s an OSU fan. I find it difficult to figure out what kind of advice to give to a 14-year-old or an 18-year-old right now. If they ever asked me, What should I major in? I wouldn t know what to say. I ended up as a lawyer, certainly never planned to be one, but I just wonder what this next generation and the generation after that, what they should take in college. Well, and you want to say, Don t over extend, be very intentional about your studies. But I found the busier I was the better my grades were, so you hate to say don t over commit. We were required as one of our sorority requirements to be in three activities, three organizations as we were pledging and that got me out on campus. I had to be on certain boards or volunteer for certain things, and now I don t know how we did it. I thought that was very important because I got to know more people and I was out beyond just my little circle there. It got me out of the box. One thing I wish had been different my freshman year our high school teachers were very qualified and gave us some very strong foundation. When I got to OSU my freshman year, I never will forget how 22 Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr disappointed I was in my professors because I felt like they had assigned the graduate students to teach the freshman. And some of them were, one in particular foreign student I couldn t understand, no one could understand. The accent was so strong, so I struggled with that. But I always thought that maybe you d have more of your freshman going on to graduate, or at least their sophomore or junior year, be four year students, if they had maybe better teaching on that first year level. I don t know what it is today, but for me that was a big disappointment. I wanted more. And of course the classes are larger and you can t be as personal and you can t be as creative with your teaching. But it wasn t the standard that I had hoped for. That s interesting. Well we had very large classes. A class of 100 was normal, so it wasn t Were most of the classes large like that, would you say? Yes. No. Humanities were because everybody was required to take them. Well, all the undergrads like, like humanities, history, political science those were required courses those were over here in what was then called the New Classroom Building. There were over 100 in every one of those classes, I d say 200. Well, we had some classes in that auditorium, it s the old theatre. Yes. The chemistry classes, I remember. I was a chemistry major for a couple semesters, because I got a scholarship in that, and those classes were large. The labs were smaller, but on the same subject, I went to University of Tulsa Law School at night. It was easy compared to Oklahoma State University. They had the labs and all this. I thought I d died and gone to heaven when I didn t have to go to lab anymore. (Laughter) Well, I think we ve pretty well covered everything, unless you think of something else. This has been a great interview. I ve really, really enjoyed it and I ve learned a lot. We ll think of a thousand things on the way home, I m sure. (Laughter) 23 Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr You can always write them down and send them to us, or we can schedule another interview. How about research activities, were you involved in any? You said there was probably more teaching going on, more emphasis on teaching you think or was there a strong influence on research then like there is now? Just those blasted term papers. That s all. I had a job one time at the Agriculture Department here and they had like 2,000 different cotton plants, different species. My job was to go out and pick a cotton boll or two off each one of them. I don t know what ever happened to that research. Did you find that work interesting or was it terribly boring? Well, you didn t get paid very much for what you were doing, 50 cents an hour in those days. I also worked as a janitor in Willard Hall and that s the same pay that I got. So did you have to take notes of each plant that those came from? I had to put them in a little paper sack, yes, where they came from, right. So you never knew what was the end result? No. I m sure there was a lot of research going on over in Agriculture. Oh yes, yes It was just a job to me still is. The only thing I researched was the first pizza parlor. The first pizza parlor? One of my roommates and friends, sorority sisters, was from the Lawton area. She kept talking about pizza and I thought I m not going to like it. It has tomatoes and melted cheese and everything. Well they started putting in this pizza oven at this place and we walked by and she said, Oh my goodness, we re going to have pizza in Stillwater And I thought, What's the big deal? So when it finally opened, I think she was the first one there, and we took it back with us. I would eat around the crust, because I didn t like the melted cheese and the tomatoes and all that cooked together. Then I d eat a little bit closer in from the crust 24 Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr and by the end of the semester I was eating half the pizza. I ve been eating it ever since. But I remember it was a big event for the pizza to come. Was that Hideaway, when Hideaway started? Hideaway Pizza. There was really only one hamburger joint in Stillwater and that was Moore Burger. And Harry Moore was an OU football player, and he had one here and one in Norman. Mm-hmm and then of course Sonic came along before I graduated, and that was a big deal because you had to be in a car to go, and not many of us had cars. That was a big event to do that. And then there was one restaurant downtown that was a good place because everything closed down on Sunday nights and that place was open, but we liked that. Actually the Student Union, I don t remember very many of the meals, but they had the best donut I ve ever eaten on the planet here. We also, for entertainment we had the student activities thing. That s when Dave Brubeck and all the different entertainers would come. Oh, yes and that was part of your student activity ticket. Your yearbook was on that, and then you had this entertainment that they A lot of big bands came here. Les Helgart, the Boston Pops and it was all free. Well, free with your student ticket. Yes, well you didn t have to pay a dime for it. So that was really big. And I remember one year we had a basketball game and it was cold, real cold weather. But they had the windows open around the top of the field house for ventilation and air and all these big buses. They had brought all these people in were parked out in the parking lot. They had their motors running to keep the buses warm and of course they always keep those running anyway. And those fumes came into the field house and sickened hundreds of people. I remember they brought some of them over to the Chi Omega house and we all got our blankets out and everything and helped those people. They were high school band students. High school band students, that s right. That was a scary moment. I just remembered that. 25 Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr Was there an infirmary here? Oh, yes. When someone got sick what happened? Oh, yes. Where was that? It was near Murray. It was on that side of the street, a little two-story red brick building? I was only in it once. We had a big flu outbreak one year, a really bad flu outbreak. Do you remember what year that would have been or what year of your schooling? It was either my freshman or sophomore year. I know my parents had to come get me and take me home. Do you remember if you were here? No. Must have been my sophomore year then. So everyone would use the infirmary? Were there doctors there or just nurses? There was a doctor Dr. Roxie Webber. Roxie Webber. R-O-X-I-E. Female? Yes. Female doctor. Who was the team doctor too, who was that? Everybody knew the team doctor a really good friend to everybody. That was later. 26 S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr That was later? Okay Did you meet Dr. Roxie Webber? I m sure I did. It seemed like we had a You remembered the name so well, that was interesting. well it seemed like we had to go over there for some kind of Shots. Oh probably shots or something, yes. military, you probably did have to have yearly physicals and things. yes. I remember being over, the military doing some type of exam one time. Okay. Gosh, you see he has good recall. Okay, I m sure I could just keep asking you questions for several more hours I will tell you his dowry when we got married was all these geology trips. He had to collect all these fossils and identify them. And when I went to his parent s home in Elk City after we were engaged, his mother was just delighted. She pulled out this box from under his bed and she gave me this box and to this day we still have most of his fossils They re out in the yard somewhere. fossils from his digs. (Laughter) Yes. We were required to find 70 different kinds in Oklahoma. We could go up to Kansas if we wanted to had to identify them. And you still have those. Not really, no. Oh, some of them? 27 S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Some of the important ones. We ve tried to give them away to the grandkids and that sort of thing. So did you go all over the state for them? No. There was just really one place, down around Ardmore. We went on a field trip for three days and got most of them there. Was the baseball field when was it named the Allie Reynolds field? Oh, that was in the 1980s. In the 1980s, okay. I wrote Allie Reynolds book. You wrote Allie Reynolds book? And every time I come in this building here ConocoPhillips OSU Alumni Center , I got down and the very last exhibit is about Allie Reynolds. There s about three or four errors on that exhibit. Oh, there are? Uh-oh. And we found out yesterday, that the book I wrote is selling on the Internet for between 170 and 302 dollars. Wow. And I don t know why. Oh, well it must be out of print. It is out of print, but why it s that much, I don t know. When was that published? 2002 Allie Reynolds Super Chief. That wasn t that long ago. But the baseball field is named after him. He was an Indian Chief as well as the most famous left-handed Yankee pitcher from Oklahoma City. Very well loved and when they opened the stadium, he and his wife sat out in the parking lot. They couldn t get in and they listened to it on the radio. 28 Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Oh, no. That was one of the games one of the games and it was sold out so he just that s the kind of guy he was. Did you interview him for your book? Yes. What year was that when they opened it then? Well it was in the 1980s. I wasn t thinking about doing a book then, but yes. He was long since retired and put up a lot of money for the stadium. He was very wealthy. Have you written other books? I wrote The Glory Days of Summer: the History of Baseball in Oklahoma, which is a big table top sized book which is being updated for the Centennial. It came out in 99. This is just a hobby. It s just a hobby, mm-hmm. Well, that s great, so does The Glory Days of Summer have an Oklahoma focus as well, like your Allie Reynolds book? It s all Oklahoma. It s all Oklahoma-related? Yes. It s for instance, the history of baseball in Oklahoma. It s a 480 page book, oversized. Why baseball, were you a baseball player when you were young? Yes. Not a very good one but I was, yes. Are you going to venture into other sports? No. No? No, I was given the opportunity to write the history of football at the 29 Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr R. Parr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr S. Parr Neurohr University of Oklahoma and turned that down. Oh well, that s a good story. (Laughs) I just couldn t do that. A good OSU story. There have been a lot of books on OU football. But I guess it was football in Oklahoma and I said, Well, 90 of that s going to be OU and I m not going to do that. Oklahoma has a great history in a lot of different areas and a lot of different areas are probably untapped. Uh-huh, we have a friend who has written over 70 books on Oklahoma. Yes, Bob Burke. Bob Burke, sure, yes. I m on the board for the Oklahoma Center for the Book. Oh, you are? And Bob is a board member. Oh, you bet. Well we just went to his induction into the Oklahoma Journalism and Broadcasting Hall of Fame last Thursday at OU. Okay. The main book he talked about was our history book. Neat guy, special. Okay, well thank you so much for participating Thank you, Karen. It was nice meeting you. ...today, it was very nice to meet both of you, hope we get to see you again. I hope it was worth your time. Oh definitely, definitely. You all have so many stories, we may have to schedule interview number two sometime on down the road. 30 S. Parr R. Parr Neurohr R. Parr Thanks for all the work you re doing, you re very organized. Yes. Oh, there s a team of people doing all this work, there s a lot of people, but it s real exciting to see it come together like it is. Okay, thank you. Thank you. ------- -------..