Oral History Interview
with
Miriam “Mim” Oesch Roth

Interview Conducted by
Juliana Nykolaiszyn
October 22, 2010
O-STATE Stories
Oral History Project

Special Collections & University Archives
Edmon Low Library ● Oklahoma State University

© 2010

O-State Stories
An Oral History Project of the OSU Library

Interview History
Interviewer:
Transcriber:
Editors:

Juliana Nykolaiszyn
Ashley Sarchet
Amy Graham, Latasha Wilson, Micki White

The recording and transcript of this interview were processed at the Oklahoma State
University Library in Stillwater, Oklahoma.

Project Detail
The purpose of O-State Stories Oral History Project is to gather and preserve memories
revolving around Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College (OAMC) and Oklahoma
State University (OSU).
This project was approved by the Oklahoma State University Institutional Review Board on
October 5, 2006.

Legal Status
Scholarly use of the recordings and transcripts of the interview with Miriam “Mim” Oesch
Roth is unrestricted. The interview agreement was signed on October 22, 2010.

2

O-State Stories
An Oral History Project of the OSU Library

About Miriam “Mim” Oesch Roth …
Born in South Dakota, Mim Roth lived there until she was nine and then moved with her
family to Nebraska where she attended an eight-grade, one-room school. Her high school
was a little bigger, however, with a graduating class of twenty-nine. Her family moved to
Oklahoma during her senior year, but she chose to stay in Nebraska until after graduation.
After moving to Oklahoma, she took a job in Southwestern Bell’s engineering department in
Oklahoma City to earn money for college. With her savings and a scholarship, she enrolled
at Oklahoma State University, then Oklahoma A&M, to major in English and speech
education. At OSU, she pledged Pi Beta Phi and was part of the student Lutheran
organization. She also worked in the Dean’s Office of the Agriculture Department during all
four years, plus one summer, to make enough money to stay in school. She served on
student senate her junior year, and was recognized as the outstanding student in her
graduating class.
During her years at OSU, Mim witnessed and experienced a wide scope of noteworthy
events, including the school’s name change (OAMC to OSU), the wrestling team’s national
championship, and the launch of Sputnik. Her views of the world were growing and
changing drastically, so after she graduated in 1960 she kept expanding her horizons by
accepting a job in Oceanside, California, where she taught high school speech and English
for two years. With a desire to teach at the college level, she left California and accepted a
fellowship at Northwestern to work on her master’s degree. There she met her husband-tobe, and she knew then that she would stay in Illinois. She earned her master’s in speech and
went on to teach at Concordia University in River Forest. In 2010, Mim came back to
Stillwater to celebrate her fifty-year class reunion.

3

O-State Stories
An Oral History Project of the OSU Library

Miriam “Mim” Oesch Roth
Oral History Interview
Interviewed by Juliana Nykolaiszyn
October 22, 2010
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Nykolaiszyn

My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University
Library. Today is Friday, October 22, 2010, and we’re at the OSU
Alumni Center for Homecoming today with Mim Roth. This interview is
being conducted as part of the O-STATE Stories Oral History Project of
the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Mim is here today
because she’s celebrating her fiftieth class reunion. Right?

Roth

Right.

Nykolaiszyn

Wow. That’s so amazing. Welcome back to campus today.

Roth

Thank you.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, Mim, I want to learn a little bit more about you. Can you tell me
where you’re from originally?

Roth

Yes. I was born in South Dakota in a tiny little town that didn’t even
have more than two hundred people. My dad was the Lutheran minister,
and so I spent the first nine years there, and then he moved to Nebraska
to a country parish, and that was in northeastern Nebraska. Wausa was
the mailing address, and there I went to a one-room schoolhouse from
fourth through eighth grade and then a consolidated high school, which
took in all these small little districts of the one-room schoolhouses. My
graduating class was twenty-nine, so it was a pretty small kind of
environment that I got my basic education in. Then my family moved to
Oklahoma when I was a senior in high school, but I stayed, boarded with
a friend, graduated with my class, and then moved down to Oklahoma.
There I went to work for Southwestern Bell for fifteen months so that I
4

could provide funds for going to college. I got a scholarship here to
Oklahoma State, but at that time it was Oklahoma A&M. My first
semester’s tuition (and I could take as many courses as I wanted to, as
many hours) was $178, but that was a big sum for me just because it all
came from savings. But then I worked at the Dean’s Office in
Agriculture for Dr. Randall Jones. I worked all four years there, and my
salary was fifty cents an hour. So if I could squeeze in twenty hours a
week, I was really doing well. So between scholarships and working on
campus and then working summers, I graduated with $300 debt. I made
it through college because everything was so much less expensive,
including—you know, the work wages were fifty cents an hour. That
was still within a doable kind of thing, but I earned seventy-five cents an
hour by the time I was a senior, so I was really in the money. (Laughter)
So that’s really the story of where I was born [where I went to grade
school and high school].
Nykolaiszyn

Well, let’s back up just a tiny bit. The fifteen months you worked before
coming to Oklahoma A&M, were you a telephone operator?

Roth

No. I worked in the engineering department in Oklahoma City for
Southwestern Bell, and there I really got to kind of know that there were
so many little towns in Oklahoma because I kept record of the different
exchanges. Any kind of problems that they had, we would process and
give to our engineers. Our chief engineer would supervise that whole
kind of thing. I had learned the secretarial arts in high school, and that
really benefited me because typing and shorthand and all those kinds of
things gave me my career of supporting, getting to have these jobs that I
could earn money at. So that’s what I did.

Nykolaiszyn

So you go, essentially—I know it changed from a one-room schoolhouse
to Oklahoma A&M.

Roth

Right.

Nykolaiszyn

What was Stillwater like for you?

Roth

Stillwater was, to me, just kind of on the fringes of my life because my
life was so centered on the campus. We would—I did join a sorority, and
I didn’t know what on earth a sorority was, but I lived in Murray Hall
my freshman year. Then they Rushed me when it was open Rush, like,
the second semester. So I pledged Pi Beta Phi, and there were some
town girls, including Malinda Berry, and I got to know her. [The town]
was kind of like there, but not part of our life so much except when as a
sorority we would go to church together. We always had one Sunday a
year, I guess, designated as the girls would all go to church together, and
we wore our gloves, our hats, and that kind of thing. There was a dress

5

shop called Bonnie’s that was—if you could afford it, I mean, it would
be like you really arrived in fashion if you got to go to Bonnie’s and pick
out something. So those were some impressions.
Off campus there was something called The Corral, and you could go
there for hamburgers and that kind of thing. You were actually not too
far from campus, but you could go there. So it didn’t figure in very
heavily for me as a student, but I recognized that it was a town-andgown kind of an operation. I did belong to a student Lutheran
organization. I’m not really sure if I can remember the name of it, but
anyhow, I would go to church there and participate in that kind of townand-gown kind of thing. But everything else was so centered on the
O’Colly and what was happening on student politics and campus life
and, of course, my studies because I was very serious about my studies,
and that certainly will…
Nykolaiszyn

Well, speaking about your studies, what was your major?

Roth

My major was in the education school. I was going to be a teacher, a
secondary school teacher. My concentration was in English, and
secondary was in speech. It turns out that that’s exactly what I did. I
taught English and speech in high school and college, and then when I
was in the university I taught communications, which is a broader kind
of thing, and so that was a wonderful field. I loved it because it kept me
so in touch with what was going on in our pop culture and in our
political scene and in the students’ lives because they all had to take—I
taught a lot of public speaking, and the students were so scared. It turns
out that on the list of anxieties that public speaking comes in even
number one or number two with fears, on the scale of fears. I was able to
talk to these kids, and we created kind of a family in our classroom so
that listening was as important as speaking, and supporting the speaker
was as important as how you could speak. So it was a supportive kind of
classroom that I always tried to do, and it was so important in their lives.
Whatever they were going to do, they were going to use public speaking,
and these were lots of teacher-preparation students at Concordia
University in the Chicago area, River Forest. So I used my education in
what I ended up doing. I did, however, go on to get my master’s from
Northwestern University in speech, and so that was the preparation that I
got for my later teaching.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, back here on campus, are there any memorable classes or
instructors that really stand out for you?

Roth

I had one teacher whose name was Dr. Samuel Woods. I believe that’s
his name: Dr. Wood or Woods. I’m not real sure, but we went to class in
Old Central, and he was an English teacher. Under him, I took “The

6

Mystery of the English Language.” It was really called “The History of
the English Language,” but it was so difficult that we traced where
English came from, Old English, Middle English to Modern English and
the changes that took place in the structure of the language itself. He
kind of stood out for me as being so knowledgeable, not personable,
particularly, but knowing what it was and how this whole thing
developed. But I found it a fascinating kind of thing. I probably would
have been a history major if I hadn’t been involved in knowing I needed
to have something I could use as a career and earn money and earn my
living, but that gave me real appreciation for history and how it all
unfolds and so on.
What else stood out? I think that I thought the caliber of the teacher was
quite high, that they were dedicated to what they were trying to teach us,
that they had done a great deal of scholarship to prepare themselves for
what it was, and I thought that this was a good place. There was a Dr.
[Theodore] Agnew who was a history teacher, and he was extraordinary
with his ability to talk about the importance of the events as they related
to the culture of the country and the world, and introduced us to a lot of
scholarship in terms of bibliography and in finding sources, primary
sources, secondary sources. I always thought that that was really good.
He, I thought, was tops. I really, really enjoyed what his courses were all
about. I was also very involved in the campus life and in the political life
of the campus and in the social life through the sorority, and there I
found I met lots of kids who were talented and were fun to be around
and to know and gain some insights.
Nykolaiszyn

Well, politically, did you serve on student senate?

Roth

Yes, I was a junior senator, senator from the junior class.

Nykolaiszyn

Tell me about running for office. What was that like?

Roth

Well, you just had to kind of know a lot of people and get them together,
and we passed out flyers. I figured out that if you knew people who were
in charge of various student organizations and that they would support
you, that they in turn would be the ones who could spread the word.
They were likely to know people who would go actually vote, and so I
thought, well, that was a—and I think it turned out that way, that that’s
how it was. We didn’t have rallies, as far as I know, or conventions or
speeches. I think we did have, like, a candidates night or something,
which was very sparsely attended. It was basically who you knew and
who they knew and a networking kind of thing to get on there, if you
really wanted to do that. I loved it. I thought it was really fun.

Nykolaiszyn

Were there any hot-button topics that came up during your term as a

7

student senator?
Roth

You’ll laugh. You’ll laugh at this. This is one of those startling
memories that I have. Oklahoma State was, until my senior year,
Oklahoma A&M, and my class in ’60 was the first graduating class as,
on the diploma, Oklahoma State University. So I went to pre- and the
beginning of the change. We also joined, in the athletic conference, from
the Missouri Valley to the Big Eight that we were asked to participate in.
I think it was my junior year, when I was a senator, that Oklahoma
State’s wrestling team won the national championship with Myron
Roderick, and we thought that that was so important because we were
going to be Oklahoma State, and this was a national championship, and
that it deserved a day of suspension of classes. No one should go. We
should all rally and have a wonderful celebration, so the student senate
voted to suspend classes.
Now, we had no authority to do that, and we knew that, but we figured
that we could put the pressure on. We called in Oklahoma City’s TV
stations and declared this is as a day that we didn’t have to go to school,
and, “No students have to go to school.” We almost got suspended from
the university because Dean Baker did not like this at all as he had to
report to [President] Oliver Willham and all the academic council that
that student senate that he was supposed to be the advisor to had just
declared a class holiday. (Laughs) We had to go in front—some of them
didn’t go to school. The professors were like—well, they were going to
hold classes anyhow. I mean, they did, but the majority of the students
didn’t go to class. Then how’s that going to work out with their grades,
and how is that going to work out with attendance? Then we were called
in to face the academic council and to present our case of defense as to
why we did this. We did so, and it turned out that we were neither
penalized nor suspended nor dealt with in anything but, “Well, I suppose
you overstepped your bounds, and you thought more of yourself than
what you—more power than you really had.” But it was so heady as an
endeavor that stands out to me that really something that was kind of
like a firebrand. It was just fun, really exciting. I remember that.
Another thing I remember was walking across campus, and I don’t
remember if this was—I should check it out, but I think it was the fall of
my freshman year, and we heard that Sputnik had gone up. The Russians
had put up Sputnik, and we were really taken by that and embarrassed, I
think, that the United States—fearful of that race that was going on
between Russia, the Soviet Union, really, and the United States.
Churchill had already declared the Iron Curtain, you know, in his speech
down in Missouri many years before, but this was just post-atomic bomb
kind of warnings where we always had to crawl under the desks and
have drills. Now all of a sudden here it was. They had Sputnik and that

8

satellite that could see everything and do all, and we didn’t have it. So
that was a significant kind of sobering of where we were in the arms
race, even though no one called it the arms race so much at that point,
but it was an achievement that outdid the United States in the scientific
endeavor. We really talked about it a lot. The student O’Collegian had
headlines and so on, but we as students, at least the ones I hung around
with, thought it was a significant thing in history. And I think it was. I
think, then, John Kennedy in ’60 did that, you know, “We’re going to
land a man on the moon,” and we weren’t much beyond, at that point,
Sputnik stuff, and he did it.
Nearly a decade after I had graduated, Neil Armstrong landed on the
moon and] announced, “One step for man, great leap for mankind,” and
it was in my lifetime that I got to see that, that landing on the moon.
They didn’t sink way down into the soil or just would disappear, because
as layman we didn’t, I didn’t, know enough about what kind of
conditions were on the moon with all the myths that had passed around.
Nykolaiszyn

Sure. Oh, yes.

Roth

But that was, I think, a link to [Sputnik] (I think it was 1957) the landing
on the moon that this was great technological advances that were just
going at the speed of light. The “Atoms for Peace” that Eisenhower had
pushed was in effect at the time Sputnik went up, and we hadn’t done
anything, at least as far as a layman would be concerned. So those are
two things that I thought influenced my view of the world, opened it up
to both fears and triumph.

Nykolaiszyn

Oh, yes. Well, sorority life…

Roth

Sorority life was wonderful. I told you, I didn’t know anything about
sororities. We had a rural high school in Nebraska. I came down, and all
the other girls apparently had gone through Rush, and I didn’t know
what a Rush was. They kept talking about Rush when I got on campus.
“Are you going to Rush?” Well, the Rush season was over at that point
in the fall because they did that before school started. Then after the start
of the second semester, then they could have open Rush for people who
—you know, they could pick up people. So I said, “Well, I don’t know. I
guess I could join the sorority if I thought that was the right thing to do,”
never really considering that it was quite competitive and that you had to
be good material for it, for your sororities and stuff. But the end of my
first year in college, I had 3.75 grade point average, and the second
semester, which I guess really counted as the end of the first year, I had
a 4.0. So academically, I was probably pretty good material. Then I got
to know a lot of people on campus quite early, and so socially it was
like, “Okay, sure, why not?” What I really found is that I had some

9

wonderful friends, and it was a community for me to thrive in as
friendships and sociability and to meet guys because they had—as an
independent you had the Snowball Ball or the Snowflake Ball or
something like that. That was where you could get a formal, and you
could have a date and a corsage and stuff, but in the sorority, they set up
a lot of kinds of exchanges, and so I thought that was pretty neat. Then
we changed roommates all the time when living in the house, and you
got to know your fellow sisters. It was a chance for leadership, and I
exerted that kind of thing and grew. I grew a lot in college intellectually
and socially and, I think, awareness of life in the world because I came
from a pretty sheltered kind of background, and I found that many of the
girls did, too. They came from rural areas, and they hadn’t had these
huge kinds of opportunities.
Nykolaiszyn

Any social events with your sorority that really stand out that you can
say, “I remember the such-and-such dance, and this happened”?

Roth

Not really. There were just so many. I was so busy, I probably never
went to sleep earlier than two o’clock in the morning because I worked
every afternoon, tried to get my schedule so that I could take my classes
in the morning and then work at the dean’s office in the afternoon. Then
I had my social life, well, student life, I should say, and then I had all my
scholarship and all the school work and studying. So I wasn’t—I was
never a really big partier. I had never had anything beyond a Coke and
rum, I guess, was the only drink that I had ever had, and I didn’t like
that.

Nykolaiszyn

Do you remember your house mom?

Roth

Yes. We called her Mom Allison. I can’t remember her last name. She
was a gentle Southern woman who presided at dinner every night, and
we had to dress for dinner. I mean, we couldn’t come down in warm-ups
or anything like that. Then we sang during the dinnertime, and we had
formal setting, and she really was the overseer of our social graces. She
had a suite in our house, and she was really a wonderful person. I never
went in and cried on her shoulder or anything like that, but lots of girls
did, and she was a substitute mother for them. But I thought that she did
a wonderful job of manners and appropriate behavior and made sure that
the house was dignified. It was not a raunchy place. We had a lot of
laughs, and we did a lot of fun things. It was—yes, that was a good
thing. Living in the house was good.

Nykolaiszyn

Curfew?

Roth

Curfew. We had proctors that we elected, and they locked the doors
during the week at eleven o’clock in the evening. On Friday night, I

10

think it went to twelve, Saturday night maybe twelve thirty or one in the
morning, and then Sunday back again to early time, like eleven o’clock.
Now, if you didn’t sign out and had the permission to come in late
because of whatever event or you went home or whatever, you were in
pretty serious trouble for not making curfew. How widespread that was
campus-wide, I think it was pretty wide-spread with houses. When we
were in Murray Hall as a freshman, it was eight o’clock unless you could
sign out to go to the library, and you can come in at nine o’clock. But on
weekends, then, that was eleven o’clock kind of thing and so on. I’m not
sure about exact time, but, boy, I made sure I would go to the library and
meet up with future boyfriends or somebody who you really wanted to
date or so on. That was all part of the, I’d say, the intrigue of the curfew
stuff, that it was important. You can always find opportunities in that,
and it did give a sense of order and control. It was not a free-for-all. Of
course, guys couldn’t come beyond calling up from the lobby and asking
if you were ready, or “so-and-so is here,” and that kind of thing. A lot
different than, subsequently, what’s happened in terms of the (what
would I say?) wide-open kind of lack of restraints and constraints of
young people today. Everything is available to them, and it doesn’t seem
to be that there are these bare parameters that gave you a lot of strength
and a lot of safety. Of course, we railed against it. We didn’t think that
was fair that we had to be in at eight o’clock at night, and of course there
was no drinking. Oklahoma was a dry state, and that limited the kind of
bashes that you read about in sorority and fraternity life.
Bootleggers?
Nykolaiszyn
Roth

Nykolaiszyn

Yes, there were bootleggers from the standpoint that the fraternities
would go up to the Kansas line. Now, I don’t know which city they
would go to, but right across the line, and they could bring back liquor if
they could get away with it without the police, the sheriffs, catching
them. They would have some hard liquor and beer always available, but
it was pretty well kept under wrap. You didn’t have any kegs, and you
didn’t have open drinking or smoking. It was all surreptitious.
Well, I’m guessing you were a very good student. I’m guessing. Were
you?
I was.

Roth
Nykolaiszyn
Roth

A little bird told me you won an award, and you edged out somebody for
this award. (Laughter) I want to hear this story about this award.
The Alumni Association instituted an award for the outstanding student
of the graduating class, and there were nominees, and my name was
submitted as a nominee, so we had an interview process. You submitted

11

paperwork with your record of what you were involved in and your
school grade points and that kind of thing. I don’t know how many of us
were interviewed. I knew Wes. I knew Jill Roberts, and there were a
couple other people. So I’m guessing probably maybe a cohort of six
people from whom they were really kind of looking at. These were
advisors or trustees from the college and from the Alumni Association,
and I think there were maybe three men who were on this committee.
You can check the records to see who it was at that time, but one of the
men—and they asked me different questions, and I could respond to
them. Of course, I had been taking speech classes, and so I kind of had
an edge in public speaking, or in maybe perhaps interviewing. But one
of the gentlemen asked me, he said, “I’ve always had a favorite poem,
and I’d like for you to quote that poem for me. Do you know this
poem?” I said, “Well, what is it?” And he said, “For Whom the [Bell
Tolls].” I looked at him, and I said, “You know what? I have read it. I
don’t know that I have studied it as a genre, but I cannot quote that. I
don’t know that by heart.” I said, “When I leave, I will go look that up
and double check it.” (Laughs)
And so I thought, “That’s it, goodbye. There go my chances.” I was
really shocked and surprised when I got the telephone call that I had
been selected as the outstanding graduate because I thought that was—I
didn’t know everything. Later on I was talking to somebody and they
said, “That’s probably the best answer you could give. If you didn’t
know it cold and you couldn’t quote it, then just to tell them you didn’t
know it.” And I said, “Well, I just responded because that’s all—I didn’t
know it. I couldn’t quote it.” It was [John Donne] who had written that
poem, and then the man who asked me that, he went on to recite that
poem. So I thought, “Well, okay. There it goes.”
And there you have it.
Nykolaiszyn
Roth

And there you have it. Yes. It was a very big honor, and my parents were
not demonstrative about my accolades I had achieved a lot of. At least in
schooling, I had gotten a lot of scholarships, and I had gotten a lot of
citation kind of things over the years. I just thought, “Well, that’s nice. I
mean, I think Mom and Dad will like that,” or so on. I wasn’t sure that
they would pay too much attention to it, and I got a certificate. It was a
beautiful certificate, “Outstanding in the—” I have it now, but Mom and
Dad framed it and put it up in Dad’s study. When he had visitors and
guests, he would point out, “That’s my daughter.” So I found out
something about Mom and Dad, too, that they didn’t say too much about
what kinds of achievements or accolades their kids got, my brothers and
sisters all were really quite accomplished and so on, but that they did
enjoy what their children had earned and received. So it has a special
place in my heart for having that.

12

Well, what was graduation like?
Nykolaiszyn
Roth

We graduated outside at the stadium, and it was hotter than blazes, and
we just went by college. We sat outside in rows and so on and listened to
speeches. I couldn’t tell you who was a speaker or even what they said,
but I knew that it was a significant day in my life and that it was a
breaking point because I was going to move from being a student, which
I had been all my life except for working all the time, to a career or a
profession. I wasn’t real sure at that point where I was going to teach,
and I hadn’t selected any of the school districts at that point where I
wanted to go for sure.
My little sister in the sorority, her dad was a business manager in
Oceanside, California, schools, and he had been on campus a couple
times. He thought I would make a wonderful addition to their high
school staff, so I went out there. I had looked at the salary schedule and
it was $3,600 a year, which was very high among the schools that had—
you had bulletin boards in the Education Department, and you could sign
up for interviews because representatives of the school districts would
come and interview prospective teachers. Instead of you just picking up,
putting in an application, you could actually have an interview. So I
knew my life was going to change. I was pretty sure I would be going
out to California, and having been only in South Dakota, Nebraska, and
Oklahoma, I had never been on an airplane, and I knew I would be
flying. So I took my first airplane ride in June, after I graduated in May,
to Los Angeles in a four-engine prop plane and landed. Barbara’s
parents, Mr. and Mrs. Gabriel, came to Los Angeles Airport, picked me
up and drove me back to Oceanside. It is probably about sixty, seventy
miles south of Los Angeles, and I could smell the ocean. I thought, “Oh,
this really is going to be a different life.”
We stopped at a diner. I was hungry, and Ruth (that’s the mother)
introduced me to cheesecake. I had never had cheesecake before. She
said, “Would you like a piece of cheesecake and a cup of coffee?” I’d
learned how to drink coffee in college, but somehow never had any
cheesecake. I didn’t like cheese that much, but I thought, “I’m her
guest,” and she seemed so enthusiastic. She said, “I’m going to order
that.” “Okay,” I said, “I will too.” I loved it! (Laughter) It was just
creamy and wonderful. So there were all kinds of new things waiting for
me in the wings, and it was an exciting time.
And how long were you in California?

Nykolaiszyn
Roth

Two years I taught, and then I went to Northwestern. I knew that I would
only be teaching a couple of years before I would get my advanced

13

degree, and then I didn’t know where I would go from there, but I knew
that if I wanted to be—I did teach in junior college as well as high
school, and I knew if I wanted to continue, and I would want to teach in
college, I would need my master’s. Besides, I wanted it, and I got a
really nice fellowship at Northwestern, so I went there. While I was
there, I met my husband. That’s changed my whole life. Not changed it,
but that cemented that I was going to be in Illinois and I was going to
have a family, I thought. It was great.
Nykolaiszyn

Roth

Well, we’re kind of winding down on time, and I want to ask you. I find
this often with alumni I interview, but what is it about Oklahoma State
that sparks such loyalty in alumni?
I think that when I was in school here, I met friends who were all
engaged in the same endeavor, and that was to learn, to expand our
horizons. I met professors who inspired me to (this is a cliché) reach for
the stars or go beyond yourself. There wasn’t the phrase, “outside the
box” thinking at that point, but it was implied that you always learned. It
was a lifetime kind of learning that a real student would always find
challenging and appropriate to the life. I think there was an authenticity
about the people, both as the faculty and as the student body. They came
to life with an honesty that didn’t seem to be put on, shallow, superficial.
Whatever it was that they were involved in, they did it with gusto. I
think that was the student body, and more or less humble, not given to
airs, and I liked that. I liked that kind of surrounding. It was wholesome,
and I felt as though this was a great place to grow and to be something
more than what you started out with.
I think you really think that that’s a special kind of place, and I know my
husband feels that his place where he went to school had those attributes,
as well. It was a successful college experiment, and that stays with you
the rest—I always look for people with authenticity. It comes from
within, and confidence that, “Yes, this is what I believe, and this is what
I will do.” And there are integrity and moral aspects to that that I saw
exhibited as a student. Perhaps those would be my reflections on what
was so wonderful about Oklahoma State. Sometimes I still call it
Oklahoma A&M, the Aggies.

Nykolaiszyn

Roth

Well, I hear that often, too. I mean, some people are torn, and some
people use it interchangeably, Oklahoma State with Oklahoma A&M.
It’s all the same, though. It’s still…
Yes, it’s the institution and the ongoing culture of real people in real
situations. That’s what I liked. I’m not so sure you find that in lots of
other institutions, not just higher education, but in other institutions that
we have in our society.

14

Nykolaiszyn

Roth

Nykolaiszyn

Well, we kind of fast forwarded through your life here at Oklahoma
A&M and Oklahoma State to present day. Is there anything else you’d
like to add before we close out today’s interview?
I suppose one more thing, and that would be my experience with Greek
life, and that that has been a very strong continuum in the alumnae
chapters, and that no matter where I go, I meet up with and enjoy added
friendships and continuing friendships with the members of Pi Beta Phi.
I belong to two clubs right now, one in Illinois and one out in California,
and it always just seems as though the same kind of things that I was
part of and interested in as a student, the kind of people that they were,
they’re engaging, they’re widely read, they are involved, have been
involved in their communities and are involved in the communities, and
that that’s a really strong tie back to Oklahoma State. I experienced it as
an active [student], and now as an alum. I think that’s been a really good
gift that I had, and I attributed that to Oklahoma State. That’s where I
found it.
Well, we welcome you back for your fiftieth reunion and thank you so
much for taking time out to talk with us today.
I appreciate the opportunity. Thank you.

Roth
------- End of interview -------

15

