Oral History Interview
with
Kathleen Laster

Interview Conducted by
Jerry Gill
August 26, 2010
O-STATE Stories
Oral History Project

Special Collections & University Archives
Edmon Low Library ● Oklahoma State University

© 2010

O-State Stories
An Oral History Project of the OSU Library

Interview History
Interviewer:
Transcriber:
Editors:

Jerry Gill
Adam Evans
Miranda Mackey, Latasha Wilson, Micki White

The recording and transcript of this interview were processed at the Oklahoma State
University Library in Stillwater, Oklahoma.

Project Detail
The purpose of O-STATE Stories Oral History Project is to gather and preserve memories
revolving around Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College (OAMC) and Oklahoma
State University (OSU).
This project was approved by the Oklahoma State University Institutional Review Board on
October 5, 2006.

Legal Status
Scholarly use of the recordings and transcripts of the interview with Kathleen Laster is
unrestricted. The interview agreement was signed on August 26, 2010.

2

O-State Stories
An Oral History Project of the OSU Library

About Kathleen Laster…
Kathy Laster was born in Dallas, Texas, but grew up in Del City, Oklahoma with her four
siblings. Never afraid to take the initiative, Kathy developed an early interest in gymnastics
and became a cheerleader as a teen, serving as head cheerleader, and taking on multiple
responsibilities and activities in school. Due to the subtle influence of a neighbor, who was
an Oklahoma State University heavyweight, and a close friend who was an OSU student,
Kathy fell in love with the school and was the only person in her family to attend OSU.
Enrolling in 1973, as a freshman she hit the ground running, working part time with the
High School and College Relations Department, giving tours to new students and
representing OSU in a most professional way. Over the next four years, she took part in
various clubs and activities, earned a President’s Leadership Council Scholarship and a
Willham Scholarship, was in Mortar Board, and was Homecoming Queen her junior year.
She was a Cowboy Coed, helping recruit football players, was an alternate on the pom
squad, was named senior class president, and was chosen as a Top Ten Senior. Kathy
entered and won the Miss Oklahoma USA pageant, and from there went to the Miss USA
pageant, which forced her to miss graduation and being awarded Top Female Graduate. At
OSU, she also met Charlie, her husband-to-be.
After graduating in 1977 with a degree in communication consulting, she accepted a job
with Southwestern Bell in management development and began earning her MBA at
Oklahoma City University. Kathy worked at Southwestern Bell headquarters and managed
some of their phone centers, but when the company split in 1984, she went with AT&T. The
job provided travel opportunities, as well as marketing and managing experience, but it
distanced her from her husband who was still in Oklahoma. Giving up the AT&T job, she
went back to school to earn a master’s degree in community counseling, then a PhD in
psychology.
Even though she was (and is) away from Stillwater, Kathy never broke her ties with OSU.
She served on the Alumni Association Board in 1985 for approximately three years, served
on the executive committee, then served as president during the 1997-98 year, which was
also the Alumni Association’s centennial anniversary. She also later served as national
president of the association. She remains closely connected to OSU, and her goals as part of
the Alumni Association have always been to keep the association strong, self-sufficient, and
a beacon for all students, past and present. She and her husband live in Shawnee, and they
have a son and a daughter (who is currently enrolled at OSU).

3

O-State Stories
An Oral History Project of the OSU Library

Kathleen Laster
Oral History Interview
Interviewed by Jerry Gill
August 26, 2010
Shawnee, Oklahoma
Gill

My name is Jerry Gill. Today is August 26, 2010. I’m visiting with Dr.
Kathleen Malchar Laster here in her office in Shawnee, Oklahoma. This
interview is for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral
History Research Program. Kathy, I appreciate you taking time from
your practice to visit with me and do this interview this afternoon.

Laster

You’re welcome. I’m glad to be here.

Gill

Kathy, you have quite a tradition and history at Oklahoma State
University, and we’re going to talk about that a little later, but could we
start with your early life, where you grew up, parents, family, a little bit
of that information?

Laster

I grew up in Del City, Oklahoma. I was actually born in Dallas, and my
parents moved to Florida, New Jersey, and then to Midwest City. I could
have been a [Midwest City] Bomber, but I turned out to be a Del City
Eagle because we moved to Del City when I was in the third grade. My
dad worked at Tinker Air Force Base, and he was an airplane mechanic.
He wasn’t in the military, but he was a civil person, and then my mom
was a secretary. For a few years she didn’t work, but about the time I
went to school, she started working. We had five kids in our family. I am
number four, next to the youngest, and was actually the first one to go to
Oklahoma State, the only one to go to Oklahoma State. I had an older
brother and sister who were OU fans, but neither one of them actually
finished college at that time. So, I was the first one in my family to go to
college and graduate. My dad died when I was about fourteen. My mom
had divorced him earlier, when I was maybe in the third grade, and
remarried, so that’s a little bit of my background.

4

Gill

Kathy, what about some of your activities in the community, particularly
in high school? I know you were very active.

Laster

I was very active in school, always. I think what really started my life off
was I became a tumbler. That was a big deal in the Midwest City/ Del
City area. That was back when the Oklahoma Twisters first started up,
and I learned how to tumble and do some gymnastics. That kind of
parlayed into then I was one seventh-grade cheerleader, and then later
they added another one. One success can often lead to another. Through
that activity, I became pretty active in school, was in a lot of leadership
roles, and was head cheerleader really all through school, but back then
you didn’t even have sponsors. As head cheerleader, you did everything.
You called all the practices, you picked up the uniforms, so it was very
different than we know it today. There was even hazing back in my day.
(Laughter) That has all kind of stopped now. But, yes, I loved Del City
High School and still have lots and lots of friends from there.

Gill

Kathy, were there some values, some principles growing up that you
learned that helped make you successful later in your life?

Laster

You know, I think some of it maybe was just genetic. All my sisters and
brothers, we were very active. We just all take a lot of initiative, and
we’re hard workers. We had a fairly chaotic family life, so I think we
learned kind of how to deal in difficult circumstances. I know one thing
my mother always said to me that kind of stuck with me was, “The
whole world can’t be out of step and you the only one that’s right.” So, I
think whenever things really felt—I was upset with everything going on
in my life, I learned to kind of look inward and see what it was I was
doing to contribute to that. I’d say a lot of hard work and closeness as a
family, and that you can make it through anything if you just persevere.

Gill

Kathy, you were talking about your other brothers and sisters that were
interested in OU. Was there an influence, something that influenced you
to come to Oklahoma State and to enroll at OSU? What was that?

Laster

When I went to cheerleading camp. Well, first of all, across the street
from me lived Marsha Wooten, who was a big OSU person and was
recognized at the Alumni Association for her service to the alumni. She
lived across the street, and her family was very OSU oriented, and my
brothers and sisters were OU oriented. So, Marsha and I would have our
little—I’d say OU was better, and she’d say OSU was better.
However, when I got into high school and I went to cheer camp at OU
and saw all the hippies lying around (I graduated in high school in ’73,
so I was going to cheer camps in the late ’60s), I didn’t want any part of
OU. (Laughter) I just didn’t like the atmosphere at all. There was one

5

person who was two years ahead of me in school named Debbie English
who went to Oklahoma State, and we got to go up and spend a night or
weekend with her, and I totally fell in love with OSU. I went to a
football game. I totally fell in love. By that time, Marsha had moved
away. (Laughs) We reconnected again when I got to OSU, and we saw
each other on campus, and I’m sure she wanted to say, “I told you so.”
But, anyway, I fell in love with OSU.
Russ[ell] Conway was the high school and college relations director, and
Russ just took me under wing. I got a President’s Leadership Council
scholarship, and he just took me under wing from the moment I was
introduced to OSU. Early on, I offered to do some tours at OSU to take
other students around, and so he offered me a job to work in high school
and college relations. So, from a freshman on, I worked part time there
all through school, so I really saw OSU through the eyes of staff as well
as a student.
Gill

Kathy, you said you fell in love with the university. What were some of
your first impressions that you remember about the campus?

Laster

It was just so friendly. It was just so friendly, welcoming, and fun. Of
course, there was the wave at the football game, and I don’t know. It’s
just a feeling.

Gill

Howdy Week activities and all that?

Laster

I don’t know that I knew the difference at that point when I first visited
there. It was just the feeling that I had. Then, like Russ and others just
embraced me, and then, actually, that’s when I first met you because you
worked in that office, and you extended every opportunity to help me or
anything that I needed as a student and would listen. I got mentoring
from day one, walking into OSU. I don’t think my experience was
unique. I think many students feel that way about Oklahoma State.

Gill

Kathy, to say you were involved would be an understatement, at OSU,
but could you share some of your activities and organizations you were
in, some of the things you did as a student, just to talk generally about
your undergraduate experience?

Laster

When I first went to Oklahoma State, I took potluck on a dorm. In my
high school years, I had been named All Sports Queen, and that had
created a lot of jealousy among my—it was the only year at our high
school that they picked princesses for all the sports, and there was only
one queen, and I was it. That didn’t bode well among female peers.
(Laughter) So, at that point, I knew a little about sororities but not a lot,
and I just kind of thought, “I don’t want anything to do with groups of

6

girls for a while. I just want to go up to college.”
So, I took potluck on a roommate. I move into my dorm room, and I
have my cute little gingham comforter, and I bring my little cheer doll
and put it up and all my little jock stuff, because back in the day that was
jock stuff in my high school days, and I leave. Then my roommate
comes in, and she puts her stuff up. Then I came back, and she was
gone, and she has wine bottles, hippie-looking stuff, and it’s just like,
“Oh, my gosh! What have I done, taking potluck?” (Laughter) But her
name was Carol Dobson, and we ended up really getting along, and as it
turned out, the resident assistant, the RA, turned out to be Debbie
English, which was the girl that I had come up to visit. She was right
next door to me, and down the hall was another high school friend who
ended up being on that floor, and then two floors up was another high
school friend. But we made friends with all the girls in our dorm. Even
now, I went up and visited with my daughter. And the old traditional
dorm, it’s wonderful, even though most kids don’t choose that today,
because you do build this camaraderie. Of course, we did all kinds of
pranks with the Vaseline on the doorknobs, answering the phone, the
shaving cream. We’d crawl up in the closets and lay up there, and then
when they got asleep we’d make noises. (Laughter)
We kept leaving our door open, so they decided to teach me and Carol a
lesson. One day when we were out of our room they came and took a
bunch of stuff out. When we came back, we thought we’d been ripped
off, and they told us they were teaching us a lesson. But, that group of
girls, we went down to Padre Island at spring break in my car by
ourselves as freshmen in college. I don’t know why! It’s amazing that
we did that. They were just great friends, but the next year they were all
dispersing and going to sororities.
Gill

What hall was that?

Laster

It was Willham. Yes, it was Willham North because it was close to the
jock dorm, and I ended up dating Charlie Laster, who was a tennis
player and lived in the jock dorm. So, sometimes they would come over
and run up through the halls at the hours they weren’t supposed to be
there, and the girls would all scream. Really, that freshman year of living
in the dorm was probably one of my favorite years because at that point I
just went to classes. I took a 7:30 a.m. history class, (you’ll appreciate
this story, Jerry) and I made it to every class because I was an
overachiever. I made it to every class, and I made a really high A. One
day the professor said, “Would you come in and see me?” and I said,
“Sure.” I went in, and he said, “Are you interested in majoring in
history?” I said, “No. What gave you that idea?” (Laughter) He said,
“Well, it’s a 7:30 a.m. class, you never miss, and you make really good

7

grades. I thought maybe you had a little interest in history.” So, anyway,
that was the last 7:30 a.m. class I ever took at OSU, that’s for sure.
So, my freshman year, mostly, I just was in the dorm, I did President’s
Leadership Council, and just had fun. I’m sure there were a few things
that I participated in. I just don’t remember. I did go through Rush my
sophomore year, and I joined the Kappa Kappa Gamma house. I actually
Pi Phi’d. My preference was Pi Phi, and after I joined, Bid Day, I
decided I had made a mistake because all the girls I wanted to pledge
with went Pi Phi and I should have pledged Pi Phi.
So, all of a sudden, Rush was over, and everyone was so friendly during
Rush, and then they moved us right into the house because we’re
sophomores, and they weren’t friendly anymore. Not that they weren’t
friendly, but they were just busy getting on with their lives, and nobody
was catering to us anymore. It was just like, “Oh, I don’t know if I like
being in this house.” So, I went to the person in charge, the president,
and I said I wanted to depledge. They said, “Go move back in the dorm,
live there a semester, and think that over.” I did, and I decided to go
ahead and stay in the sorority and ended up becoming president.
Junior year, I was elected president for my senior year. I was in Mortar
Board, and I was the recipient of the Willham Scholarship. Dr. Kamm
was president at the time. He was wonderful. Honestly, there’s just so
many activities, I don’t know. We did intramural sports, I was in lots of
different clubs, and anything I could be in, I was.
Gill

Kathy, did you have some favorite student hangouts, places you liked to
go on campus and off campus, as well?

Laster

Well, the Fox was big in my day, and Eskimo Joe’s was just a little
dumpy place around the corner. Hardly anyone went to Eskimo Joe’s.
The Strip was the big place. I started dating my husband, now, second
semester of my freshman year, and I’ll never forget our freshman year. It
was the Thursday before spring break. I was in the dorm, and I’m
thinking my husband , my boyfriend at the time, was with me, but I can’t
remember that for sure. I remember hearing this loud noise, and all the
sudden you look out the window, and all the dorms are blinking lights.
You start hearing this swelling noise, and when we looked out, we saw
this huge crowd of people moving toward us, and we just filed out of the
dorms like we were little ants, just all went to the elevators, filed out,
joined the mass as it continued to go through campus and pick up all the
students. I mean, there were thousands and thousands of students. I don’t
know if you even knew about this. The crowd made its way to the Strip
where people began to rip off their clothes and start streaking through
the crowds. It was really the inception of the streaking movement in the

8

United States, and that’s when it hit Oklahoma State, and I was there.
The crowd went down and got the big bull from Sirloin Stockade and
pushed it down Washington Street and pushed it into Theta Pond. People
went nuts with spring fever that year, so that was a really fun incident.
But I met my husband at the Fox, second semester, after a basketball
game. He and his tennis team came over and joined my friends from the
dorm. My husband sat across from me, and he was sitting next to the
cutest person in our group. Her name was Linda Beaty, long blond hair,
and I thought, “He’s the cutest, but she’ll get him. She’s the cutest girl.”
(Laughter) He talked to me kind of across, in the loud room across the
table. It turned out, he was at Girls State, and so was I, in high school.
He got to go because he helped put on the trial. He was part of law
analysis from his high school. I was the district judge at Girls State, and
so he remembered me from then. He grabbed my arm as we left that
night and asked if he could call me, and that’s kind of how it started.
Gill

The blond-headed gal didn’t win out after all, huh?

Laster

And then another little thing, I didn’t drink in high school. I went to
college, and I was a good girl. I didn’t drink. I went home at Christmas
break, and I talked to my mom that maybe it might be okay if I drank a
little bit. So, that was the very first night we’d gone out, and I had
ordered a beer. I took one sip out of it, but I’ll always remember I met
my husband the first night I started my drinking career at OSU.
(Laughter)

Gill

You have a long relationship. (Laughter) Kathy, you mentioned earlier
Russell Conway. You were talking about Bob Kamm. Were there faculty
members or other administrators who influenced your development as a
student, that you recall that stand out in your mind?

Laster

Well, I remember Dr. Parker. My major was communication consulting,
and he just always made an impression on me. The people that really
stand out are Russell Conway, Dr. Kamm, you. I remember—was it Ray
who was…

Gill

Ray Sharp?

Laster

Yes, he was always so friendly. I applied for Outstanding Senior
Woman, so I went and talked with the alumni people. They didn’t have
the Alumni Board back then, the Student Alumni Board, but I got to
know them through that. There were many teachers along the way, but I
don’t remember names.

Gill

You achieved some significant success as a student. You mentioned a

9

couple things, but could you talk about some of the recognition awards
that were particularly meaningful to you?
Laster

Most of those really kind of come your senior year, although I did
receive a scholarship, the President’s Leadership Council. I was always
proud to be a part of that, receiving the scholarship as a freshman, the
Willham Scholarship, getting Mortar Board, and getting into those
honorary kind of organizations. But as a junior, back then for
Homecoming Queen, I guess you applied. You turned your name in, and
some people encouraged me to do that, so I turned my name in. You had
to go through an interview process, and so I went out on the field. I think
there were maybe three seniors and myself. It might have been two
seniors and myself, but I did not expect to win because I was just a
junior. My mother had had an aneurism that luckily they caught right
before it burst, and she had had brain surgery. I always remember this
because she was in a crowd with her scarf on from the brain surgery, and
I got to wear her white leather coat in the parade.

Gill

Did she know that you’d been selected?

Laster

No.

Gill

I know you didn’t, but she didn’t know, either.

Laster

No, you do the parade first. So then, when they announced my name, I
literally was shocked because I no way expected to win that. I was
surprised to even be a candidate. That was a very exciting honor. What
was neat about that was then the next year at Homecoming, I got to play
a role as having been former Homecoming Queen. Then my senior year
I got to be president of the sorority, and I got to take my first plane ride
to go to the national convention for Kappa. First time I’d ever been on a
plane.
College opened up so many opportunities to me. I did apply for the top
senior awards, and I was picked as one of the top ten. Then, I was at a
wedding, and this woman came up and asked if I would enter the Miss
Oklahoma USA pageant, and so I did. There was a girl that was in the
pageant, Karen Keenan, who was also at OSU. She was a pom girl, and I
was also a pom girl my senior year. She had done a lot of pageants, and I
hadn’t, so I just watched Karen and turned the way she turned and
walked the way she walked. (Laughter)
It was when they did onstage interviews, so I was able to get the
audience to laugh when I did my interview, and, anyway, I won. I won
that. So, the Miss USA pageant that I went to was the very night of my
college graduation. It was also the day that they did the luncheon to

10

announce the top senior man and woman on campus. That day, I was
away in Charleston, South Carolina, and Russell Conway was there, and
I was named the Top Female Graduate, so he accepted the award on my
behalf, and I got a telegram because that was not in the days of texting.
(Laughs) So, I got a telegram telling me that I had won that award.
I remember being in Charleston, and while it was fun and exciting to get
to be in the Miss USA pageant, at that point I knew I wasn’t going to
make the top twelve. You could tell because they interview you onstage,
and they were all over me at first, and then they weren’t talking to me
anymore, so I kind of knew I hadn’t made it. I remember thinking, “This
is fun, but what really is meaningful to me is my college graduation and
to have been there to accept that award.” I just remember having that
moment that, “This is a neat experience, but the OSU stuff is what really
has definitely the greater meaning for me.” So, I did not go through a
college graduation until I got my PhD.
Gill

Oh my, gosh! (Laughter) Kathy, this is a serious question. Where did the
passion come from, the drive to be involved in all this, not only just
involved, but knock-the-top-out leadership? I’m not trying to embarrass
you, but where does that drive come from, to just plunge into things and
do them? It kind of defines your whole life.

Laster

I don’t know. I honestly just think I was born with that kind of
personality. We had some kind of rough things in our family life, and the
way I dealt with that was to just involve myself in activities. Honestly, I
think I got a lot of feelings of worth from achievement, and really later
in life kind of worked at undoing that kind of programming, so to speak,
where you didn’t have to knock the top off of everything. You were still
okay. (Laughter)

Gill

Do you have some favorite memories of some special times as you think
about your undergraduate experience and reflect back on some things
that stand out in your mind as being special to you?

Laster

Well, I have mentioned some of the highlights. The football games, I can
remember being a Cowboy Coed. Now, that comes back to me. I was a
Cowboy Coed when that first started, and we would help recruit football
players. We got to fly on a few private planes to go out. There are
probably rules against that now, (Laughs) but that was fun to be
associated with that. I don’t know about meaningful, but this was fun.
As a pom girl, I was actually an alternate my senior year, and the other
alternate was Sherry Brand. We did not get to go to the Tangerine Bowl
as a part of the pom group because we were the alternates, but the Posse
Club funded the two alternates to go. So, we got to go on a private plane.

11

We were given spending money. We didn’t have to follow all the rules
that everybody else had to follow, (Laughter) but we still got to go on
the field and be a part of the pom squad, so we got the best out of both
worlds on that deal.
It’s hard to say exact things or happenings as much as it was just the
friendships that you develop, the experiences that you had, and how
much you learned about yourself. It was a time that you almost just feel
like a butterfly, that you came into your own. I felt like those were the
years that I came into my own, that I really discovered who I was and
what I was capable of. It exceeded beyond what I thought was possible
for me. I’ve done studies now, as a psychologist, about self-efficacy and
about what drives our career decisions. It’s what we believe we’re
capable of becoming. It really wasn’t until I was in my thirties that it
occurred to me that I actually could be a doctor.
I started out in the Business College, and after about a month I went to
an undecided major in arts and sciences because I decided I could be
more than a secretary. Not to say that that’s a bad thing, but for me to go
in the Business College, all you could do in the business world was be a
secretary. So, if I didn’t want to be a secretary, I needed to change
colleges. It didn’t even click with me that you could be business
management or business marketing. So, I ended up in the business
world, but that’s the thinking for females. This was 1973. This was a
very still enlightening time for women.
Gill

So, what was your major, finally, before you graduated?

Laster

Communication consulting, consultancy.

Gill

You enrolled in your freshman year in what year?

Laster

Nineteen seventy-three. I went as a seventeen-year-old because I didn’t
turn eighteen until September.

Gill

And you graduated in ’77, four years later?

Laster

Yes.

Gill

Kathy, as I understand, you accepted your position after graduation in
’77 with Southwestern Bell. Can you talk a little bit about following your
graduation and into your career with Southwestern Bell and with AT&T,
and then we’ll talk about the later part of your career later?

Laster

If I could go back just one moment, I want to say this.

12

Gill

Sure, absolutely.

Laster

I just can’t say enough about Russell Conway and what he did for me in
those years during OSU. Russell mentored me. He was kind of a paternal
figure to me. He taught me about leadership. He would talk to me about
his reasoning for the way that he did things. He truly guided me and then
wrote me letters of recommendations, opened doors for me in ways that
I don’t know that my career at OSU would have been what it was
without Russell Conway. So, that is a man dear to my heart, just as you
became to me later, even after I graduated and became involved with the
alumni. So, I just wanted to say that.

Gill

Thank you. I think you went straight after graduation to working with
Southwestern Bell, and later AT&T. Can you talk a little bit about your
career path? Just pick some highlights and share a little about that?

Laster

That was back when there were a lot of interviews on campus. I went
into the Management Development Program with Southwestern Bell,
and my brother-in-law actually worked for Southwestern Bell at the
time. So, I went right into management, and you were a little bit resented
coming right out of college and supervising people who had been there
for a long time. You spent maybe a month or two doing the actual job. I
went and managed business offices for Southwestern Bell. That
developed into a job where I did management development training, and
then I did some work on the headquarters. Then I went into phone center
stores, and I managed phone center stores. You might remember some of
those things from back in the day.
When Southwestern Bell and AT&T divested, it was 1984, and they
were forced to split off. I chose AT&T to go with at the time, so I
continued to manage phone center stores, ultimately over a three-state
area. At that time, we would have quarterly meetings, all the zone
managers from across the United States, in nice places all over the
United States. Those were wonderful years in the corporate life, when
you really got a lot of management development training. You got to go
to a lot of nice places, and you got to really develop a lot.
Then I was offered to go to a Senior Management Development Program
where they decided at AT&T that they needed to begin developing
people for those higher levels of management down the line to get
people in the pipeline. I was selected to go on that program. The idea
was to put me in a lot of cross-functional positions. So, I did some
manufacturing, I went up to headquarters in New Jersey, I was over
marketing, domestic and international, for the cordless product line, and
I worked with a consulting company to help develop where that line
needed to go over time. It was really kind of neat. I got to work with Bell

13

Labs and work with overseas manufacturing concerns in Singapore,
Hong Kong, and Germany. It was just a lot of neat experiences.
I actually commuted for my husband. He stayed in Oklahoma. I lived in
New Jersey for a year and a half and negotiated a good expense package
with the company, but I ultimately came down to go on with AT&T.
Then, my husband really wanted to stay in Shawnee, so it was going to
be either split up our marriage or I needed to rethink my career path. We
had a career conflict, and I took about a year and a half to kind of
reevaluate. I actually even interviewed for the High School and College
Relations Director job at OSU at the time, but, ultimately, I decided to
go back and become a psychologist, where I could be a professional in
the community that I lived, Shawnee.
I still am doing that. I have a clinical practice here. But after a few years,
I decided that my real love still was working in business, and so I have
evolved now to a consulting psychologist, and I have a company called
Impact. We do organizational development with companies, leadership
development, culture change, executive coaching, and those sorts of
things. So, I still have a clinical practice, and I do the organizational
work.
Gill

And your family…

Laster

Along the way, when I went back to get my PhD, we decided to start our
family. We were later, older parents, but I had a daughter in 1993 and a
son in 1996. My daughter is now seventeen, and my son is now fourteen.
I am an older mom, but…

Gill

Kathy, I think you maybe said it, but I’m not sure I picked up the year
you made your career change from AT&T to come back to school. What
year was that?

Laster

I think it was around 1991. No, it was ’93. I took a leave from AT&T,
and then AT&T called and asked if I would manage a service center in
Oklahoma City. I did, and they closed that. I helped close that, and that
allowed me to have a buyout from the company. So, it was about ’93
when I left AT&T permanently and started my work. I went and got a
master’s at OSU at that point in community counseling. From there, I
went into the PhD program.

Gill

You had a fast track. You mentioned a position with AT&T, national and
international. How tough was it to make that kind of decision in your
life? It had to be pretty tough.

Laster

Yes, I forgot to mention, too, I had gotten an MBA right after I got out

14

of school and was first working for Southwestern Bell through OCU’s
[Oklahoma City University] night program. It was really tough because I
have been a high achiever all my life, and my career with AT&T was on
the senior level track program. It was a highly selective program. My
career could have gone great guns, but it really came down to a value
conflict. Actually, I did my dissertation on work/family balance because
for women to break through the glass ceiling, there are so many prices
you have to pay that, honestly, men typically don’t. Most men that are
CEOs have families, they have children, but most women that are CEOs
don’t have children and aren’t always married. I’m not saying that’s 100
percent across the board, but percentage-wise that’s a pretty drastic
difference between men and women.
Gill

In that era, back in the early ’70s?

Laster

Well, that was the early ’70s when I went to college, but this was
probably still in the ’80s, like mid- to late ’80s. So, yes, I could have had
that career that would have gone gangbusters, but I was going to have to
give up a marriage and the opportunity to have a family. I had to
seriously weigh what was more important to me. I chose to hold my
marriage together and to start a family. I can’t say that I regret that
decision, but it was really a shift to give up the prestige, the status, and
the money that came along with that high-powered career. But I’m
happy with what I’m doing right now. I have a good balance in my life
of work and family. But there were some prices to be paid either way
you went, and you just had to choose which one.

Gill

Do you feel challenged and fulfilled in your new endeavors and your
new career?

Laster

I do. I do. I really enjoy my clinical patients, but I don’t want to do that
full time because I found I’m a real extrovert and I have a real business
head. I’ve been on several boards. I’ve served on a hospital board and
then a chairman of a hospital board here in our community since 1993. I
was a chairman a couple of those years. The work I did at the Oklahoma
State Alumni Association was very meaningful to me.

Gill

Kathy, that’s a good segue into the next part of our conversation about
your relationship with Oklahoma State University and the Alumni
Association. You’ve always remained closely connected to Oklahoma
State University throughout your career and in your life. Why are you so
loyal to OSU and passionate about Oklahoma State University? I think
those that know you know that you are deeply loyal to Oklahoma State
University. You feel very strongly about the university and your
experience. Why has it been so important to you, that you’ve been
willing to give so much of your time and energy to Oklahoma State?

15

Laster

I think other graduates get this because that experience that you get at
OSU lays the foundation for the rest of your life. It’s at such a critical
time in our development as young people. What OSU did for me at that
point in time of my life—I came from a middle-income family. I wasn’t
even upper-middle, middle-middle. It just opened doors for me, and it
started my life off in a way that just made a huge difference in my life. I
don’t know how you describe the loyalty that you’ve developed for an
institution, because it is an institution, but it’s all the people that touched
my life during that time and that invested in me and cared about me and
gave me more belief in myself. How do you define the value of that? So,
it just goes to your very heart. It just goes to your very core, the
appreciation you feel. I guess it’s the people. It was the people at OSU
that made that possible. That’s where the loyalty is.

Gill

You’ve served over many years in numerous leadership positions in the
Alumni Association, including your tenure as national president of the
Alumni Association. Can you talk a little bit about some of the
leadership positions that you had in the Alumni Association? I’ll ask
some follow-up questions about your participation in strategic planning.
We can laugh about that one now, but can you talk about your
progression in leadership positions you’ve had?

Laster

When I was working, before I went to New Jersey, I had the opportunity
to go on the Alumni Board. I went on as an at-large member, and I don’t
remember how many years I served on that, but it was probably at least
three.

Gill

Do you remember which year you were on the board?

Laster

I went to New Jersey in about 1989. It was prior to that, so it had to be in
the mid-’80s. Around 1985 would be my guess. But I rotated off of that
position, or it could have even been that I left. I can’t remember exactly.
Anyway, there was a period of time I served. Then, when I came back
from the year-and-a-half stint in New Jersey and I’d interviewed for the
High School and College Relations job, it kind of reconnected me with
some people at OSU.
At some point then, I was asked again to come back onto the board,
pretty soon thereafter. Pretty quick, as a matter of fact, because I think I
served as president in 1997, and you serve out your term. I was asked to
be on the executive committee. That’s a few years’, as I recall,
commitment. From there, you either go off the executive committee (at
the time this is how it worked) or you’re tabbed to be the next president.
You go into that sequence. So, I was president in ’97 and then pastpresident the year after, and have remained fairly connected and

16

involved since then.
Gill

Kathy, what years exactly did you serve those two years as president?

Laster

Well, I know it was 1997 because it was really one year, but it crossed
over a calendar year. I’m thinking it was ’97-’98 because it was the
centennial of the inception of the Alumni Association, which I believe
was 1897. So, I got to be president the year we reached our centennial.

Gill

Kathy, as I recall, there’d been one female president about four, five, six
years before you. Before that, it had been back since the 19-teens since
there had been a woman who had been president of the Alumni
Association, so you’re just the second woman president of the Alumni
Association since the 19-teens. Was that special for you?

Laster

It was. Again, it was like, once again, OSU just kind of reaching out to
me, saying, “You know, you’re really capable of a lot of things. Here,
let’s tap you again!” because it was another experience where I learned I
was capable of more than I thought I was capable of. So, again, Jerry,
obviously, you’re doing the interview here, and you were the alumni
director at the time, but since, that position was renamed to CEO and
president due to many of the efforts that we worked together on through
the years for the Alumni Association to become an independent entity
from the university.

Gill

Speaking of names, Kathy, think back if you can about some of the
colleagues that you had, some of the leadership teams during those
years that you remember.

Laster

When I became president, that was the year that First USA came along
and wanted to pay a lot of money to have access to our database. They
offered us ten million dollars, which was an infusion of revenues that
were unheard of before in Alumni Association’s life, so we had to
decide what we were going to do with that. We had a team, an executive
committee, and some of the people—God, I hate to even name names
because I’ll forget some, but I know that Kirk Jewell was on with me.
Gene Batchelder, and—gosh, help me out, Jerry, because there were
several. Paul Schulte. Do you remember?

Gill

Rhonda [Hooper]?

Laster

I don’t know if Rhonda was on the executive committee yet.

Gill

She was right behind you.

Laster

She was a few behind me. I’m not sure she was on my executive

17

committee. At one point, Greg Massey. At some point, I served with
Greg on that. Of course, Ike Glass and…
Gill

Was Leonard Court a part of that? Leonard may have been a couple
years before you, actually.

Laster

Well, Leonard was, maybe. When I was elect, he was immediate past, I
believe. It might have been Leonard, Ike, myself, Kirk. And then I
believe it was Paul, and then maybe Gene, and then maybe was it
Rhonda? It’s hard to remember the exact order.

Gill

Pretty powerful individuals there, aren’t there?

Laster

Yes.

Gill

When you look back, does it amaze you how at that one point of time in
history in the Alumni Association and the university that you brought
that kind of firepower, if you will, to the Alumni Association?

Laster

Yes. [James] Halligan was president of the university at that time. There
were some pretty significant things that changed in the Alumni
Association at that point. I don’t know if you want to go into that, but…

Gill

Do you remember some of the key challenges and goals of the
association during your presidency? First of all, do you recall when you
came in as president, some of the challenges?

Laster

Well, we were really working to get a lot more alumni leader ownership,
the feeling of ownership, into the Alumni Association, which was really
your vision. We had term limits at that point, also, but we were trying to
get new blood in at the same time. We were really trying to give the
alumni more say in the leadership of the Alumni Association. You, as
the director, were really willing to hand off some of that power in order
to get the kind of involvement that you knew would really propel the
Alumni Association to the next level.
What we did at that time was we really began to evolve it to more of a
team leadership approach because, how it was up until the time I came in
as president elect, you didn’t have much of a role, and then you step in,
and you have to make all these appointments of at-large board members
and make a lot of decisions. So, as I walked into those shoes, I thought,
“I’m not sure that I’ve had the opportunity to know all of this. Let’s go
right now and get the president elect in the room so that they can see
what’s going to happen their year so they can begin preparing.”
We then made some changes on the executive committee where we

18

started electing the president elect-elect earlier. Then we started making
a really strong effort to involve the past president, the president, the
president elect, and the president elect-elect. So, it really began to create
a momentum of whatever initiatives we were working on. Everyone
bought in so it would go on beyond one more year because I think up
until then, whoever the president was would have some bent that you
would work with as the director, and the next year it might be something
completely different. It created some continuity of leadership that I think
really made a difference.
Some of the challenges were that we were somewhat encumbered by
whoever the president of the university was, because however their
feeling was toward the Alumni Association made a difference in what
our role was. So, we very much wanted to attain independence and
become self-sufficient, financially. There was also a strong desire to
create our own space, which was, I know, a dream of yours to eventually
have our own Alumni Center. Even if the ten million dollars that came in
—at OU, a lot of that money went straight to their athletic department,
and there was a movement afoot at OSU to siphon that money to the
athletic department. So, we worked with President Halligan and the
Athletic Department to give them—I think we gave them one million of
that. Then the rest—we convinced Dr. Halligan that we have some very
important plans for the Alumni Association, and we were allowed to
keep those moneys and to put them to good use.
Gill

Kathy, then at this point, you really set the stage for that, in terms of we
had this sense of where we were going and how we were going to be
structured organizationally. At that point, you took leadership, and
under a strong leadership and strategic planning, this wasn’t just a
strategic plan. This was a significant total re-look at the Alumni
Association. Can you reflect back on how the inception of the strategic
planning process helped change the Alumni Association?

Laster

Well, we were afforded an opportunity that no prior leadership group of
the alumni had ever had the opportunity to do. Because of my work at
AT&T, I had gone to the Wharton School of Business for a leadership
executive training program. I had been introduced to a man named Mark
Sebell of Creative Realities. He had come back, and I had invited him to
AT&T. We had developed what we wanted to do with the product line,
so I knew I had that experience. Then it was like, “With this ten million
dollars, what is the vision for our Alumni Center?” There was a mission
statement, but we needed to develop a really common vision as to what
we wanted to become about as an Alumni Association. Through that
association, we were lucky to be able to get him at a much reduced cost.
To start that process, we really needed to go ask our alumni what did

19

they want. So, we went around, and we did focus groups throughout the
state and in other states. We did some out-of-state focus groups, and
Rhett Laubach was on staff at that time. We had him trained as a
facilitator by the consultants. We went around, and that’s when I think I
first met Burns Hargis because we did one in his home in Oklahoma
City. But we gathered alumni, had a really creative session, and really
kind of pulled together the wishes. We also did a quantitative survey.
We pulled data everywhere we could, and then we put all that together
into the key nuggets of what we had learned from our alumni. From that,
we came up with four basic directions that we needed to go.
Even before we got to that work, the consulting company said, “Let’s do
one thing before we start this work,” and it was probably the most
important work that we did. They asked us, “Let’s define the core
purpose of the Alumni Association.” We had gathered for this, kind of,
what we called “invention session,” but a session where we had a lot of
representation, young, old, involved alumni, alumni that weren’t as
much involved. We pulled together a lot of different representative
samples into this group and spent about three days in a think tank and
developed where we wanted to take the Alumni Association. But that
first task was to develop the core purpose, and what we came out of that
with was connections for life. We were about making connections for
life. Ultimately, when Rhonda became involved, with the marketing
background that she has and the advertising, that evolved to the Orange
Connection.
Gill

Rhonda Hooper?

Laster

Rhonda Hooper, yes.

Gill

We developed about three or four overarching priorities. Do you
remember what some of those were?

Laster

One was IT [information technology]. We definitely needed to work on
information technology because that was the way of the future and how
we could really reach our alumni. One was about “OSU is where it’s at,”
and how we can go out and really connect with the alumni, that it’s not
just about being in Stillwater. We had to find a way to really reach. I
don’t know if this ended up being one of the major ones, but the whole
thing of how we needed to do more target marketing. That’s when we
developed a lot of programs to try to bring babies in, the Legacy
Program, the Grandparents’ University, and sending gifts out to kids as
they grew up. What am I missing?

Gill

You were talking about earlier, one priority was to put the parking lot in
for the Alumni Center. That was one of them.

20

Laster

Oh, that’s absolutely right. That was just kind of a given when we did
our interventions, like, “Okay, we know we need to do this. That’s a
given.” That was a huge initiative, and really, the work—it was maybe
born and gotten on the planning sheet at the time that I was president,
but the real work of that was the several people behind me. Clayton
Taylor was one big person involved in that.

Gill

Financial support of the Alumni Association, long-term, was maybe one
of those overarching priorities.

Laster

Yes, self-sufficiency, becoming self-sufficient. What was so great for the
Alumni Association is about the time that the Alumni Center became a
reality, which is an amazing building. I mean, I think it’s more than any
of us ever envisioned or dreamed of. But it was about that time that we
became self-sufficient, so it was like, “Bam! Bam!” It all started falling
into place. I know we still have the challenge today of raising enough
revenues to just maintain and operate that center and make it kind of pay
for itself, but it’s still a huge accomplishment.

Gill

Kathy, we were talking about the strategic planning and the priorities
that had come out of there and how it impacted the Alumni Association.
In your mind, how did the Alumni Association change after we initiated
some of these things? How is it different after these?

Laster

Well, the board really evolved. Really, at one point, as a member of the
board you would come and get updated on the university, but it was
really the executive committee that made all the decisions. Then, really,
it was mostly the president working with the director of the Alumni
Association. What I saw change, with the term limit change and with
moving to the concept of an alumni leadership team, more and more of
the decisions and responsibility began to fall upon the alumni leadership.
At one point, when you would go to an alumni meeting, the director,
which was you, would mostly carry the meeting. It became more about
you were just a short part of the meeting because the leadership and the
alumni themselves began to really feel a lot of ownership for what we
were doing and became a lot more involved.
Along with that, I think there were more efforts at fundraising. I think
more people saw and understood the value the Alumni Association has
to the university. I think there came to be more of a collective effort
among alumni to do the things we needed to do to make the Alumni
Association the purposeful organization we wanted it to be for the
university, which is to be the friend raisers, develop the relationships,
and make the experience of OSU go beyond the undergraduate year for
the graduates, create those connections, and bring value to alumni across

21

the country. So, we saw those changes.
Gill

Kathy, you alluded to a couple things I wanted to ask you about. The
organizational structure of the Alumni Association and its relationship
with the university, we use the terms “self-governance association,”
“independent association,” or basically one driven by the alumni itself.
Can you speak about how you feel about the organizational structure of
the Alumni Association?

Laster

I just think it’s so critical for the alumni leadership to be able to have its
own organization because there’s a hierarchy at OSU, and the president
is at the top. The alumni director, at the time, was not even seen in the
high, senior-level hierarchy. They were invited in, I think. The director
was, you, but you didn’t always get the voice that the alumni deserved to
get. It very much depended on the philosophy of whatever president of
the university we had. There was not a lot of control over our own
organization because we were always at the mercy of whatever the
prevailing thought was about what the role should be.
By becoming self-sufficient, it allows the Alumni Association to truly be
the voice of alumni and to define our purpose and value. Of course, we
work very closely with the president of the university to make sure that
we’re helping, bringing value, and doing the things that everyone wants
to make OSU a better place and to continue those connections. I think
it’s critical to the voice of alumni to have that independence.
Also, it’s important that the alumni stay separate from the Foundation
because the Foundation raises the money. But we want alumni to feel
like they’re a part of OSU, and it isn’t always that you’re just coming to
ask for a handout of money if OSU contacts you. There needs to be an
organization within OSU that just cares about keeping the connection,
the value, the camaraderie, and the spirit of OSU alive, and serving our
alumni, not just raising money, although sometimes that’s a part of it.

Gill

We talked a lot about initiatives, but thinking about programs and
activities of the Alumni Association, did you have some favorite ones
that you enjoyed, some of the programs of the Alumni Association that
stand out in your mind?

Laster

Oh, gosh. True, near, and dear to my heart was when we started the
program I mentioned earlier, the Legacies, because what does an alumni
want more than anything but for their kids to understand the value of
what that university meant to us? To have that engrained in the kids
early on, and to make that investment. Where we got that idea from was
Sony did that, years and years ago, when they started making little kid
toys so they’d have that brand loyalty by the time you become an adult.

22

It was along that idea that we started thinking about, “What do we need
to do for our alumni?” Grandparent university—my daughter is a senior
this year, and so she’s gotten all these gifts all the way. She got to go to
Legacy Weekend last year, and it really gave her a flavor of OSU and
what the students are like. So, I didn’t have to sell my daughter on OSU.
By the time she was a sophomore, she was saying, “Oh, of course I’m
going to OSU!” Now, it didn’t hurt that her dad would say, “Kara, you
can go to college anywhere you want, but if you go to OSU, we’ll pay
for it.” (Laughter)
Gill

A little bit of extra incentive, Kathy.

Laster

Of course, she knew she could go wherever she wanted.

Gill

Kathy, backing up and starting at the front end, as early as when they’re
little kids, they’d send Pistol Pete books and coloring books and
different things. Can you share what some of those are?

Laster

Yes, like a coloring book, and at one point there was a bank that they
could save money for college. They got a little backpack, a cute little
OSU backpack, at one point. They would get birthday cards. I can’t
remember all of them.

Gill

It seems like they loaded the information when they joined, if the parents
would consent. They’d actually put it in the database. Then, when they
got in high school, freshman year, they’d be switched over to the High
School and College Relations database for prospective students, and
then they’d start getting critical information.

Laster

Right. Another thing I loved was the Student Alumni Board that started.
I don’t know that we really get credit for that, but I just think that is a
really great program. We begin to grab those students while they’re in
college and give them those opportunities for leadership, expose them to
alumni. That’s a great program. Recently, they started the Orange Door
Program, which was something we kind of conceptualized way back in
1997-98. The idea that if you’re an OSU business and you join the
Orange Door and you want to do business, you can go on there and see
who are OSU people if you need a particular service. You can see
alumni, and we can be loyal to each other.

Gill

That was started mainly for out-of-state chapters, wasn’t it?

Laster

A lot of the strategies that were discussed back then we knew would take
awhile to implement. So, I mean, really, even today we’re still seeing
things come to light that were part of the long-range strategy.

23

Gill

Asking in the general nature about alumni, why is it so important to
keep alumni engaged with Oklahoma State University?

Laster

There’s an emotional value to that. Of course, for the university it’s great
to keep alumni engaged. It kind of depends on how you want to look at
it. The university needs alumni to be engaged because we can be
amazingly helpful in recruiting and fundraising and just the general
perception of OSU. There are tons and tons of ways the alumni can
come back and contribute to colleges with their time and mentoring or
efforts or whatever.
One thing we looked at really strongly when we were doing the strategic
planning is, “What value does the Alumni Association have to the
alumni, to the alumnus?” We really wanted to look at, “Why would you
join the Alumni Association?” We really worked hard to provide some
benefits and also educate our alumni as to how that small little
membership fee pays for so many of the programs like, right now,
Homecoming. Homecoming is supported by Oklahoma State Alumni
Association. We’re in the middle now of a fundraising campaign to save
Homecoming because some of the living groups are beginning to think
about pulling out because of the cost involved. Not only has the alumni
funded it, but we need to fund it at a higher level to keep the pressure off
of those student groups because one pulls out, research shows that other
universities, others start pulling out. And Homecoming is the greatest
tradition at OSU. It is the best in the United States. It is one of the top
homecoming celebrations. We don’t want to lose that because it is part
of our tradition. So, it’s the emotional attachment that we have to those
traditions that I think the Alumni Association helps us to connect to and
that emotional value.

Gill

Kathy, one aspect, it’s not why you do it, but in your leadership and the
new programs created, two or three of those have received CASE
national awards, Council for the Advancement and Support of
Education. There are about six schools that receive that and are
recognized in the entire United States and Canada. For about three
years running, three out of four years, OSU Alumni Association received
the CASE Recognition Award. Pretty impressive, isn’t it?

Laster

It is very impressive. OSU has an Alumni Association far and above
many universities. Compared, for example, to OU, the kind of
connection OU would make with the alumni would mostly be through
athletics. OSU is kind of more of a comprehensive connection. Certainly
there’s a lot through athletics, but there’s also another way to connect
with OSU beyond just athletics. It really is one of the more superior
alumni associations, and I think that’s great.

24

Gill

You can look at some of these and try to capture or pull some thoughts
together. From your perspective, what should be the primary mission
and purposes of a university alumni association?

Laster

Well, I just go back to our core purpose: connections for life. It’s about
connecting alumni to the university. It’s about the university being able
to connect to the alumni. It’s about relationships. I say this, and this has
not happened to me yet. I still have not met one OSU alum that I do not
like. I mean, they’re just great people that go to OSU. (Laughter) Every
once in a while in the crowd at an athletic game, you’ll hear one person
that gets overly negative, but, mostly, OSU people are just great people.
When you’re out here in the communities and you meet another OSU
alum, there’s just this instant connection. It’s like this bond, this almost
unspoken bond that you both know what you experienced. I was recently
on the OU campus, and one of their administrators was just so excited
about the OU experience. I know, internally, I was just thinking, “You
just have no idea how great the OSU student experience is!” (Laughter)

Gill

“If you only knew,” huh? (Laughs)

Laster

We put out more leaders than most universities. We just have amazing,
well-rounded, wonderful students, and it’s a great place.

Gill

This will be a tough question. It’s not intended to be tough, but of all
your memories, can you share with us some special memories and
highlights of your time at the Alumni Association?

Laster

You’re talking about in terms of serving on the board?

Gill

Just in the alumni activities, period.

Laster

Of course, it’s always fun to go when there’s a big athletic event, like
before the Big 12 tournament, the basketball tournament, just going to
those and feeling the camaraderie of OSU and the orange. There’s just
nothing that beats that feeling. I’ve got chill bumps. Just those moments
that you get to be a part of that, knowing that bowls want to come after
us because of the loyalty that our alumni have to OSU.
I love doing all that strategic planning work. I loved going out and
serving the alumni, and hearing from them, and spending the time to
really think how we could be meaningful to alumni. I love that. I love
the camaraderie of the board meetings when we could collaborate about
how we could better serve our alumni and also know what’s going on at
the university and feel that connection. There’s such emotion among the
alumni. The passing of the gavel of one president to the next, often there

25

are tears as those things happen because of such emotional connection.
This is not just an organization you’re a part of to get on your vita or
your résumé. It’s an emotional connection. It’s something you do that
goes to your heart. So, it’s just the relationships. It’s all about
relationships.
Gill

Kathy, looking forward now, we’ve talked a lot about the association,
looking back and to the present. Looking forward, how do you feel about
the future of the Alumni Association? What do you think it needs to do to
continue to grow, continue to be of greater service?

Laster

Well, first and foremost, it has to maintain its financial stability. It has to
continue to be funded at a level that it can remain self-sufficient. I think
that’s critical to be able to accomplish its purpose and its true mission,
which is to serve the alumni and the university. I think continued, strong
leadership, and then enough cannot be said about the Alumni
Association staff and the president and CEO who run our Alumni
Association day to day. That role is a critical role to the success and the
people that we have on our staff that do the work. They’re dedicated,
they’ve been there for years, and they love the university. Many of them
are prior graduates, so the quality of the people we have on those staff
roles and the leadership role is going to be important.
I think continuing to connect with our alumni and help them understand
the value of the membership is really important. Continuing to come up
with programs that make it relevant for our alumni to be a part of the
Alumni Association is important. I think the best thing we have going
for us, in addition to the history and the passion that people have for
OSU, is our Alumni Center. It is now a testament to the importance of
alumni on our campus. The building represents that. It’s a huge building.
It’s a beautiful building. It’s rich in tradition and aesthetics, and it’s
something to be proud of. It’s a physical representation for alumni of
what we feel toward Oklahoma State University. You can never dismiss
the value of alumni on the OSU campus because that building is forever.

Gill

Where it’s located.

Laster

Oh, it’s just amazing! Across from the Student Union, right by Old
Central, and one of the first things you see when you come into campus.
The brick pavers that have names and names and names of our alumnus.
It’s wonderful. It’s a great tribute to Oklahoma State.

Gill

Kathy, how do you think the Alumni Association is going to need to
change, and how is it going to need to be different going into the future?

Laster

Just continue to be dynamic and marketing-oriented, and continue to

26

stay in touch with our alumni. We need to continue to stay relevant.
Gill

On a personal note, we talked about your daughter Kara. You said
earlier she was a senior this year. I understand that the OSU legacy in
your family may be continuing?

Laster

Yes, she’s definitely planning to go to OSU. We have an eighth grader,
as well. He’s very into basketball, so it depends what happens with his
basketball career, if he gets a scholarship somewhere. But if he doesn’t, I
imagine OSU will be his pick, too. It’s a neat thing when your whole
family can bond and rally around your affinity to a university. I can’t
wait for her to go and have some of the experiences. Even now, as I am a
little sentimental about this being her senior year and the last year she’ll
be at home, I know what’s ahead for her. I know how wonderful an
experience she’s going to have at Oklahoma State. It gives me great
comfort as a parent, as a mother, to know. So, I’m not quite as sad about
it sometimes as she is because she is a little scared of what the future
may bring, but I know what awaits her. It’ll be a wonderful experience.

Gill

Kathy, thinking of all the things that you’ve accomplished in your
lifetime and your practice today, what professional and personal
challenges remain ahead for you?

Laster

Well, I always enjoy the opportunity to somehow give back a little bit
because I’ve talked today, there’s been a few times I could have even got
a little emotional if I’d let myself go there because it’s just been such an
important part of my life to be a part of Oklahoma State University. So, I
want to find a way to give back. I’ve tried to give back in my time, and
hopefully at some point I can even give back more, financially.
Work/family balance is always a big deal to me. I did my dissertation on
that, and I think it’s a challenge how you give the time you want to your
kids and your family and the thing that matters, really matters most in
life, in my view, and still maintain your professional passions and
interests. I love working with organizations. I love making a difference
in people’s lives, whether it is in a clinical setting or whether it is in an
organizational setting. I love doing that kind of work, so continuing to
balance all that is a big challenge for me. Of course, taking care of my
health—as alumni, we’re getting older. (Laughter) We’re now part of
that older group that is alumni, and so that’s important to maintain that. I
want to maintain our affiliation always with OSU. I look forward to our
kids going through.

Gill

Kathy, perhaps something that some of us in this interview might not
have picked up on at this point, you made the major change in your life,
major decision, to go from corporate America to going back to

27

Shawnee, America. You also made a little bit of change in your career
from your private practice as a psychologist to more of some business
consulting. Can you talk about that and your decision? You’re kind of
balancing those two worlds right now, but can you talk about those two
areas in your life and what it means to you?
Laster

I enjoy doing the clinical work, but sometimes people find this early in
their careers, and some people still try to figure out really what they’re
about. For me, I finally connected the dots at the ripe old age of around
fifty, just slightly over. I just realized that that’s where my passion is, is
working with groups of people and organizations. We spend a lot of time
in our work life, and when you can connect a person’s individual passion
with where the organization they work for is going, it is the people—
OSU is an institution, but it’s the people in the institution that make it
great. You can have a company, but it’s the people in it that make that
company great.
My business is about trying to help tap into the potential of the people
and align their needs with the organization’s needs to really get the buyin and the passion that helps the organization achieve what it wants, as
well as the individual get the personal growth that they want. I love
doing that kind of work. I look back. My undergraduate was speech
communication consultancy. It is exactly what I have ended up doing. I
went the path of business, psychology, travel, stay home, the whole
gamut. I have come back full circle to what I graduated in. I needed all
those business experiences to be able to make a contribution to
organizations in this role.

Gill

You’ve worked, Kathy, with a lot of different kinds of organizations:
non-profit, corporations, Phillips. Can you talk about some of them?

Laster

Well, we’ve done work doing culture change in organizations. I’ve
worked individually with executives on their own leadership
development, even on their own, defining what they’re about and how
they might want to evolve their professional and personal life at this
point. I’ve worked with leadership teams. I love doing work with
leadership teams to help them really engage.
I work with this model called the Five Dysfunctions of a Team where we
really help the organization build trust and deal with conflict and really
get committed and hold each other accountable and really focus on their
results to become a higher performing group with a lot more satisfaction
for everyone. We also do selection assessment. If someone is going to
hire someone, we can help do an assessment to see if it’s the right fit for
the job, or if someone needs to be promoted. So, we just have a lot of
tools to help organizations maximize their people.

28

Gill

Personally, in your consulting business, you’ve worked with
ConocoPhillips. You’ve worked with hospital boards in addition to
coaching.

Laster

Banks and just different organizations, universities. I’ve actually done
some work for the University of Oklahoma, and just a variety.

Gill

Maybe I could ask it this way, Kathy. What do you want to do with the
rest of your life?

Laster

Boy, that’s a deep question. (Laughter)

Gill

Well, I mean your consulting office or counseling office.

Laster

The first thing that comes to mind is I want to live long enough to enjoy
my kids and their kids and make a difference in their lives because I
didn’t have my kids until I was thirty-seven and forty. So, it’s important
I take care of myself if I want to be around for them. I love this work
that I do. I see myself doing this.

Gill

So, you’ll continue to balance both.

Laster

Yes, I do. Eventually when the kids aren’t home, maybe we’ll enjoy
more time with our friends and old acquaintances, reconnect. My
husband played tennis at OSU, Charlie, and he had a tennis partner,
Glenn Nakazawa, and at Homecoming last year they did a reunion of the
tennis team. We stayed in Parker dorm overnight. Our families, we got
in a dorm room and ate Taco Bell late at night and did all the things we
did in college. (Laughter) As a result of that, we went out to visit them at
their vacation home at the Sea Ranch, north of San Francisco, and totally
reconnected. Now our kids with their kids, and it was just a wonderful
thing that, really, Homecoming created that opportunity for us.
I’d love to have the time with friends and family and continue to work
with my clients and just stay viable for as long as I can. I want to keep
our connection with OSU, and I think we’ll be very involved in the next
few years because of our kids. I love that I was president of the Alumni
Association because forever more you get to be a part of the board, and I
can always stay connected. I value that greatly.

Gill

Kathy, you have gotten far enough in life that you’d be thinking about
your legacy a little bit. Let me ask you this question. How do you hope
people will remember Kathy Malchar Laster?

Laster

Boy, that’s a tough one. I guess I would say as someone that really tried

29

to make a difference in other people’s lives, whether it was my own kids
or my siblings or my extended family or my friends or my mentors or
my clients. I guess I just want to feel like I somehow made a difference
for them.
Gill

Kathy, what should we bring up that maybe someone looking at this in
twenty years might want to know? Have we missed something? Is there
something you’d like to say or some topic we haven’t covered?

Laster

I think maybe a little bit, to go back to the female thing. It was a great
opportunity to get to be the president of the Alumni Association as a
woman. I do think women bring things in leadership. We use our brain
in different ways than a man does. Not to say there aren’t great male
leaders, but female leaders can bring many things to organizations.
Oklahoma has been traditionally a pretty good-ol’-boy state.
I actually want to credit you because you kind of gave that opportunity
to me to come on and be on the board and to have the opportunity to
serve as president. It’s people like you who make that possible for
women that then begin to change that view so that women do have the
opportunity to show what we offer. I do think that I probably brought a
different set of things to the Alumni Association by having the
opportunity to be president, and I think there are many, many capable
women out there. I would like to see women step up to those kinds of
roles and to be given the opportunity to be given those kinds of roles. So,
that’s a challenge I would put out there.

Gill

Kathy, it’s been great. I appreciate your comments, your perspective,
and your insight on your relationship with the university and the Alumni
Association. Is there anything else before we close?

Laster

I just have to say this. I know you’re the one interviewing me, but my
association with you has been so incredibly meaningful to me because
you’re one of those people in my life that reached out and touched me
and saw potential in me and believed in me, even before I believed in
myself. The leadership you brought to the Alumni Association, you,
Jerry Gill—I know you didn’t want this to be a part of this, but the
legacy you have left at this university to help evolve the Alumni
Association to what it is today, not only does it set us up to be really
successful going into the future, you’ve just personally touched so many
people’s lives in your role as the director of the Alumni Association. I
just want to thank you because you have made a difference in my life,
and I thank you for that. I thank OSU and all the people that made a
difference in my life.

Gill

Thank you.

30

------- End of interview -------

31

