 Story_ID: 111747 Speaker 1: We're going to get started by slating. My name is Evelyn Pounds, and I am the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer. We have three observers. We have Vicky Gray, Anthony Walker, and Kelly Jackson. Now, please state and spell your complete name. Speaker 2: Dina Ruth Andrews. Dina, D-I-N-A, Ruth, R-U-T-H, Andrews, A-N-D-R-E-W-S. Speaker 1: Your date of birth and location of birth? Speaker 2: February 28, 1959, Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: It's, oh, Valentine's Day, (laughter) February 14, 2006. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview is? Speaker 2: Five Fifteen Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: Atlanta-- Speaker 2: Georgia, 30312. Speaker 1: That's good, that's good. Story_ID: 111748 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you a few People magazine-ish type questions. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Green olives, queen green olives with stuffed pimentos. (Laughter). For the moment, I am totally addicted. Speaker 1: Okay. Your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Probably St. Thomas, Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: And a favorite phrase or saying? Do you have one? Speaker 2: Let me back that up. I have two favorite places. I have St. Thomas, and I have Ghana, West Africa. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "God is faithful." Story_ID: 111749 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us about your mother, her name, if you remember where she was, when she was born, where she was born, just-- Speaker 2: My mom is Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews. And she was born in Senatobia, Mississippi, October 8, 1935. Speaker 1: And spell Senatobia. Speaker 2: Oh, Senatobia, S-E-N-A-T-O-B-I-A. Speaker 1: Mississippi? Speaker 2: Yeah, Mississippi. Speaker 1: That's a new one, I hadn't heard of Senatobia, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And she was born in 1935? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And just tell us about her. What did, just tell us some things about your mother, or characteristics about her. Speaker 2: My mom, my mom was the glue. My mom died in January, 1998. And prior to her death, she was the glue that kept everybody together. She was the love and the emotion and the more down-to-earth part of our family, with unconditional love. And she taught us, you know, great values and principles. Speaker 1: Did she have any favorite stories, or any stories that she shared with you and-- when you were growing up about Senatobia, or just about her growing up days? Speaker 2: Well, she and my uncle--she had one brother, one biological brother, my Uncle Virgil [ph.], and they grew up together. My biological grandmother died giving birth to my mom. So she was raised by her grandfather, and her grandmother, and her aunt. And somewhere along the line, my grandmother died in Mississippi. And all of my mom's aunts and uncles had died, with the exception of the woman that I call my grandmother, Katheryn Johnson, who was my biological grandmother's sister. And so, my mother was raised technically by her grandfather and her aunt. And so, they came--they left--I forgot what year they left Mississippi. Well, they went from Mississippi to Memphis [Tennessee] and then to California. And so, you know, my mother and her brothers, they had a lot of fun. You know, they had a lot of fun. You know, in high school, they had a crew of friends that they went to high school with that they grew up with, that they all married and they had children together. And you know, I'm still friends with one of my mother's high school friend's daughters. She's one of my best friends, Belinda. Speaker 1: Okay, so they moved to what part of California? Speaker 2: Los Angeles. Story_ID: 111750 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your father. What is his name, and when was he born? Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting. My father is Eugene Ellis Andrews. That's the man's name that I carry. However, my biological father is Richard Cook, who I've not met; I've only seen a picture of. And my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] and father, my mother and father were separated, getting ready to divorce. And my father decided that he didn't want the divorce and, you know, that he wanted my mother and the family to stay together. So, I was to take his name and never know that he was not my biological fam--my biological father. And when I was twelve years old, he had re-married and had a daughter, and decided it was time for him to tell me. (Laughter). So, I mean, I'm happy now. It was painful, but I'm past the pain. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's happened in a lot of cases-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --more than we actually recognize. Speaker 2: Yeah, because people don't talk; people don't tell the truth. And, anyway, I could get into that whole thing, but-- Speaker 1: So, your--the father who raised you? Speaker 2: That's Gene. Speaker 1: That's Gene? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And he and your mother remained-- Speaker 2: Well, they actually ended up divorcing. Speaker 1: They did divorce? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They ended up divorcing when I was, I think about nine years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think he re-married when I was about twelve. Speaker 1: Okay, now--? Speaker 2: No, he re-married when I was about eleven. Speaker 1: Now, your biological father, was he in Mississippi or was he in California? Speaker 2: California, they were all in California. My mother was, she was probably--I know she went to high school in California. And she may have gone to junior high school in California. So they were all settled there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --by that time. Speaker 1: Now, before your mom died did she tell you anything about your father or their relationship, how they met? This is your biological father, now. Speaker 2: Yes, actually, she did. We began talking about it. Well after Gene told me that he wasn't my father, you know, I went home and I was like "Well, you know, Mom, you know, what's this?" And she pulled out a picture of him--a tall, slim, you know, good-looking man. And she said, "Well, this is your father. You know, his name is Richard Cook." And so it took, it took many years. I think I was like twenty-four years old before we really starting dealing with it. Because for my mother, it was a painful experience for her. And when she and Gene got back together, my father could no longer see me. I think she said the last time he saw me, I was two years old. And so, I had no relationship with him. And he couldn't see me and, you know, the whole bit. So, I think when I was about twenty-four, we began discussing it-- Story_ID: 111751 Speaker 1: When--let's see. When I was twenty-four, we, as I said, we began to deal with it. And at that point in my life I had become a born-again Christian and, you know, I wanted to know, I wanted answers. And what my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] said to me was that she and Eugene [her stepfather, Eugene Ellis Andrews] had separated. She met Richard [her biological father, Richard Cook] through my godfather, who is her cousin, Joe Edwards. And they were in the military together, and so they began seeing each other, you know, during the separation period. And Gene decided that he wanted his family back, and so that was the story. And she said that Richard was there in Los Angeles [California] visiting, you know, with her cousin. And he's from Orange, Texas, and I'm trying to find him, but I haven't been able to find him yet. So-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Now, who do you, your mother, did she tell you about, well, your characteristics? Who do you think you're like? A lot like your father, or a lot like Eugene? Or how do you, you know, the characteristics that you might have picked up from the father's stance? Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting. Because I know, I'm sure I have a lot of Richard's characteristics as far as, you know, looking like him. And an entrepreneurial spirit, I'm sure I got that from him. Because my mother, you know, I believe that she said that, you know, he had more of an entrepreneurial spirit, which Gene did not. Gene--it's interesting. But at the end of the day, without going into a lot of detail, the type of man that I would have desired to marry would have been different than the characteristics that Gene carried. And I ended up marrying someone who, I mean (laughter) actually, you know, I mean it was a little deeper, you know, than--. So, it's interesting because, you know, Gene was the only father I knew, and I loved him, you know, dearly. And I guess, you know, the whole psychological thing that girls go through, you know, when they're separated from their fathers--the abandonment. You know, you have this close relationship and then, you know, there's divorce; there's a feeling of abandonment. There's the lack of identity. You know, you thought you were someone and you really--you know, and then it's like "who am I," you know? So anyway, it's interesting, because you know, the people that raised you, you have a tendency to take on their characteristics, or, or to pull from someone, you know. And you're trying to get that thing that you didn't get from them, or that they took away from you. You know, and you end up marrying the wrong person sometimes. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, that's true. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 111752 Speaker 1: Now, when you were with Gene [her stepfather, Eugene Ellis Andrews] and he was raising you, you know, as his own, are there any stories that he might have shared with you that you can remember about when he was growing up, or how he met your mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews]? Or just any stories that you have from his side of the-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, my dad was from Bakersfield, California. And they met in high school or somewhere around high school. And they just, you know, they met each other and they fell in love and, you know, that's just the way it was, you know, until things started doing--the relationship started going in different directions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, you know, we were very close to, you know, I mean it's like, I'm doing this interview and, you know, my mom's deceased now and my father's deceased now. And so I actually, I kind of live in truth at this particular point. But anyway, you know, we're still, you know, we're very close. I mean his, Gene's sisters are my aunts and, you know, my cousins, and we're still in communication with one another. And my stepmothers are my stepmothers. And I just talked to one day before yesterday for her birthday. And, you know-- Speaker 1: And this is, the stepmother's from Gene-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as well as Richard [her biological father, Richard Cook]? Speaker 2: No. We don't, we don't know anything about Richard. Speaker 1: (unclear) Okay, all right. Story_ID: 111753 Speaker 1: Your--we talked about your grandparents on your mother's [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews'] side-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that they had passed. So it was your grandfather, your mother's father, who raised her. Or it was her grandfather who raised her? Speaker 2: Well, it was her grandfather who raised her. My grandfather remained in Senatobia [Mississippi], and he re-married. And I think, gosh, they had, I'd say like an army of kids. I mean, because it was only three of us. But I think they must have had like, I don't know, seven or eight kids or something like that. And I've actually not talked to them since my mother died in 1998, but, you know, I do plan on connecting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But yeah, he stayed in Senatobia, he re-married. But my mother, like most children, stayed with the maternal side of the family. Speaker 1: All right. So, this aunt [Andrews' great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] who actually raised your mother--now did your mother tell you a lot? Did you get a chance to meet the aunt who raised your mother? Speaker 2: Yes, she lives with me now. Speaker 1: Oh, she-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Actually, she's really, I don't call her my aunt. I call her my grandmother. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Because she's the only grandmother I know. And she just moved with me here in Atlanta [Georgia] right before Thanksgiving. Speaker 1: And what is her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Katheryn Johnson. Speaker 1: Katheryn Johnson? Speaker 2: Yeah, Katheryn Porter Johnson. Speaker 1: Now does she remember stories that she tells about when your mother was growing up, or even just any stories about your grandfather, which was your great-grandfather? But it was your mother's grandfather? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Does she have any stories? Speaker 2: Yeah, Papa, yeah, she talks about Papa all the time. Actually, everybody talks about Papa. And he was, I guess, evidently he was just the joy of everybody's life. And, you know, he used to go to church and read the Bible. And I think, you know, he was a teacher in the church and, you know, that kind of thing. And you know, just an out-going kind of person. Speaker 1: Okay. Now he was born, he was born in the late 1800s or maybe even early 1900s? Because the rule of thumb is that if your mother was born in '35 [1935], then her parents might have been born in 1915? Speaker 2: Right. Well, my grandmother was born in 1919, okay. I refer to Katheryn as my grandmother. That's the only grandmother I know. So, Katheryn was born in 1919. And she's--so probably add, you know, another twenty years on there or something. Because she had her--I should have done--we should have done this, but we haven't done it. We talked about doing a family tree. But she had six siblings, I think. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay. Speaker 2: And they're all deceased. But so, you know, you'd probably add at least twenty years on to Papa's age and, you know, come up with-- Speaker 1: Add twenty years to her age, and come up with Papa's age? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or if we were to move back to--the grandfather was her father? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, he was born around the turn of the century? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: About 1900? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: It could have been even the late 1800s? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And do you know if he served in any wars, or-- Speaker 2: You know what, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: You're not sure? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: All right, excellent. Story_ID: 111754 Speaker 1: And Eugene's [her stepfather, Eugene Ellis Andrews'] parents, did you know anything about his parents? Speaker 2: No, I know very little. My aunts and uncles, I know them. But as far as his parents are concerned, no. I think they died, like, when I was real young. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And Richard [her biological father, Richard Cook], we don't--do you know anything about-- Speaker 2: Just from Orange-- Speaker 1: --his parents? Speaker 2: No, just from Orange, Texas. And he had relatives in Los Angeles [California], but that's all. Speaker 1: That's it, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, not too much on him. I'm not too, I don't have much on history, as far as my family. Speaker 1: All right-- Story_ID: 111755 Speaker 1: --All right. So, let's talk about your, your sisters and brothers. How many siblings (unclear)? Speaker 2: Actually, I have two brothers. My mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] has two brothers--my mother had two sons. I have one brother that's two years older, and one that's eight years younger. Speaker 1: Okay, and would you tell us their names in the order of birth, and include yourself. Speaker 2: Right. There's Mark Ellis Andrews. And Mark was born in '57 [1957], September 15, 1957. And then there's me, Dina Ruth Andrews, and I'm born in 1959. And then there's Arthur [Casperson], and he was born eight years after me. So what was that, '67 [1967]? Speaker 1: Yes, almost ten years-- about '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and his birthday is January 6. And I have, through my two brothers I have---Mark has two stepdaughters, and they're both adults now. And Arthur has a daughter and two sons. So, I have a ten year old niece, a nine year old nephew, and a seven year old nephew. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 111756 Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: You know, that's real interesting. My, I think my earliest memory of growing up was probably--I don't know if it was kindergarten. I think it was like kindergarten. And my aunt was one of the teacher's aides. And she was my mother's [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews'] brother's wife, Aunt Dorothy, who is my godmother. And Aunt Dorothy, they had, well, in total they had six children--five boys and one girl. But Aunt Dorothy became pregnant, and I remember, you know, I was the only girl at that time. And when she became pregnant, she was having this other baby and, you know, it took away from, it took away from the attention that we had. And my mother would tell me, you know, "You can't, you know, you can't jump all over Aunt Dorothy. You know, you can't, you know, you can't do that." And that's one of the earliest, one of the earliest memories that I have is, you know-- Speaker 1: Someone was infringing upon your territory and you didn't appreciate that. Speaker 2: (Laughter). That's terrible, yeah, but that's it, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were about six years old then? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, how did that make you feel? I mean, how did you actually feel when your mother told you-- Speaker 2: Oh, I cried. Speaker 1: --that now you weren't going to be able to share her? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I cried. It was, you know, because that was my Aunt Dorothy, you know. Speaker 1: So, was it as bad after the baby was born as you perceived it to be? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know what happened. I don't know what happened after the baby was born. (Laughter). Story_ID: 111757 Speaker 1: But you still maintained a relationship with your aunt (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah. And actually, you know, this is something. Because I got, I'm getting all the seniors, because my aunt is moving with me. She will be here February the 23. So, I'll have my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] and my aunt. (Laughter). The house is big enough, Vicky. (Laughter). Speaker 1: And they're moving from California to Georgia Speaker 2: And they keep, they keep each other company. Speaker 1: What do they do? Speaker 2: Well, my aunt is in Louisiana right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, she'll be coming from Louisiana to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: What part of Louisiana is that? Speaker 2: Lake Charles. Speaker 1: Lake Charles, Louisiana. Speaker 2: Lake Charles, yeah. Speaker 1: South? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In south Louisiana-- Speaker 2: I mean it's really good. I mean, because she told me that she and my uncle promised one another that if anything happened to either of their parents that, you know, they would be there to help take care of them. So as it turns out, you know, my grandmother [great-aunt] came. And I need, I need help with her, you know, in the sense that, you know, I need someone else in the house. Because I'm working, you know, and I have things that I--you know, if I have to travel or whatever, I need someone in the house. And then you know, I just love her, and she babies me. (Laughter). So anyway, so we have, we have, yeah, I'm still a big baby. (Laughter). Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: The more the better. Speaker 2: Well, it's only--that'll be just three of us, you know. And it's enough, we've got enough space. Speaker 1: And in this day and age, that's quite an accomplishment. Because most people are putting their relatives in nursing homes. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think that's-- well, I can't speak for anybody else, because I don't know other people's situations, you know. But the house that I'm in now, when I bought it, I bought it with my grandmother in mind. And you know, I needed a bedroom that had a first floor. And I had a very interesting situation in 19--probably 1998, '99 [1999], after my mother died. And my aunt, I knew my aunt was eventually going to be with me. And during that time period, I mean, it was really bad for me when I lost my mother. And anyway, my aunt was there, you know, as she always is. And so, you know, I invited her to come and live with us. And I think that, you know, I think if you've got room for your parents--because they don't, they don't--hospitals no longer care, really care for your families like they used to. And I didn't even realize that this change had taken place until my mother died. And I was in Albuquerque, New Mexico; I was living in Albuquerque, New Mexico at the time. And my--well, I call her my daughter. And it's, we'll probably get to that part of the story. But anyway, she got pregnant at seventeen years old, and she didn't want to have an abortion. And so, she said "You know, Mama, I don't want to abort my baby. Can I come live with you?" And so, she was living with me. My mother ended up having a heart attack and going in the hospital. And they didn't tell me that she was in the hospital. I just happened to call home and they said, you know, "I'm going to the hospital to see Auntie." And so, they moved her from the hospital to rehabilitation. And my, one of my girlfriends went over to the hospital, to the rehab place. You know, because I'm like, "Something's wrong with my mother." Because if she wouldn't talk to anybody else, she would talk to me. She wanted to talk. I'm her baby, you know, she would talk to me. But I'm trying to talk to her on the phone, and she's like, "I'm tired, I don't want to talk." And so, I knew something was wrong. And so, I flew in about two weeks later. And once I got there, and I pulled the covers back to put some lotion on her legs and feet, her foot was purple. She had lost the circulation in her foot. And the people were supposed to be giving her rehabilitation. And-- Speaker 1: Exercise and everything? Speaker 2: Right, they didn't-- Speaker 1: And massages? Speaker 2: Yes, nothing. And they had to call an ambulance and do emergency surgery to try to get, to try to get the blood flowing. And, you know, after two weeks, it didn't work, and they had to amputate her leg. And she died five days later, you know. So from that experience, you know, I found out that they really don't care for your family like they're supposed to, like they're being paid to do. Story_ID: 111758 Speaker 1: And then with my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] coming here--and she had a mild stroke; they call it a TIA [Transient Ischemic Attack]. And if I wasn't there at the hospital with her day in and day out--they wouldn't help her go to the bathroom. She might not get her meds on time. You know, so I mean, I just, you know, for anyone who can afford to have their parents at home when they're older, have them at home, you know. Speaker 2: The-- how did your grandmother come to live with you? How did she actually get to come stay with you-- Speaker 1: Well, she had been contemplating, you know, coming to live. But she hadn't made a final determination. So, she came to visit for Thanksgiving, and she ended up getting sick. Speaker 2: This was Thanksgiving of 2005? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, 2005. She ended up getting sick and had a mild stroke. And from that point forward, she said that she was staying. So, I was like, "Okay." (Laughter). So, you know, I mean it's an adjustment. Initially it's an adjustment, it's a big adjustment. You know, because there's doctors and, you know, there's medicine three times a day. There's meals three times a day. There's, you know, occupational therapists two times a week. There's a nurse in the house once a week. There's, you know what I mean, there's--like every day. (Laughter). You know, so trying to balance it, you know, wasn't easy. But, you know, I thank God that we've finally got a handle on it now. You know, so it takes a couple months to get, you know, acclimated. Speaker 2: With her there, you can at least be assured that she's getting- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that care. Whereas, if she was at some facility where-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --she'd be out of sight, and almost out of mind. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You wouldn't be assured of that. Speaker 1: That's right. And they have so many people that they're trying to take care of. They can't, you know, take care of everybody. So-- Speaker 2: And what do you call your grandmother? Speaker 1: Biggie. Speaker 2: Spell that for us. Speaker 1: B-I-G-G-I-E. Speaker 2: Now, how did that name come about? Speaker 1: Well, everybody called her Big Mama, and I called her Biggie. And so, she's Biggie. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, did you start calling her that from a babe? Speaker 1: Yep, yep, yep, yep. Speaker 2: That is so interesting. Okay, now, let me just ask you this. Is there any other story that you might have regarding your grandmother that I might have missed out on? Speaker 1: Well, you know, she's funny. She always tells me, you know, like the things that I would say. You know, I'd always get words twisted. (Laughter). You know, and she said that, you know, that I would get mad at her and I'd call her "You old boo-boo thing" and, you know, I mean we, we just, you know, we always had a good time. I mean because, you know, Grandmother was there. You know, she picked us up and took us to church every Sunday. And our family's always have been really close. You know, so, it's just like I've had two mothers all my life. Story_ID: 111759 Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you're in the community--tell me something about the community that you grew up in, in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: Well, initially we were in South Central, the Leimert Park area [of Los Angeles, California], you know, between those two areas. And then when I was twelve years old, actually my uncle and my Aunt Dorothy first moved to, they call it the City of Industry now. And it's a little unincorporated city called Valinda [California], which is, you know, it's, I want to say parallels West Covina [California]. It's like an unincorporated city, you know, like right between West Covina and La Puente [California]. And so, my aunt and my uncle moved there first. Then my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] moved there. I moved there with my grandmother and my Aunt Lisa, who was my grandmother's only biological child. And she died. We had three deaths in 1983, which was, you know, the second most traumatic, you know, thing in my life. But anyway, we moved there. And then my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] came with my brothers that summer. So, we were out in the suburbs. It was like, I guess some people call it the sticks. (Laughter). But I mean, it was then. Now it's like, you know, now it's like, you know, you probably can't find a house for under $400,000. (Laughter). But that's California. You know, that's California, you know, for a three-bedroom and a den ranch-style home. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, you said that your aunt died. And this was the most traumatic experience that you had felt, or experienced to date. Speaker 2: That was the, that was the second most traumatic. I would say the first one would be the whole thing with Gene [Eugene Ellis Andrews] not being my biological father. Then in 1983, that was, that whole year was just one thing after the next after the next. And Lisa was twenty-eight years old. My grandmother's only living brother, James Porter, died. Four months later, my Uncle Virgil [ph.] died. Four months later, Lisa was murdered by her husband. And so--and I got fired. (Laughter). I got fired. Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey], Dick Griffey said that I was an entrepreneur, because I was managing Jimmy Jam [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis. And, you know, he said that I needed to go. So, I got fired on my fifth year anniversary. So, 1983 was interesting. (Laughter). Story_ID: 111760 Speaker 1: This was the twenty-eight-year old? Speaker 2: Yeah, Lisa. Speaker 1: And Lisa was? Speaker 2: Lisa was my aunt. Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I thought. Are we rolling? Speaker 2: (OFF-SCREEN MALE VOICE:) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: She was, she was Biggie's [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson's] only, she was Biggie's only biological daughter, and she was twenty-eight years old [in 1983]. And she married this guy, this much older man. And she had decided that she was going to leave and, well, she had moved out of the house. It was actually my grandmother's [great-aunt's] house that my grandmother gave to she and her three daughters, and she'd moved into the apartment with my grandmother. My mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews], my mom had a birthday, October the eighth. And that weekend, we were all there at my grandmother's. And we had asked Lisa, "Please don't go back. You know, don't go back over there. No matter what, don't go back over there." But as it turns out, she was going to do the laundry. He called, and she told him she was going to do the laundry. He convinced her to come back to the house, and he murdered her. And the twins, the three girls that I call my daughters, are Lisa's daughters. They're now 30 and 26. Speaker 1: So, you took over raising them? Speaker 2: Well, it's a family thing. My grandmother [great-aunt], my mother, and myself all helped to raise those three girls. And so, the twins were three years old at the time, and they were in the car. And she left the car running, because her plan was just to, you know, go and get the laundry and come out. And little did she know he was going to murder her. So, he stabbed her like, oh, God, twenty--I think it was like a total of twenty-something times. And she happened to get out the front door, and she stumbled down the stairs on the lawn. And the kids, you know, were actually in the car, and saw, you know their mother being murdered. And a police officer lived across the street. And he said that the guy came out and he sat on her and slit her neck, you know. And so it was, you know, it was, it was terrible. And so, I got the call. At the time, I was managing Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis] and (starts to cry)-- Speaker 1: This is very traumatic for you, very traumatic for you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But anyway, I had to finish work. So Jimmy and Terry were on the way to Rome [Italy] to produce the Change of Heart project ["Change of Heart" by the band Change]. And so, I finished doing what I had to do--beat the wall up a little bit--and went out to my family's house. And so that was like-- Speaker 1: So the, the twins actually saw everything? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, how did this affect them? Speaker 2: They, they, they're rebellious. You know, they're sweet girls. You know, they all have good hearts. But they're very rebellious, you know. (Laughter). They're very rebellious right now. And so, you know, and their father, you know, their father wasn't there for them. And Tamika, the oldest one, her dad was there for her, but he died a couple years later. So, but Tamika, you know, Tamika's doing well. And you know, they're all, they're coming into their own now, you know. So, and they've had a lot of love, you know. But you know, it's hard. You know, it's hard when you lose your parents like that. Speaker 1: Do you think they, well, it's almost impossible to get closure in that particular instance. But was there anything done for--like counseling? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: To try and help them through, you know, this experience? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because that was just a traumatic experience. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, my grandmother [great-aunt] took them to counseling. And I think, I don't know how many years she took them, but, you know, she did take them to counseling. You know, and I think at this point in their lives, you know, as young adults, it would probably be good for them, you know, to seek further counseling, you know, to resolve some issues. Because, you know, what I've learned in my own experience is that, you know, you're always trying to figure out, you know, what's going on. You know, why am I doing this? Why am I acting this way? And you know, I think that would be good for them. But they have to want to. Story_ID: 111761 Speaker 1: Now, is this also one of the daughters that you stated--when you lived in--was it Phoenix [Arizona]? Speaker 2: Yeah, in New Mexico. Speaker 1: New Mexico? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: That was the one who wanted to have her baby? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, which one? Was this the oldest? Speaker 2: No, this was one of the twins. This is Tiffany [ph.], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And how old is her baby now? Speaker 2: Lisa is seven tomorrow. Today is, what is today? (Laughter). Today is the-- Speaker 1: The 14th. Speaker 2: The 14th. The 16th, Thursday, she will be--she'll be seven, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, how old is Lisa? Eight? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Lisa is seven already. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's going to be eight. Oh, my God, oh, gosh. Okay. Speaker 1: And she had her, she named her after her mother? Speaker 2: Yeah, she named her after her mother. Speaker 1: Now that was, now what was, that took a lot, too, to actually-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --turn around and use the name, you know, to re-name her after this trauma-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. She's a special little girl, that's my baby. That's my bunny rabbit. So, and Lisa's been with me most of her life. I think from the time she was a year old she'd lived with me, you know, most of the time. She's with her mom, now. But she'll probably be back this summer. Speaker 1: So, she's in California? Speaker 2: Yeah, she's in, they're all in California. Speaker 1: They're all in California now, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so after this, you said you got fired from your job [in 1983]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got fired from my--actually, I got fired from my job in September, and [Aunt] Lisa got killed in October. And so, and like I said, prior to--we had the other two deaths [her great-uncle James Porter and her uncle Virgil (ph.)]. And at that time I was twenty-four, and I really, I really didn't know how to, you know, handle death. I really didn't know how to grieve. And all I did was, I kept working. You know, I kept working. And there was a point where, you know, things slowed down. And I went and moved into the house with my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] to help her with the girls [Aunt Lisa's three daughters]. And I ended up staying there not that long, you know. But my grandmother said I ran the house like a military, but that's not true. (Laughter). That's not true. Speaker 1: Why did she say that? Speaker 2: Well, just because--order. You know, I'm like, you know, big on organization and order and, you know, structure and that kind of thing. I mean everything's not as orderly as it used to be, you know. But I would have their schedules, you know, and put them on the refrigerator so they would know, you know, what they had to do, and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: But this was good for the girls. Speaker 2: Oh, no it was good for the girls. And I mean now, it's like they wish, you know, it's like "Mama, we wish..." You know, so yeah, it was good for them, you know. And so now, you know, we're going through another level of structuring, you know. Because they're twenty-six now and, you know, they've been with my grandmother just about all the time. And, you know, they haven't done everything they needed to do for themselves. And so, now it's like grandmother's in Georgia. (Laughter). Mm-hm. Yes. Speaker 1: You know, so now it's like okay, I've got to, I've always get to do the tough love. So, we're doing tough love again. Speaker 2: You're doing tough love from a distance. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: With them there, and grandmother here, and grandmother here. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So the oldest one, Tamika, you know, she's married, you know, and she's got her career. And you know, she's, you know, she's adjusting. You know, I mean, it's hard for them. You know, it's hard for them with my grandmother being, you know, almost three thousand miles away. And you know, but-- Speaker 2: So, now-- Speaker 1: But it's good for them. Speaker 2: Okay. So, now with all that has transpired, it's a smaller family unit, but still a close knit-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --family? Speaker 1: Yeah, without a doubt, without a doubt. And I'm the only one that's away. Speaker 2: Everybody else is still in California? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And they're still in the same town? Speaker 1: Well, they're-- Speaker 2: I mean the same suburb of-- Speaker 1: They're a little further-- Speaker 2: --Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 1: They're a little further out now, because we sold the two houses that were, you know, in that area where we lived. And now, my younger brother has bought a house in San Bernardino [California]. And my older brother's in Upland [California], and the twins have gotten a house in San Bernardino. And Tamika is in, I think she's in, she's the same area in Upland, I think. So, you know, they're still very close; everybody's still close. On Sunday we talked, and everybody was off to my brother's for my nephew's birthday party. So-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 111762 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the community when you were small, and--right side of Los Angeles [California]. What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of childhood that you can remember? Speaker 2: Ooh, that's interesting. We had, we had, well, from everything that I knew as a child, we had like a great life. South Central [Los Angeles, California] was not what it is today, but it became. And one of the things that I remember as a child was the Watts riots [1965]. And you know, the thing that's so deep about that is after I moved to Atlanta [Georgia] the first time in '92 [1992], that was the second time they had a riot, Rodney King. And I wasn't totally relocated here. You know, I'd just come here and, you know, I think gotten into a hotel or something, I don't know. But I was on an airplane, and when we got--and we didn't know there were riots in L.A., because the riots hadn't broken out when we were on the--when we left Atlanta. And as we were flying over, the pilot began to tell us that there were riots going on. And you look out the airplane window, and the whole city is lit up--fires, you know. I mean it was, it was something. Speaker 1: So you were flying at night? Speaker 2: Right, flying at night, yeah. And it reminded me of, you know, I remembered when I was a kid, and the Watts riots broke out. And it was the same kind of thing, you know. But here it is. I'm, you know, flying over it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And here it is again. Speaker 2: --you know, and looking down. (Laughter). And we're trying to, you know, we're trying to, you know, get to the-- Speaker 1: Almost twenty years later. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, twenty years later. And we're trying to get to where we got to go and, you know, got to take side streets and the rest of it. You know, and it was interesting, you know, but people--I don't know. I just, you know, I feel like, I feel like there are so many in--well, I want to say injustices in our society. But things are just so imbalanced, you know. And it's like nobody really cares, you know. Speaker 1: So, tell us about what you were doing, and how the riots affected you. Like, just describe for us that period in your life. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I really, I really can't say that they affected me. I mean I remember seeing, you know, people, you know, running around, looting and, you know, things like that. I mean I'm a kid. I don't, probably, I don't know--I don't even know if I was--I don't know, six years old, seven years old, or something like that. So, I just saw all of this stuff going on around me. The thing that probably affected me most, as far as poverty and being in the inner-city was concerned, was that my mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] worked for the post office. And I mean I remember as a kid, my brother and I used to help her when she was studying. Because they had to learn zip codes, they had to learn-- Speaker 1: They called those schemes, didn't they. Speaker 2: Right, cities and states and all those things. And I remember, you know, as a child, probably like, you know, seven or eight years old, nine years old--my older brother Marcus--Arthur-Arthur [Casperson] wasn't quite thought of yet. But we would help our mom study, you know, for her test. And then she went legally blind, and she couldn't work anymore. And so, she ended up going on welfare. And so we, you know, and I remember--as far as the whole poverty thing--is going to the store with food stamps was the thing that changed my life. (Laughter). And, you know, I have to be honest because, you know, my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] worked. She graduated from college, she was a schoolteacher. She retired from Los Angeles County [California]. You know, my mother had worked previously, and then she couldn't work anymore. And you know, there was Social Security and welfare. And so, we were, you know, we were in that group, you know, where I had to go to the store with food stamps. So I was like, you know, I'm, you know, I'm-- Speaker 1: You were determined that that wouldn't last for a long time. Speaker 2: That wasn't, yeah, that wasn't going to me. You know, that wasn't going to be me. And so I think that is one of the things that has, that has pushed me. It's like from my father [her stepfather, Eugene Ellis Andrews], the abandonment. You know, because you're constantly doing things to try to, to try to be accepted, you know what I mean. It's like you don't know, you know. But subconsciously, you know, you're doing something. You know, you're trying, you want to do something to be accepted. And for me, I just, I worked hard. I mean, you know, I did well in school. I think in second grade I was skipped a half grade. Then I never--I graduated from junior--as a junior in high school, I never went, never went to the twelfth grade, you know. (Laughter). And, and, it was like--and then, you know, there was this thing, you know; I wanted to get out the house, you know. You know, because girls and their mothers, you know, you start, you know-- Speaker 1: After a period of time you do start to kind of get on each other's nerves. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Right. Right-- Story_ID: 111763 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about like the house you lived in, the street you lived on. Just paint a picture, so to speak, of that in your early years where you-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --before elementary school. What was the name of the street? Do you remember-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --where you first lived, when you moved there [Valinda, California, now City of Industry, California]? Speaker 2: Yeah. See, these are, these are things that I can remember. I remember one house. I remember the very--when I was talking about my aunt--when I was about six years old, I remember I think we lived in like a one-bedroom apartment. And my brother and I, Mark and I--it was a sofa sleeper in the living room. And my mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] and father [Eugene Ellis Andrews] had their room. And I think we went to Vermont [Avenue] Elementary School [Los Angeles, California] at the time. Then the next house I remember that we lived in--and my mother and father were, they were separated by this time, if not divorced. Speaker 1: And this about nine years old now? Speaker 2: No, this is before. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is before then. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is before nine years old, yeah. This is somewhere between that, probably--I don't know, maybe seven or something like that. And-- Speaker 1: Around '65 [1965], '66 [1966], somewhere around there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, somewhere in there. Because we first went to Vermont Elementary School, and then we went to Manchester [Avenue] Elementary School [Los Angeles, California]. And I think we were still at Vermont Elementary School at this time. And my mom, I guess she had rented a house. And it really is--you see it in the movies like Soul Food--you know, the houses where, you know, you've got the porches and, you know, nice rooms, nice sized rooms and those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Almost like a shotgun house, but a little bit larger than shotgun houses, yes? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah, maybe about three bedrooms or something like that, you know. Speaker 1: Did it have an upstairs, or--? Speaker 2: It didn't have-- Speaker 1: All on one level? Speaker 2: Yeah, all on one level, you know. And so, I remember that house. And, you know, it had a nice porch. And that's where, you know, I remember some of my mom's friends, you know, during that time. Aunt Ida and her kids, you know, her family. Speaker 1: Did they live on the same block that she lived on? Speaker 2: They lived on the, yeah, they lived on the same block. And her daughter, Bobbie, you know, she was one of our first babysitters. And then from that house, we were in a, we were in a duplex. We were in a--and what's interesting about this place is that Bishop Noel Jones, his church--well, actually the church [Greater Bethany Community Church] that he pastors when he first got to Los Angeles--the church is on that corner. And I used to pass that street every day. My brother [Mark Andrews] and I walking to school, we would pass that church. It was like the church was right there on the corner. We'd walk down the street, you know, and make a left turn. And right there on that corner, what is it? I don't know, thirty years later, you know, thirty-five years later, I'm visiting that church; I'm going to that church, you know. (Laughter). Speaker 1: And he was still in that same building? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he was in, yeah, he was-- Speaker 1: In the same building thirty years later? Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. Well, see this is-- Speaker 1: But his ministry had expanded? Speaker 2: Well, no. See, Noel Jones was not the pastor when I was a child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The pastor when I was a child died, and Noel Jones came from Texas to pastor the church. And so here it is I've been gone from this community for, you know, what, thirty years. No, more than that, you know. But at least thirty years, I've been gone from that community. And all of a sudden I end up back over there, because someone says, "Hey, you need to go over and visit this church while you're in L.A. You know, there's this pastor there." You know, and it's like that's where I grew up. You know, so it was a duplex. And then the next place we moved was like across the street, across the major street. That was 82nd, and then we moved to 83rd and Vermont. And that was, that was a--I don't know, that was probably like, you know, a two-bedroom duplex or something. And then, you know, in the same, in the same little--I don't know, it's different. (unclear) It was like an apartment-- Speaker 1: A basement? Speaker 2: No, it was the same. It was a house, a house that sat alone-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was probably a two-bedroom house. And we lived in that house. And then there was a strip of apartments that were all part of this complex, just single story. And so, we moved next door to the three bedroom. And then from there, that's when we moved to the West Covina area [Valinda, California, now City of Industry, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or City of Industry, is what they call it. Speaker 1: So, you all were moving like every year, every two years? Or every three years? Speaker 2: You know what? I guess we were moving more often. (Laughter). This is the first time I ever thought about it. Speaker 1: And this is mainly when you were in elementary school? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but we stayed. We only went to two elementary schools. We went to Vermont [Avenue] Elementary [School] and Manchester [Avenue] Elementary [School]. And then part of seventh grade, I went to Bret Harte, and my brother, Mark, he was at Bret Harte [Preparatory Middle School in Los Angeles, California] for the eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, because I left and went out to the City of Industry with my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson]. Speaker 1: Now, when the Watts riots took place [August 11-17, 1965], were you in the apartment? And was your mother and your stepfather together at that time? Speaker 2: No, they weren't. Speaker 1: This is after they had separated? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is after they had separated, and we were in a house at that time. Speaker 1: You were in a house at that particular time? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, were you on the same side of town that the riots took place? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Or were you--okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we were-- Speaker 1: --within that same neighborhood? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, same neighborhood, yeah. And like I said, all I remember was, you know, people looting. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Did you all go out at all, or did you stay in? Speaker 2: Well, you know, we stayed close to home. Yeah, we stayed close to home. You know, but, you know, you could see what's going on. Speaker 1: And the fires and all did not affect-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --the neighborhood, the houses that you were living in at the time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That's good. Story_ID: 111764 Speaker 1: Now in the first elementary school [Vermont Avenue Elementary School in Los, Angeles, California], and even the second elementary school [Manchester Avenue Elementary School in Los, Angeles, California] that you attended, were there any teachers who influenced you? Speaker 2: You know what? I can't remember any teachers in either grade. I vaguely remember the principal of Manchester Elementary but, no. Speaker 1: It was not. So, what was the mix for children in the school? Were there any blacks? All blacks? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were there any whites? Were there Hispanics? Were there-- Speaker 2: It was all black at South Central. And, but I will tell you one thing I do remember during that time at Manchester Elementary. And that was the death of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and the death of [President] John [F.] Kennedy. Those were the two things that I remember happening during that timeframe. Speaker 1: Okay. What did, did the students act any particular way? What was, what was the atmosphere during the King assassination that you might remember? Speaker 2: It was sad, it was sad. It was like we knew something. We knew something had happened that was important, you know, as far as, you know, I guess our community, okay. You could put it like that, you know. Because in second grade, you know, it's like you're not fully aware of everything that's happening. But you know something big has happened, and you've heard about this person, you know, or these people. And, you know, African Americans were, you know, they were crazy about Martin Luther King, and they were crazy about John F. Kennedy. And so, you know, from our parents to our teachers, you know, everything stopped. Speaker 1: Do you remember watching television to watch any of the ceremonies, or, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the funeral procession and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --all of that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, were you observant of the adults, and the expressions that they might have carried at that particular time or? Speaker 2: No, I can't say that I really was. It was more of an overall kind of feel then, you know, a specific--you know, there was conversation. It's just, like now, I would imagine with Coretta Scott King dying and everything going on around--you know, her funeral, and with Rosa Parks dying and everyone's talking--you know, all the adults are talking, you know, and the kids are, you know, they're getting bits and pieces. And they know something's going on, somethings big, you know, but they're not really getting it. And I would say it's probably that kind of feel, now that I'm an adult, you know, and having children and young people around. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when, during the--do you remember the Kennedy assassination? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, here you are in an all-black environment? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And Kennedy, President of the United States-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: How did that affect, you know, this all-black environment? Was it more so a response from the adults, or were the children actually responding to the president's assassination? Speaker 2: Well, everybody was responding, adults and children. You know, because he was a loved president, you know, by our people. So you know, the kids respond to, you know, what the parents respond to and what the schools respond to. So-- Speaker 1: Did you see any contrast between the Kennedy assassination and the King assassination, can you? Speaker 2: I really can't say that I saw-- Speaker 1: It was the same type of grief? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was, yeah, it was the same type of grief. Story_ID: 111765 Speaker 1: Now what elementary, what junior high school did you attend? Speaker 2: I started at Bret Harte [Preparatory Middle School in Los Angeles, California]. That was in South Central. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Bret, B-R-E-T, I think, H-A-R-T-E, I think that's how you spell it, I'm not sure. And that was on Vermont and South Central. And then I went to--oh, God, what is the name of that school? Let me see, Grandview [Middle School in Valinda, California]. Grandview was an intermediate school. Speaker 1: And that would be what grade? Seventh and eighth grade, or--? Speaker 2: Seventh and eighth. And we started high school in the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we went to Workman High School, William Workman High School [City of Industry, California]. Speaker 1: So, you had the seventh grade at one school and eighth grade at the other? Speaker 2: No, half of seventh grade at Bret Harte, and then half of seventh grade at Grandview. Speaker 1: And then the eighth grade-- Speaker 2: The eighth grade at Grand View. Speaker 1: Now, what was life like when you were in junior high school? Did you participate in any activities? Were you-- Speaker 2: Well, you know-- Speaker 1: --active in-- Speaker 2: No, not really. I wasn't that active in activities. But I had my brother and four of my cousins, and we all went to school together, you know. Because the family had come together again, because my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] was the last one. So we didn't have, I didn't, in junior high school I really wasn't--or intermediate--I really wasn't, I don't remember being involved in any activities. Now, I did work. I remember, I think I was about fourteen when I started working at the Department of Parks and Recreation. And that's what I enjoyed doing. I was like, you know, worked with the younger children there. And the park was, it was almost detached. It was just divided by a fence. What do you call it? What do you call it? Speaker 1: A picket fence? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: A wire fence? Speaker 2: Wire fence, yeah, wire fence. And so, I would go over and I would help, you know, with the younger kids. Speaker 1: Well, just--not babysitting, but-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: -- was it teaching them activities or just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. The Department of Parks and Recreation- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Swimming? Exercise? Speaker 2: --I was like a recreation leader. No, they didn't have, we didn't have--we had painting, and games, and different things like that, after school kind of things. Speaker 1: Now, this was also close to the time when you found out who your biological father [Richard Cook] was, right? Speaker 2: Well, it was afterwards, it was afterwards. It was like we had passed that, because that happened in second grade. And so now we're in, what, the seventh grade or something like that. Speaker 1: You're in junior--okay, all right. I thought you were twelve, that's where I-- Speaker 2: No, fourteen. Speaker 1: Fourteen. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, so twelve-- Speaker 1: It was like sixth grade? Seventh grade? Eighth grade? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was like sixth grade. And then I was about, I guess eighth grade when I was working at the Department of Parks and Recreation. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I mean after it initially happened, you know, we just kept doing life as usual. He [Eugene Ellis Andrews] was married to my stepmother, Delfrancis [ph.]. You know, we had a little sister, Andrea. And you know, we did the weekends, you know, at my father's, and the whole bit. And then when we moved out to the West Covina area [Valinda, California, now City of Industry, California]. That's, you know, that was like thirty miles, you know, away. And so, you know, most of our time was spent with my mother's side of the family--my uncle, and my cousins, and my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson]. Story_ID: 111766 Speaker 1: Now when you moved to the West Covina area [Valinda, California, now City of Industry, California], now, your grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] moved also? Speaker 2: Yeah, she moved before we did. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were went? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the other relatives followed suit? Speaker 2: Well, no, my uncle was there first. My uncle and my aunt, and their family first. My grandmother went out right after them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And them my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] followed six months later. Speaker 1: Okay. And you said that this was kind of a deserted area almost, but like-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we didn't have-- Speaker 1: --out in the middle of nowhere, but now. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, very few sidewalks, very few sidewalks. It was like, all white. Now, that was a culture shock, okay. And now, I didn't realize it until after the fact. But we were at an all-black school, and community. And then we moved to a community that was primarily white. I mean, I don't know if the student body was one hundred percent African American. And so, you know, I think for us, because we had each other--you know, I had--there were my six cousins, and my two brothers, and [aunt] Lisa. And so we had, you know, a close, tight-knit family. And then there were a handful of other African Americans there, and we all had one another. And you know, we were, at that time, you know, we were all involved, you know, in activities. I think I was like on one of the pep squads. And my girlfriend, Gale, who's now a vice-president, we went to high school together. She's now a vice-president at T. Rowe Price. Gale was on, you know, one of the pep squads, and her brother played football. My cousin played football and my brother played football. My cousin played basketball, you know. So we were, you know, we were all involved in--but it was still, it was different. You know, it was different because-- Speaker 1: Did you have all-white teachers? Speaker 2: Yeah, that I can remember. Speaker 1: So, you all integrated the neighborhood, integrated the schools? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, pretty much. Speaker 1: And when you say it was a culture shock, what is it that was so different that really affected you, or that you can remember? Speaker 2: Well, you know what I think I missed? In the inner city schools, they had bands. Because I played violin and clarinet in the Los Angeles County School District in South Central. You know, they had the bands that were more vibrant. And, you know, it was just a different, you know, it was just a whole different, you know, kind of feel, you know, than it was there, you know, in that area. And I think it caused me to, you know, it just caused me to want to just get out of school and, you know, just get to where I had to go, you know. And I don't know, that's just about me. I guess that's just in-bred. You know, it's just like I just want to get to where I got to go. Story_ID: 111767 Speaker 1: So tell us about when your mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] went blind. Speaker 2: Well, I actually became a mother. You know, I began cleaning the house. My younger brother was eight years younger, Arthur [Casperson]. And so if I was twelve, he was what? Eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve? He was four-- three years old or something like that, three or four years old. And so, you know, I was, I was helping, you know, around the house--cooking and cleaning and all of that stuff, you know, changing-- Speaker 1: Because you were basically your mother's eyes at that particular time-- Speaker 2: Yeah, changing diapers and, you know, the whole bit. So, it was a lot of responsibility, you know, and I was the only girl. So I think that's why I'm so maternal. Speaker 1: Even today. Speaker 2: Yeah, even today. Speaker 1: And what were some of the challenges that you faced in school? Let's say elementary, and even junior high school, being the only female in the family? I mean, you know, I mean, you know, the only daughter and two brothers. Speaker 2: Yeah. The good thing, the good thing is my older brother, Mark; Mark protected me, you know. He was my big brother, and we went to school together; we walked to school together all the time. And you know, he always took care of his little sister. But there came a point, and this was the turning point, of how I got to West Covina [Valinda, California, now City of Industry, California] before my mother and brothers. It's that there were some girls on the street in the neighborhood who didn't like me. I guess, you know, I was cute, and one of the older boys liked me, you know. And we got to the corner store, down there with those food stamps-- (laughter) Speaker 1: Something about those food stamps. Speaker 2: --and they decided, they decided they wanted to jump me. You know, so I ended up having to fight these girls. And you know, Art and Mark always teases me. He says "Yeah, girl, you did good. You pulled all the girl's hair out." (Laughter). You know, so, anyway, my mother wasn't having it. You know, I was her baby. You know, I was her baby and, you know, she wasn't having it. So, she went ahead and sent me to West Covina with my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] and Lisa, my Aunt Lisa, probably six months prior to she and my brothers coming out. Speaker 1: And so how was that, leaving the family? How did you feel being--you're out, and your mother and your brothers are left behind. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't, I don't know. Gosh, you know, wow. When I stop to think about it, it's like I didn't have time to think about it. Because what ended up happening--and this is so unreal. That-- now that we're talking about all of this stuff--so much happened in my life. It's like every time there's something traumatic, it's quadrupled in every situation. (Laughter). I can say I've had three major hits. And each one has been so heavy that it's like I don't even, you know, I sit back and I laugh. And I guess, you know, that's my therapy of how I get through things. But at the same time, my grandmother ended up having an accident, an automobile accident. She worked downtown L.A. [Los Angeles, California] So, it was like a twenty-five mile from downtown to home. And a truck came around, swung around and hit her. And she ended up breaking her, I think it was her left leg and arm, both of them. We ended up having a hospital bed in the house. And then that's when my mom, my mother and my brothers came out. And so this all happened, you know, within six months. So it's like, you know, well, how did I adjust, you know, to leaving my mother and my brothers and going, you know, to West Covina with my grandmother and Lisa? Well, it's like, stuff kept happening. You know, it was like there was something always happening. It was like--so anyway, we had to nurse my grandmother through that situation. And she's still here at eighty-seven (laughter) with me. Speaker 1: So did she have to have a cane afterwards, or she just healed and was walking, like, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, she healed; she healed. I mean she had a cast on the leg, cast on the arm, had a pin in her leg, a pin in her arm. And she's still got the pin in her ankle, I think. But yeah, she was busted up real bad, you know. And it took, it took a while for her to recover, but she recovered, and she was driving and, you know, doing her thing. Actually, she just stopped driving a couple of years ago when she had an accident, and the police took her license away. (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's one way to give them up. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, a strong black woman. Story_ID: 111768 Speaker 1: So now you're in West Covina, and you went to junior high. And you said that you had a music career. You did violin, and did you play the piano? Speaker 2: Actually, I started music in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at Bret Harte [Preparatory Middle School in Los Angeles, California]. And I played clarinet and violin. And when I got to West Covina [Valinda, California, now City of Industry, California], I stopped playing. And so, don't ask me. You know, I mean I think the reason why is because the dynamics of the music department in L.A., you know, culturally, and, you know that in West Covina were totally different. And then too, maybe with all of the stuff going on with my grandmother's [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson], you know, accident and everything that happened, you know, maybe I just couldn't--you know. Speaker 1: Couldn't cope. Now, how did you start playing the instruments in the elementary school, Bret Harte? Speaker 2: Bret Harte? Speaker 1: Bret Harte. Speaker 2: They, they offered those classes. They offered those classes and provided instruments. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when did you pick the instruments back up again, or did you? Speaker 2: I didn't. I never picked them back up again. Speaker 1: Not in high school [William Workman High School in City of Industry, California] at all? Speaker 2: No. No, I never picked them back up. Speaker 1: Well do you play today? Speaker 2: Nope. (Laughter). And it's so interesting. Because--and even my working in the music industry--I wasn't looking for a career in the music industry. [Aunt] Lisa and I were like sisters. Lisa was four years older than me. And she was hanging out in L.A., and she knew people. And I had transferred, I started college at Cal State Fullerton [California State University, Fullerton, California] when I was sixteen. And you know, like I said, I always wanted to do the next thing, you know, just, I don't know--short attention span or something. But anyway, I transferred to Cal State L.A. [California State University, Los Angeles, California], and I wanted to get a job that paid me more money. My cousin, Paul Jackson, Jr., who is a noted musician, jazz artist, and song-writer/producer, was in the business before I was. And his dad was a senior executive at TRW. And so Paul, Sr. got me a job at TRW for the summer. But Dina wanted to make more money. And, you know, she wanted to travel and, you know, she wanted to do these things. So, Lisa knew someone in the music business that told her that Dick Griffey was looking for a "Girl Friday." And I don't know what a Girl Friday is today. (Laughter). But anyway, anyway, so I called his office and he happened to answer the phone. This is when it was three people on staff. It was Dick Griffey, Clyde Wasson, and Cheryle Appling. And they ran SOLAR Records [Sound of Los Angeles Records]. That was in 1983 [sic, 1978]. And so, Mr. Griffey answered the phone. And I told him I heard he was looking for a Girl Friday. And he said "Well, yeah, meet me at the studio with your resume." So, I got there; I was a little late because we worked in Redondo Beach [California], and he was in a studio in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. And I just caught him. You know, he was leaving out as I was getting ready to go into the door. And I gave him my resume and called back, you know, a couple days later and he told me to speak to his general manager, Clyde Wasson. And I went and met with Mr. Wasson, and they hired me. And that's where I began my career and stayed there for five years, until I got fired for managing Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis]. (Laughter). I love you, Griffey. (Laughter). No, he's still, you know, I'll love him for life. And actually, he gave me the privilege of going to Ghana, West Africa in 1991; he sponsored my trip. And I stayed at his home and, you know, got a chance to, you know, do some ministry work and go to the villages. And I had a bunch of fun and, you know, just had a great time. And I actually got stuck there during 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. So, yeah, so anyway, you know, and his daughters and I, you know, we still talk. They're my little sisters and, you know, we keep in touch with one another. So-- Story_ID: 111769 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, we're going to come back to Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But in high school [William Workman High School in City of Industry, California], did you participate in any activities, other than--well, you didn't do the music in high school. So, you're in this integrated school? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and-- Speaker 1: And, you know, your brothers and the other guys are active-- Speaker 2: Cousins. Speaker 1: The cousins are in basketball and football, and the like. So, what were your high school days like? Speaker 2: I remember I was on one of the pep squads. And I'm sure I did some other things. I was, I was like, you know, I've always been very social. And you know, and we've always had parties at the house. And you know, my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] and my uncles and, you know, my father [Eugene Ellis Andrews] and them, they'd just have parties all the time, and listen to music and that kind of thing. So, I was always social. I don't remember exactly what I did. I know that there was one pep squad that I was on. I'm social, but I'm not, I'm not real membership oriented. You know, it's like I love everybody. You know, so to be, you know, a part of this particular group, you know, that doesn't blend with this group or that--you know, I just like to be with everybody. So, the pep squad is the only thing I remember. Like I said, I could have been on something else, but I don't remember. Speaker 1: But that's-- actually stands out-- Story_ID: 111770 Speaker 1: Okay. So, you graduated high school [William Workman High School in City of Industry, California]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you said--what age were you? Speaker 2: Sixteen. Speaker 1: You were sixteen? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. And you decided to go to college? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And when you were in high school, did you have any aspirations to be--as to what your career would be? Speaker 2: You know, I wanted to be, well, a couple of things. Belinda and I--and I had mentioned Belinda earlier. Her mother and father and my mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] and father [Eugene Ellis Andrews], and my aunt and uncle, they had this whole crew of friends that all went to high school together. And they were young adults together; they had babies together and the whole bit. Anyway, Belinda and I used to sew all the time. And so, we would make our clothes, you know. And so we had little, you know, fashion thing going on. And at one point, I wanted to be a buyer. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wanted to be a buyer for, you know, a major department store. And then by the time I got to college, I wanted to be, you know, a Communication major. And then I changed my major from Communication to Business. And so, I had a Business major and a Communication minor. And you know, and it's really interesting. Because I didn't, I didn't have a lot of counseling as far as, you know, career and education and, you know, all that. You know, my mom told us "Hey, you know, you got to go to school. You got to go to high school. You got to graduate from high school. You've got an option, you know, from high school, and either you're going to go to college or you're going to work." My grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson], you know, she graduated from college and, you know, did her thing and, you know, she was always moving. And so my choice was to graduate from high school and to go to college. And so but I didn't have a lot of, I didn't have a lot of input, you know, as far as a career, and what I wanted to be, you know. But those were the things that I remembered, you know, that stuck with me. And those were my majors, my majors and my minor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And all--it's like--it's so, you know, incredible. Because it all worked together, you know, with me going into this music career that I wasn't even looking to become a part of. Story_ID: 111771 Speaker 1: Okay. So when you were at, when you were in college, you changed your majors a couple of times? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But you said you went to California State? Speaker 2: Yeah, Cal State Fullerton [California State University, Fullerton, California] for two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I transferred to Cal State Los Angeles [California State University, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I stayed there through my junior year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I dropped out when I began working for SOLAR [Records, Sound of Los Angeles Records] and things started picking up. Speaker 1: So you started making money? Speaker 2: Yeah, I started making money. (Laughter). That's it. That's it. I looked at the money that I was making, and I was looking at the money that, you know, the people, my elders, were making around me. And I said, okay, you know. (Laughter). Speaker 1: And you're all of what, like nineteen years old? You're not twenty yet? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm nineteen. I was nineteen when I started there. Speaker 1: So, you started as Griffey's [Richard "Dick" Griffey's] "Girl Friday?" Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, what did Girl Friday mean then? Speaker 2: Girl Friday then, at his office, meant I was the receptionist; I was the administrative assistant; I was "Dina, there's a new job that needs to be done." (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, you did it all, the catch-all, everything for him? Speaker 2: I did, I did. Catch-all and everything. But you know what? I wouldn't trade it for anything. I mean he taught me, you know, about publishing administration, how to copyright; international. You know, I became the international liaison. He took me over to France a couple of times (unclear) production, A and R [artists and repertoire]. You know, so I mean that's--you know, anyone who wants to be in the industry needs to get under a new, small, company that has a lot of work to do, and be happy to do whatever they can do. You know, 'cause that's how I learned. And it's like, you know, I've been, I've been an independent contractor now for twenty-something years, you know. Story_ID: 111772 Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell us something about Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey], who he was, and what he did for the industry. We know what he did for you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And just tell us something about him. Speaker 2: Dick Griffey is the founder of SOLAR Records [Sound of Los Angeles Records]. He was previously, he started out, I believe, promoting concerts. And he was partners with Don Cornelius that had Soul Train. They were partners together, and they had the record label, Soul Train Records. And they split, and Dick took the record company. And then he ended up starting SOLAR Records [1977]. And he was, gosh, he was probably one of the, he was one of the most successful record company executives in the, what, 1978? The late-- mid-seventies [1970s] to--probably I would say late eighties [1980s], early nineties [1990s]. And he's responsible for The Whispers; Shalamar; Lakeside; Dynasty; Klymaxx; The Deele, which is L.A. Reid [Antonio "L.A." Reid] and Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds]; Midnight Star, just a number of phenomenal artists that, you know, are still making hit records. Speaker 1: Okay. And you said that he took you to Ghana, West Africa? Speaker 2: Yeah, he invited me as a guest to Ghana. I told him, you know, that I wanted to come there. One of my friends has a ministry for children there. And he invited me there and, you know, let me stay in his home for six weeks, and I had a blast. And he-- Speaker 1: So, he has a home there also? Speaker 2: Yeah. Actually, actually, he really, he's there more than he's here. And he's been doing business in West Africa for the past like fifteen years. Speaker 1: He's doing productions, I mean, is he producing any artists or promoting any artists? Speaker 2: Actually, no, he's doing other business there. And I do understand that he's starting a record label. Speaker 1: There? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this was, he's originally--well, he was born in the United States. But he bought a home in-- Speaker 2: Right, he was born in Nashville, Tennessee. And I don't know when he got to Los Angeles [California], but I met him in Los Angeles when I started working for him in 1978. Story_ID: 111773 Speaker 1: Okay. And you say that you [Andrews and SOLAR Records, also known as Sound of Los Angeles Records] all eventually parted ways. And was that a time when a lot was going-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on in your life? Well, a lot started to happen. So you stayed with him [Richard "Dick" Griffey] how many years, you say? Speaker 2: Five years. Speaker 1: Five years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you got all this training? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, this was the foundation for what you're doing-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --actually, today? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So when you were, let's say, let go. How did you take that? Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was just traumatic. It was heart-wrenching. Because SOLAR Records [Sound of Los Angeles Records] was, it was, we were a family. Everyone was very close. We built, you know, a company together. You know, we had a very successful company. We rode from one gold record to the next platinum to the next double-platinum. And you know, everybody, everybody was very close; we were like a family. But what happened was the company started growing. And, you know, whenever you have a new company, you know, you may have people that start out with you, and then you know you start making more money. Then you go and you hire the senior executive from, you know, the major record company to come in and do whatever. So, there were a lot of things. There was a lot of growth; it was a lot of fast growth. There were a lot of transitions, a lot of different people, you know, coming in. And you know, it really--it hurt, it hurt. But you know, you know, he told me he loved me and, you know, I was an entrepreneur, and he felt like I needed to, (laughter) I needed to do my thing, you know. So-- Speaker 1: So this is similar to what Roberta Flack did to Luther Vandross. Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so. Speaker 1: Kicked him out of the nest and said "fly." Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's what he did, you know. Hey. And you know, it's interesting. Because my relationship with Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis]--they were still with The Time, and they felt like Prince wasn't treating them fairly. And they were writing and producing, and, you know, and not getting credit, you know, for some of the things that they were doing. And during that period of time I was, you know, the hot, you know, female executive in the business, and people could depend upon me to make things happen. And they were introduced to me by, you know, a girl who wasn't even in the business that I had met, you know, and that was hanging out with, you know, a few different people. And they asked me, you know, if I would represent them. And so, for me, at that particular point it was during the fourth year there at SOLAR. And it was, it was, you know, it was something to do. You know, it was something to do, and I needed money. (Laughter). You know, I needed more money, you know. Because you know, we had the senior executives that were in and, you know, they were making their six-figure salaries. And I don't even know if I was making $25,000 a year, you know. (Laughter). And I was always doing three different jobs, you know, holding down, you know, three different positions. But he looked at me as if I were a child, you know, like I was his daughter, his kid and, you know, and I didn't need any money. And you know, I was like "But, no, Dick. I live down the street here in West Hollywood. And I've got an apartment, and I've got a car, you know." (Laughter). Speaker 1: You have rent. Speaker 2: And so, anyway, what ended up happening was their career began to take off. And I was doing business with other, you know, executives at other record companies, and introducing-- Speaker 1: This is independent of SOLAR? Speaker 2: Right, it was independent of SOLAR, but I took them to Mr. Griffey first. But he didn't, he didn't get it. You know, I mean he gave them a couple of songs. But [HM] Clarence Avant, you know, who was more savvy, was like "Okay, you know, I don't know them. But you said that they're good, so, you know, I'll let them do one song." Speaker 1: Now tell us who Clarence Avant is--so that we can see the-- Speaker 2: Right, Clarence Avant owned Tabu Records. And prior to that, gosh, I don't know his whole history. But anyway, there was Tabu Records when I met him. And prior to Tabu, there was another company. I can't think of it off the top of my head. Speaker 1: And he eventually ended up with Motown [Records]? Speaker 2: Right. He eventually, you know, became, I think CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of Motown. He, and I think Jheryl Busby, I think were running the company at the same time. And he's, you know, they call him the "Godfather of Black Music." And you know, he's friends with [HM] Quincy Jones and Michael Jackson, and all of those people. So, anyway, you know, he was real savvy. You know, and he needed, you know, he needed these, you know, young guys to, you know, to pump that music out for him. And so, you know, it just, you know, it all worked. Speaker 1: And you ended up getting some contracts-- Speaker 2: Well, yes, yeah-- Speaker 1: --on your own? Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. And this is the reason why Griffey stated that you were an entrepreneur, 'cause he saw how successful--? Speaker 2: Right, exactly. (Laughter). Exactly, exactly, but it wasn't that I wanted to leave home, you know. I didn't want to leave home, you know, I just needed some money, you know. But anyway-- Story_ID: 111774 Speaker 1: So, you gave up your apartment and moved in with your grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] after-- Speaker 2: Well, no. Actually what happened, Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis] lived with me. And this is, this is, the people, people, people really don't know what goes down in the music business, okay, as far as helping people to become who they are. It's like those of us who are behind the scenes that are working to make deals to put roofs over people's heads--to put food in their bellies and, you know, all of those kinds of things. It's like, nobody really gets that. You know, all they get is, "Ooh, they're a star." "Ooh, they wrote this song." "Ooh, they produced that." "Ooh, they're this or that." But you know what? You know what goes on to make that happen? There's so many dynamics, you know, with it. And so, Prince had kicked them out, and they were on the road. (Laughter). Speaker 1: And what all did they do-- Speaker 2: Well, they were-- Speaker 1: --when they were with Prince? Speaker 2: Well, they were, they were members of The Time. Terry played bass; Jimmy played keys; and they also wrote, you know, and produced. And, you know, they were a hot group, you know. I mean, and The Time is still, you know, is still playing and doing gigs now. And Jimmy and Terry, I guess their biggest success has been Janet Jackson, writing and producing for Janet Jackson. Early on when I was representing them, it was Klymaxx, S.O.S. Band, Change, Alexander O'Neal, Charrelle--gosh, just, you know, projects, you know, projects. But they got, they got--Prince, you know, kicked them off the tour. And you know, I get a call. And I've got to drive from West Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] to Long Beach [California] to pick them up, which is probably forty miles, and you know, pick them up. And they ended up staying in my one-bedroom apartment with me. I had a pull-out sofa in the living room and a queen-sized bed in the bedroom. And you know, I mean, we were like brothers and sisters. There was no, you know, no funny business going on. Speaker 1: How old were they at this time? Speaker 2: Ooh, gosh, let me see. We were, we were like 23, 24. Speaker 1: You all were about the same age. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were all around the same age. And, you know, but I had, you know, I was successful, you know, as far as the business, and connecting, you know, with other record companies and A and R [Artists and repertoire] people, and getting projects and that kind of thing. So, I would, you know, I would--and the office, Griffey's [Richard "Dick" Griffey's] office, was around the corner. So, either I would have Terry to drop me off at work in my car, and leave my car for them to drive to the meetings that I had set up. Or, I would walk to work and have them pick me up later, you know. And Jimmy slept on one side of my bed, you know, and Terry slept, you know, on the pull-out sofa. And you know, we just made it happen. And then after, after I got fired [from SOLAR Records, also known as Sound of Los Angeles Records in 1983], Terry, you know, Terry is the--you know, he's the business guy. You know, he's like, "Well, Dina, you know, why don't we get a larger apartment? We can all live together." So, he moved me from West Hollywood over to the hood, (laughter) in a three-bedroom apartment that was affordable. And you know, we continued, you know, doing it the way we were doing it. I had my room; Jimmy had his room with his keys in it, and Terry had his room with his bass in it. And the kitchen area was my office. (Laughter). And oh, we had, we had a ball. I mean we had meetings, we had everybody. I mean, we had folks coming over. I mean we gave Jimmy a surprise birthday party, and we had all of Hollywood, you know, over. (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, about how much were you all pulling in then? Speaker 2: I think, man, for a week, I think they may have been getting about fifteen hundred dollars a song to produce, as a producer's fee. And then the record company paid for the expenses. So, you know, we got three songs. You know, it was, you know, well, maybe five thousand dollars or something. (Laughter). You know what I mean? But I mean I was like, you know, we were doing good, you know. And then, you know, and then things started moving into, you know, the all-in, you know, funds and that whole bit, where you can, you know, ask for a lot more money. And then, too, I remember Clive Davis flew us into New York [New York City, New York] to meet with him, because, you know, he wanted to do business with the guys early on. There was a gentleman, Gerry Griffith, that was over black music. And so, Gerry and I, you know, were friends and were business associates. And he introduced, you know, it was his introduction to Clive Davis. And-- Speaker 1: Well, we need for you to tell us a little about Clive Davis. But hold on one second. We're going to change tapes now. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 111775 Speaker 1: All right. So, we talked about how much--all this money you and Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis] were making at this particular time. (Laughter). I know when he, when they listen to this and reflect back to these days that's going to really be a good joke. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so let's see what happens? What happened then? Okay, so you're in this three bedroom apartment, and everybody's got their room. And your office is the kitchen. Speaker 2: Right. Well, then I, yeah, so they're working, I'm working. And then, you know, we talked about, you know, my, the deaths in my family in 1983. And that's when, you know, things started--well, actually, you know, I continued to work, but things began to change. And you know, we had like business affairs and things that we didn't do up-front, you know, management contracts and things like that. And you know, those things became unimportant, you know, to them at that point. And you know, other people--and the gifts and the talents the guys had, and the money that they were making them--you know, began to overshadow. And while they were in Rome [Italy]--and you know, this is during the time, you know, I buried my aunt [Lisa]. And they came back and, you know, we, they wanted me to move to Minnesota with them, you know. They were going to move back to Minnesota and start their business there. Because they had done, you know, all the things they wanted to do in California as far as getting established. And they wanted me to move back to Minnesota and go on a salary instead of a commission. (Laughter). And so, I was like, I never left home before, number one. You know, and number two, you know, it was really, you know, an insult to me, you know, to ask me to go on a salary and, you know, stop paying me my management commission, you know, after all the sacrifices, you know, that I had gone through-and even losing my job, you know, behind the whole thing. So, anyway we, you know, we went our separate ways at that point. And that's when, that was in somewhere in 1984. Story_ID: 111776 Speaker 1: And I had begun seeking God, you know, after [her aunt] Lisa died and, you know, I'd lost my job at SOLAR [Records, Sound of Los Angeles Records] and that whole bit. So, I was at a place where, you know, I was more or less, "God, all of this stuff is too heavy for me. You know, the weight of the world, you know, is too heavy for me, and I need your help." And so, you know, I ended up accepting Christ as my Lord and Savior and, you know, grew up-- Speaker 2: And where were you, what church were you in? Speaker 1: That was at Bishop--what his name--West Angeles Church of God in Christ [Los Angeles, California] Bishop Charles Blake. And anyway, so you know, I just, you know, my life began to change, and I began to, you know, just look at things differently. You know, I had lost so much with my family and, you know, with my job. Because really, to be honest with you, my job at SOLAR was more important, you know, than a career, you know, an entrepreneurial career. (Laughter). And, you know, because there was so much that we did and so much that we established there as a family. But at that point, you know, I was out there. So, even the grieving that--had I not gone through it--you know, that's the point where my relationship, you know, broke up with Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis], and they went back to Minnesota. It's probably, I don't know if it was, you know, six months or a year. Probably somewhere between six months and a year later, I ended up, you know, giving up the apartment and moving out to West Covina [Valinda, California, now City of Industry, California] with my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] to help her with the kids and, you know, just did the family thing. And then, you know, I got some calls from some other people to, you know, do some independent contracting work, which I did. And, you know, a lot of people were familiar with Keith Washington and Leon Sylvers [III]. And they were part of the artist roster for, it was a new company, and it didn't last. It was called Perry/Williams Entertainment. And they had a young man, Troy Johnson, along with Keith Washington and Leon Sylvers who was, you know, who had become the head producer for them. And so, I did a little work with them. And then-- Speaker 2: What were some of the works that they actually produced? Speaker 1: Oh, gosh. Leon Sylvers did all of the SOLAR--well, Leon Sylvers was part of the Sylvers family, the recording group, The Sylvers. It was a family of brothers and sisters that had come out in the, I guess the Sylvers came out in the early seventies. And then Leon produced all of the SOLAR hits for Shalamar and The Whispers. And he may have done--I don't think--he may have done a little bit on Midnight Star. But he had, you know, he had several hits, you know, back to back, "And the Beat Goes On" [The Whispers] Shalamar, "Second Time Around." And I can't, I can't even remember all of the names; there were so many titles. But, and then Keith Washington, I think one of the biggest songs that he had out was a song called "Kissing You" on Elektra Records [sic, Qwest Records]. And Troy Johnson, Troy ended up becoming a gospel artist. And I think that he's got a new record out that just came out recently. And so anyway, after--did some independent work with them-- Story_ID: 111777 Speaker 1: And then I, I don't know. I got a job with Motown Productions with Suzanne de Passe, after [HM] Berry Gordy had passed it down to Suzanne de Passe. And there was a man there, Burl Hechtman, and Suzanne Coston, who was still Suzanne de Passe's right-hand man, who hired me to work for them. And I initially started working as an assistant to Burl Hechtman. And he said to me, he said "Dina," he says, "I know you're over-qualified." (Laughter). He says, "You're over-qualified, you know, but I'm getting to get this show. And you know, if you help me, if you'll be my assistant, whatever you want to do on the show, you know, you can call your own shots." And he kept his word; he honored his word. The show was "Nightlife" with David Brenner and Billy Preston, and they taped in New York [New York City, New York]. And once the show started, he said "What do you want to do?" And you know, I went to New York and hung out, you know, for a few weeks. And I, we created a position for me--"West Coast Project Manager," or something. (Laughter). And I was like the only person on the West Coast, and you know, all I did was take phone calls and, you know, hardly nothing-- Story_ID: 111778 Speaker 1: But then I felt like, I felt like I wasn't really doing anything [at Motown Productions]. You know, I felt like I was collecting a paycheck, and I really wasn't doing anything substantial. And this yearning in me to start my company. (Laughter). It was like Dina's always got to do something. Anyway, I wanted to start this company. So, I officially launched Dina Andrews Management Special Projects [Dina Andrews Management, Inc.]. And I went and got me an office up on Hollywood and Vine [Los Angeles, California] down the street from Capitol Records. And I began talking on clients and, you know, managed primarily songwriters and producers. And at that time, I was one of the only people that was managing songwriter/producers. And I enjoyed managing the songwriter/producers more so than the recording artists. Because with the songwriter/producers, you know, they write songs. And you know, I'd shop them to the record companies. If the record companies and the artists liked the songs, we'd make a deal. They'd produce them; you know, we'd finish the project, and we'd keep moving on. And you know, money is always, you know, turning over. And you know, we're working with different people. Speaker 2: So, it is true that the songwriters continuously make money? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes. Songwriters, songwriters are paid from the first record that's sold. They're paid publishing if they own their own publishing. And they're paid songwriters' royalties. And so, they're the only people where there's no recoup-ability factor. And with recording artists, whatever money the record company puts out, they have to recoup those dollars before the artists actually start making money. So, when you see an artist who has sold a million records in a brief period of time when they first come out--and you know, they say "Well, we don't have any money," it's because the record company has to recoup whatever they spent first. Then there's the accounting factor, you know, of when the record company has to account to them. And so, a lot of times they don't take time to understand their contracts. So they scream on the record company, you know, (laughter) because they didn't take the time to understand well, look the record company. You may have sold a million records. But the record company spent fifteen million dollars. So, they've got to recoup that fifteen million dollars or that five million dollars, you know, before they, you know, pay you. And with the distribution system, you know, and the retailers having to pay the distributors, and the distributors have to pay the record companies, it's like everything does not flow like yesterday, you know. So, it's that whole business system of operation that most creative people don't get. And that's why we have so many lawsuits, and so many issues and so many complaints and so many problems. And then a lot of times--anyway, we can go on. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Exactly. Speaker 1: We can go on to the next thing, because I'm getting carried away. Speaker 2: So Dina, what year was it that you went on your own? You know, you started your company. And was this like '85 [1985] or--? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: You stayed with Motown [Productions] for how long? Speaker 1: It's probably maybe a year and a half or two, something like that. So, I think it was 19--well, I officially started the company, you know, I mean first I did the thing with Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis]. But I officially started at probably, let me see, '83 [1983], '84 [1984]. Probably somewhere, I think it was-- Speaker 2: Eighty-Five [1985]? Speaker 1: Eighty-Five [1985], something like that, '85 [1985]. Story_ID: 111779 Speaker 1: And, you know, it's so interesting. You know, we look at our history. You know, we look at our past, and you know, so many things transpire. And as soon as I got that little office--there was a gentleman who was my attorney, who was connected to Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis] that had cut me off, you know, because he didn't want any conflicts of interest of what his new business would be with Jimmy and Terry. And that same attorney came to me as soon as I got my little office in Hollywood and said, "Dina, you know, I'll pay you. I'll give you, I'll reimburse you all the money, you know, that you paid for this office space, you know, to come and be a manager in my company. You know, you're a good manager." (Laughter). He says, "You're a good manager, but you need a manager. So, you know, come over here." You know, I was like, "No, I've done this, and you know, I want to try this." So I was--and I didn't--the thing I didn't understand--and I guess the thing is when--as far as my life is concerned, you know, from childhood, we always had everything that we needed. You know, we never went without. And so you know, when I say, you know, we had a good childhood, I didn't know that, you know, we were in poverty, because we always had everything. And so with that, I never, you know, there was never--I can't say that I had like a lot of rough experiences. I always look at things, I guess, through rose-colored glasses. And so, I didn't know about the business part of, you know, things being good one month and one year and, you know, not so good the next or whatever. So, I went ahead and got this office. And, you know, I passed on Ron Sweeney's deal, and you know, was doing my thing. (Laughter). And then-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute, you said you passed on it? Speaker 1: Right. That was the guy who wanted me to come, you know, into his-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. That was the attorney. Speaker 1: Right, exactly, so I passed on that, you know. And I continued, you know, building, you know, my little empire. And then I had, you know, a rough couple of months. (Laughter). And you know, for me, I don't expect to have, you know, I didn't expect to have that to happen, you know. Speaker 2: But you were living with your grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] during this period, right? Or had you moved back out on your own? Speaker 1: I was still--you know what? I think I was still at the house; I was still at the house at that time. So, I just had the overhead of the office and my, you know, I had an assistant that worked for me. You know, but still, you know, it's like, you know-- Speaker 2: But you're used to something coming in and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --being able to meet the responsibilities-- Speaker 1: Right, exactly, exactly. You know, you've got bills, you know. You've got cars and insurance and that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 111780 Speaker 1: But anyway, anyway, so what happened was another manager came along, Earl Cole. And Earl happened to manage my cousin, Paul Jackson [Jr.], at the time. Another producer, songwriter/producer, Dean Gant, Midnight Star--no, not Midnight Star--Atlantic Starr, "Secret Lovers." And let's see, and then Dean produced, wrote and produced for Anita Baker. And who else? But anyway, he called. And so he said, "Well, look, Dina. You know, I'll give you, you know, a two-year contract to come over here and, you know, help me. You can still keep doing what you're doing." You know, it's like that was the whole thing. "You can still, you know, continue to handle your clients. You know, I just need you to handle my producers and whatever." So I ended up giving up my little office and, you know going over with Earl Cole for a year, and then back out on my own again (laughter) because I always get kicked out. And so, I was, well, you know what it is? It's--and I--and it goes back to Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey]. Dick Griffey is the one who spoke "entrepreneurial spirit" into me. You know, but it wasn't that--you know, I took care of Earl's business. But you know, people generally want to you to do just what you're doing. And I got a deal with Capitol Records. I became very good friends with the gentleman, Scott Folks, who was the vice-president of A and R [Artists and repertoire] for Capitol Records. And I had a British producer, Derek Bramble that produced, what did he produce? David--he produced Davie Bowie before I ever met him, while he was in England. And Vanessa Williams, Tisha Campbell [Tisha Campbell-Martin]--gosh, I can't remember all of the people that Derek produced. But anyway, so I was managing Derek, and then I put together a guy group. And I got a production, a development deal, with Capitol for the guy group. And so, yeah, things were going well. And I mean, I had his clients, you know, making money and, you know, doing deals for them and doing deals for me. And you know, it was like the honeymoon was over. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, how did you go about getting the Capitol Records deal? I mean, did you go out on your own and seek after it? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Or did it kind of come to you, or how did you go about that? Speaker 1: Well, see what happens, what happens in the industry is if you're, if you work in the industry and you have clients who are--you have noted clients who are good songwriters or producers--or if you're known for discovering talent, the doors are open to you, you know. And you know, you're part of a family; you're part of a community. So if I, if I pick up the phone, you know, and call the vice-president of A and R for J Records, you know, and I say, "Hi, this is Dina Andrews, and you know, I represent Jimmy Jam [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis," he's going to take the phone call, you know, even if they're new guys. Or, "You know, this is Dina Andrews. You know, I used to work at SOLAR Records [Sound of Los Angeles Records]." And it's, you know, that's how it goes. And then, two, we go to the same conferences, you know. And you know, we just, we do business. You know, we meet at the same places. You know, and there's parties that happen. There's, you know, social events. There's conferences, you know, different things like that. So people know you, you know, within the business. Everybody knows who everybody is. And so, if you've got something, you put the goods on the table. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you got the deal with Capitol Records. And what did you do next? Speaker 1: Let's see. Speaker 2: Did the money start rolling in? Or, you're back on-- Speaker 1: Well, the money was rolling. The money was rolling at that point. Let's see, oh, Ron Sweeney came back again. (Laughter). And he was working with-- Speaker 2: He's your nemesis, he keeps popping up. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And he was working with [HM] Clarence Avant. He was the president of his company, or the vice-president, or something like that. And he heard my group, and he thought my group was hot. And he wanted, he talked me into doing a deal with him. And the deal was he was going to have Jimmy and Terry produce so many songs on my record and, you know, give me a minimal amount of cash, you know, on the deal or whatever. So, I went for the deal, and he ended up getting fired. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Jimmy and Terry-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, Ron ended up getting fired. Speaker 2: Yeah, but who fired him? Speaker 1: Clarence Avant. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Avant, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So, he ended up getting fired. And so, I still had the deal there. But you know, the deal, it didn't work out; it didn't work out, so--. Story_ID: 111781 Speaker 1: What did I do next? I was still managing Derek Bramble. And I think the next phone call that I got was from Pebbles [Perri "Pebbles" Reid]. And she had started, she had started her production company, P.T. Entertainment. And she had TLC and another woman who worked in the business, Cassandra Mills. She was the president of Giant Records, and she managed, who did she--? She managed [Alton] "Wokie" Stewart before I did. And Stephanie Mills, she was Stephanie Mills' sister-in-law; she managed Stephanie. And let's see, oh, gosh, anyway, Cassandra did a lot of things in the industry too. And so, she referred me to Pebbles. And that's when I came to Atlanta [Georgia] to become the general manager for her company. And you know, it was the same kind of deal, you know, you keep your artists. You know, you can keep the clients you have, you know, but I need you to do this for me. And so Atlanta, I ended up falling in love with Atlanta. I did a year, a year's contract with Pebbles at P.T. And TLC, you know, they went on to do great things and, you know, and, and, and, you know that's like, you know, still kind of current news. And-- Speaker 2: So, you moved to Atlanta. Are we in the nineties now? Speaker 1: Yeah, that was '92 [1992]. That was March of '92 [1992]? Yeah, February/March of '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: This was Pebbletone, Incorporated? Speaker 1: Yeah, she called it P.T. Entertainment, uh-huh. And-- Speaker 2: And you were the general manager? Speaker 1: Yeah, general manager, and also managing Derek [Bramble]. And I picked up "Wokie" Stewart, and then I did some consulting for Dallas Austin. Alvin Speights, who is still a very good friend and client--he's an engineer, sound engineer. He does primarily mixes, and he's mixed for just about everything Dallas Austin did between 1990--the early nineties up until the late nineties--you know, with Madonna and TLC and several named projects. Current projects Ricky, Pretty Ricky and, you know, I just could go on and on and on with, you know, projects and names. But anyway, those were--and I think--I don't know if I said Wokie Stewart. But anyway, I got into the whole flow, you know, of Atlanta, and what was going on here. Story_ID: 111782 Speaker 1: And then I got to another place, where, you know, it was time for a deeper spiritual journey. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I wanted to get married, okay. So it's like, I guess, you know the thing about it is people perceive folks in the industry as, I don't know, I guess as not normal, you know. But you know, we have the same desires, you know, as everyone else. Our lives are really, you know, the same. I mean, you know, they're jobs; we have jobs, you know. And the jobs pay, sometimes they pay differently. You know, you pay, we get paid on percentages, you know, and you get paid a salary. You might get paid bonuses, or you might get a retainer, plus, you know, a percentage. You might have a good year, you might have a bad year. You know, you want kids, you know, as women. You want to get married, and you'll have children, and all of that. So, 19--let me see, what was that? Nineteen--probably 1994, I just, I felt like the urban music was going in a direction that, you know, really wasn't comfortable to me. I, you know, I just kind of like didn't want to do it anymore. And so, I picked up a gospel songwriter and producer, by referral. And most of my business has come by referral. Just about every client that I have had--every project, every contract--someone has referred me. I've not been successful soliciting business, and so, generally I don't, you know. If, you know, somebody calls me and wants me to do something, you know, we'll meet and talk about it and negotiate a deal, and you know, we do it. But anyway, there was a songwriter/producer Percy Bady, from Chicago [Illinois], as a matter of fact, that was referred to me. And Percy and I worked together for about four years, and you know, very successful, you know. He's written and produced for [HM] BeBe and CeCe Winans, the Winans, Yolanda Adams, Marvin Sapp. What's the young guy's name? Smokie Norful, just, you know, a lot of projects. And so, I was instrumental in helping him to become an established producer. He was established as a songwriter, a noted songwriter. But then when I began to manage him, we strategized, you know, for him to produce all the songs that he wrote, to establish him as a producer. Story_ID: 111783 Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me, what is, what are the duties of the general manager? What do you actually really do? Speaker 2: Well, gosh. I'm kind of like--as a general manager-- Speaker 1: In the music industry? Speaker 2: --in the music, in the music industry. Basically what we're doing is we're overseeing all the activities and functions of the company, of the day to day operations of the company. Speaker 1: And this company would be a songwriter or a producer's-- Speaker 2: Anybody's company. Speaker 1: It could be anybody's company? Speaker 2: Yeah, it could be anybody's company, because it's really, it's really, you know, it's really all the same. You know, it's like if you've got a business, you've got a business plan. And you know, the things that are in that business plan, you know, have to, have to happen in order for it to work like it's supposed to work. And so, you have somebody who is more or less the glue that keeps everything together, that makes sure everything is running like it's supposed to run, and that doesn't let anything fall through the cracks. And so, my responsibilities--I liaison and coordinate with attorneys, record companies, with publishers, with business managers, you know, which are in our business; those are the accountants; with our clients, with other clients, with other managers, with record companies. You know, we were just like the catch-all kind of person. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 111784 Speaker 1: Now, we get back to what prompted you to actually get into the music industry? We know how you started out, by being a "Girl Friday" [to Richard "Dick" Griffey at SOLAR Records, also known as Sound of Los Angeles Records]. But what made you actually get in and want to stay? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I love the work. I mean I like, I like constant change. And the industry is such that, you know, the work itself is stimulating mentally. You know, because you have to be a creative--even as a business person, you have to be creative. You know, because you might have a marketing plan for an artist, and you start out with that plan, and something doesn't work. And you've got to be able to come up with another idea, you know, to make it work. Nothing is ever the same on a daily basis. It's like, you know, my days are always different, you know. And I just, I enjoy my work. I enjoy my work; I enjoy, I enjoy seeing, I enjoy seeing an artist create--whether it's the songwriter, whether it's the producer, whether it's the artist--you know, creating a product that we can market and produce and put out into the world and it becomes successful, people love it. And I guess, you know, I'm using this term loosely. But the greatest "high" that I remember having is from the days at SOLAR [Records, Sound of Los Angeles Records], you know, where we had all of these new artists. And you know, they were nobodies, you know, nobody knew them. But we worked behind the scenes--marketing, you know, promotions, sales, publicity--you know, we did all of these things. And the consumers loved them. And Dick Griffey produced a concert, a tour called "SOLAR Galaxy of Stars" where he put all of our artists on tour. And I remember going to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; we went to Philadelphia. There were a couple of markets we went to. But stepping out on that stage, being in that arena where you've got, ten, fifteen, twenty thousand people in an arena to see the artist that you developed, you know, I mean it's incredible. You know, it's like you actually worked, you know, and people liked what you put together, you know what I mean. And so it's like, you know, the artists, the artists, you know, they, they are encouraged by it. But we're also encouraged by it, too, because we work really hard. So, you know, I enjoy it. I enjoy it, and that's, you know, that's it for me. I enjoy the work that I do, you know, from every level. You know, I like constant change. I like seeing things manifest into something great. And-- Speaker 1: Do you feel that--I know it seems like--this is true, though. They, all of this started at SOLAR with Dick Griffey. You had a chance to, you were exposed to the industry? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And then you really kind of felt at home, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --from there he could see that--what is it--that the entrepreneur had actually developed. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Story_ID: 111785 Speaker 1: Now tell us a little bit, I just want to back up a little bit. Tell us a little bit about what life was like at Motown [Productions] when you were there for that year, year and a half, working with Suzanne de Passe. Speaker 2: Actually, it was the television production side of things, not the music. And it was just, it was very professional. Suzanne, you know, very professional woman. She's about her business, you know. She was, you know, always cordial, you know. And, she just-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --she just did her thing. Speaker 1: So, you moved from music to film then? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And it was the production that was, what's the name? (unclear) Speaker 2: "Nightlife" with David Brenner and Billy Preston. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Burl Hechtman- Hechtman. Speaker 1: was my--Burl Hechtman was my immediate supervisor. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he went on to King World [Productions, Inc.]. Speaker 2: So, he went on to King World? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. So, how was it going from music to television? What was the change like? Speaker 1: You know what? It was very different for me; it was very different for me. It was good, but I knew music, and I was so comfortable with music. That's why I went back to it by starting, officially started Dina Andrews Management Special Projects. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 111786 Speaker 1: We're in 1994, you've moved to gospel. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. But you're still doing hip-hop? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, you just totally-- Speaker 2: Totally to gospel. Speaker 1: To gospel. And what was that change like? Speaker 2: The projects that Percy [Percy Bady] and I worked on together were great. The relationship was great, initially. The people were very open and, you know, welcoming to me, you know. Speaker 1: Even more so than in the music industry, or about the same? Speaker 2: No, no, it was just a warm reception. You know, it was a warm reception. You know, I had success in the general market, and that was respected. And you know, people were very warm. And even--she's now--Tyra McGee [Tara Griggs-Magee] is now the president [sic, Executive Vice-President and General Manager] of Sony [Sony Music Entertainment] Urban/Gospel. And she gave me, you know, one of my first referrals to a gospel group, which was the group, Virtue, that she had at Verity Records. And I managed them, you know, through the first record that they released on there. And you know, Percy had done some things with her previously, you know, during the time that we were together. And Vicki Mack [Vicki Mack Lataillade], who was, or is--well, she was the owner of GospoCentric [Records]. (unclear) Kirk Franklin worked with me in secular music, as they call it. I call it general market (laughter), you know, the general market for RCA [RCA Corporation] when SOLAR [Records, Sound of Los Angeles Records] was distributed by RCA. And so, you know, Vicki was warm. And actually, you know, actually we did a deal together for Percy as a songwriter and producer for her company. You know, so, you know, it was, it was, it was it was good. You know, because I'm a Christian and, you know, I love to go to church and worship God and the music, and that whole bit. It was all good for me, but it brings me--you know, we've been talking about how everything works together. Basically, what has happened is it has helped to bring me to the point where I am today. And basically, what I see is that in music there are some extremes, you know. There's that urban hip-hop side of things where, you know, everything is like, you know, a strip joint, and women--the names that, you know, are being used to refer to, you know, women. I think that, you know, they're kind of degrading--you know, the B--'s and the H--'s and the, you know, all of those things. Speaker 1: Mh-hm. Yes all of the acronyms. Speaker 2: And so, yeah, so you've got that side. And then on the other side, you know, you've got gospel, which is just to the other extreme. But the thing that, you know, I believe is missing in this whole equation is basic biblical principles of living, you know, how we live. And you know, going back to my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews], you know, the things that she instilled in me is, you know, "Don't lie, don't cheat, don't steal. You know, treat people like you want to be treated." And so you know, my mission at this particular point is a happy medium, you know, where you can have hot urban tracks, but you could just talk about life. You know what I mean where, you know, you have some values, some biblical values and principles, but you're not beating anybody over the head with the Bible. And it doesn't have to be about Jesus, because that's what they're teaching. You know, that's what they're saying with gospel music. Story_ID: 111787 Speaker 1: I want to ask you. At this particular time you've had a spiritual, another spiritual awakening. Is that what you feel might have encouraged you to head into the gospel arena? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think I've always been, I've been searching for something now for about ten years. I've been trying to figure out--I read a book by Myles Munroe called "In Pursuit of Purpose" in the early nineties [1990s] when I first got to Atlanta. And that book began to make me think. It's like, okay, what did God create me for? What am I here for? And I know that, you know, so many people desire to be in the entertainment business, you know. You know, they'll give, they'll sell their soul, you know, just to be in the entertainment business. And all of this stuff has just come to me. You know, I mean I haven't had to sell my soul, my body, you know. I haven't, you know, had to aggressively, you know, go after making this thing happen. You know, and so I just believe that I was created for a purpose, and that it has to do with what I do in entertainment. But what is the purpose? And so during, you know, these periods of time where I'm, you know, I'm unhappy with what I see going on in the general marketplace and the music that's being promoted, and the images that are being promoted--and then on the other side, you know, everything is church, church. And you know, people aren't being real about who they are and, you know, what they're going through and how they're living, and the challenges-- you know, those kind of things. It's like, okay. But there's, you know, there's this area here. And you know, we go through, we have, we have life challenges, you know. I mean, I've been hit, you know. You know, I've been hit three times in my life, you know, that were so hard. You know, it's like one time I was wondering if I was going to get up, you know, when my mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] died and I'd married this man. And you know, everything fell apart at the same time, you know. So, here it is. If we can--going back to the early days, you know, to Marvin Gaye where he's singing about "What's Going On?" You know, message music. You know, what's going on in the world? You know, we've got, we've got wars going on. We've got--you know, our community--you know, our children are dying and going to hell. You know, they're killing each other. They're killing their parents. You know, we've got adults, you know, men who are, who are committing sexual sins against our children, boys and girls. We've got women now who are committing sexual sins against our children. You know, what are we doing? You know, and media is the, media is the foremost vehicle, you know, that we can make change through. But we're not doing anything, you know, to make a difference, you know. So, you know, at this particular point in my career, you know, my heart's desire is to build a youth music and art center to train up youth and young adults, and teach them how they can make a song, you know. Ciara, this young lady, she's got a song--she came out--her first hit song was called "No Goodies" [sic, "Goodies"] okay. And she's talking about not giving up sex, you know, not giving... And it's like, okay, yeah, we need to have some more songs like that. And we also have to, we also need some young ladies out there that are saying, "You know what, I'm not going to give it up to, you, you know, but I'm not going to flaunt my body in front of you either, you know what I mean? Speaker 1: Have some responsibility attached to it and that's-- Speaker 2: Right, we don't have to--right, we don't have to do that, you know. So, anyway I think that, you know, the whole spiritual awakening thing--it's not so much--it's a matter--I wouldn't term it where it's like so much like, "Oh, God, she's awakened spiritually." No, it's not that. It's like I'm older, I'm more mature. And I'm looking at what's going on in our society. And, you know, we're watching Rosa Parks die. We're watching C. Delores Tucker die. We're watching Coretta Scott King die. And we're watching our kids die. You know, we're watching all this stuff going on, but who's doing anything about it? You know, who's going to come to the table? You know, and it's like the people who have the power to make change, most people are being safe. You know, other people are like "Hey, my kids are cool, you know. So, I don't have to do anything. I don't care about the kids over there in the community that's killing themselves, you know. I ain't got no money to put towards, you know, an organization's that's trying to help somebody else." And so I guess, you know, for me, it's like it goes back to the basics, you know, that I was reared up with, you know. And I've always pretty much been the same. You know, even, you know, when I was trying to be bad, you know, I was good in comparison to everybody else, you know. So-- Story_ID: 111788 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you keep talking about being hit three times. Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. The first hit you said was when your mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews]--well, let's go over those hits again. Speaker 2: Okay. The first hit was when my father [Eugene Ellis Andrews] told me that he wasn't my father. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: The second hit was in 1983 when my two uncles [James Porter and her Uncle Virgil (ph.)] and my aunt [Lisa] got killed--died, got killed. And Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey] fired me [from SOLAR Records], and my love interest was a whore-monger, okay. (Laughter). I didn't put that in before, but anyway, Speaker 1: Right. That one didn't come in before. Speaker 2: That was part of it. That was part of it. And my last hit was in January and February of 1998, and my mother died. And I married this man who had literally followed me for twenty years. And, you know, he was a bad boy that I thought turned good. And you know, (laughter) anyway, I knew I was taking a risk, okay. But I just didn't know that risk came--you know, I didn't know that it came with that high of a-- Speaker 1: Price tag. Speaker 2: A price tag, thank you. (Laughter). Speaker 1: 'Cause you pay for what you get, one way or another. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, and I paid dearly. You know, so and everything happened at the same time. You know, the loss of my mother, loss of my husband, loss of material goods, loss, you know, of everything. And you know, I just, you know, I had to rebuild, you know. But the whole thing about it is, you know, with all of those things, I think there is an overcomer in me that says that--you know, I remember when I was in my early twenties I came up with this thing that I was going to swim, and I was not going to sink. And so, no matter what happens, I'm going to swim. I'm not going to sink, okay. I might have to go lay down for a minute, but I'm going to get up and I'm going to keep going. Speaker 1: (unclear) overcomer. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. You know, and I think that no matter what--I mean because to be honest, you know, even the most perfect situations or those things that look like they're so perfect from the outside--you know, there's all kinds of stuff going on--you know, layers upon layers upon layers of stuff, you know, going on--things that are hidden and things that we don't talk about. You know, and a lot of kids, you know, they're in the ghetto, and they feel like oh I can't, you know, be anything, or this is my lot in life. No, it's not your lot in life, you know. I was born in South Central [Los Angeles, California], you know. (Laughter). My mom, you know, and dad broke up. My mom had an affair with another man [Richard Cook], you know. My dad told me he wasn't my dad. You know, I mean it's like, you know--and we, we make choices, you know, and we have to take responsibility. And so-- Speaker 1: So, do you think you came back after your mom's death? Speaker 2: Oh, God, it's faith. It's faith. I mean, you know, it is faith. It is faith in God. It's a deeper faith every day. You know, that's it; it's faith. It's faith in the Word of God. It's like-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you talked about the death of your uncles, and even the death of Lisa-'cause they all were in there around that particular time. So, how did your uncles' deaths affect you? Speaker 2: Well, I think with Uncle Leak [ph.], he was older. He was the eldest. And he had been ill, and so we knew that, you know, his days were running near. So, that, you know, I could deal with that. You know, I spent time with him and, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that kind of thing. He lived with us, you know, in his latter days. So, I could deal with that. But then when Uncle Virgil died, that was totally unexpected. And-- Speaker 1: What did he die from, you say? Speaker 2: I think he had a stroke or a heart attack, something like, one of those. Speaker 1: So, his was swift? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. And that was, that was heart-wrenching, because he was a strong man. And you know, I just remember, you know, last seeing him in the hospital, you know, where he was incapacitated, you know, where he couldn't talk, you know. And it was like, you know, I could tell that that hurt him--that, you know, he couldn't, he couldn't function, you know. And that was my only uncle. So that was, that was painful. But then Lisa's death, that was the ringer. You know, that was the one that--I was angry at her, because we asked her not to go back over there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I was angry because she was like my sister. And she was my best friend, and I didn't have her anymore. And, you know, then there were the kids and, you know. Speaker 1: So, now it was more than, it was more or less like the deaths happening at like the same time? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Everything-- And it normally happens in threes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it was the fact that so many, so much is coming at you at once. Speaker 2: Right. And see, we were this small, close-knit family. And we were happy, and we had good times all the time, you know. We had family dinners, we had parties, we celebrated birthdays, we celebrated holidays. You know, so, for our close tight-knit family to lose three immediate members, you know, within a matter of months was hard. It was hard. It was like we never experienced that. Well, I can say I'd never experienced anything like that before. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 111789 Speaker 1: Now, we talk about my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson]. Now, she experienced losing her mother when she was a teenager, and all of her siblings with the exception of one, Uncle Leak [ph.], that came to California with them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so, you know, and I mean segregation--you know, being the only female, you know, or sibling to go to college and graduate. You know, she said she got accepted to Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia]. But her daddy wouldn't let her go to Spelman, so she went to, what is it? Oh my God, she just told me a couple of days ago. I can't think of it right now. Speaker 2: Was it a school in California? Speaker 1: No, no, this is in, we're talking about the South. Speaker 2: In Mississippi, okay. She was still in-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, we're in the South, yeah, Memphis. And you know--and, you know she had to work. But her dad didn't want her to go, you know. But she fought all odds. And you know, I asked her recently, I said, "Well, Biggie," I said, "With all the things you've gone through..." because you know, I'm an entrepreneur and, you know, sometimes things are tight. Sometimes, you know, they're rolling well and, you know, sometimes--you know, emotionally, personally, you know, just stuff. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, just stuff. That's just life, right? Speaker 2: Rollercoaster, right. Speaker 1: And one day, you know, I told my girlfriends, I said, "You know, we're always crying and bellyaching, you know. But did we stop to think about what our grandparents went through, what our parents went through? They weren't crying and bellyaching. They were dealing with stuff, you know, and they were just making it happen." And that's all we do. We cry, and we complain, and we bellyache. (Laughter). And so, I asked my grandmother when she got here. I said, "Well, Biggie" I said "You know, what is it? You know, what is it?" You know, and it's interesting, because when you ask me these questions, it's hard for me just to, just off the top of my head remember something. But as I'm talking, you know, and reminiscing, you know, it's easier to, you know, address these questions. But I asked her, I said "You know, how did you get through, you know, losing all your siblings, all your children, you know, and you're still here? And you know, I mean, gosh, you know, segregation in Mississippi, you know. You're born in 1919, you know, and you lived there until you were like in your mid-twenties or thirties, you know. How--?" She said everything that she has gone through, all of those hits, she says that she thanks God. And I'm like, okay, you know what? Why didn't they just tell us to do that? You know, I mean, you know, we get all of these preaching messages, you know, all these different, you know, instructions on, you know, how to worship God, how to pray, how to do this, how to do that. You know, and she just very simply said, "I thank God. Every time something happens, I embrace it, you know." And that's what she's saying. She's embracing it, you know. She's, her faith kicks in, and she knows that, you know, there's got to be something else on the other side for her to look forward to. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, so-- Story_ID: 111790 Speaker 1: And what about the marriage? So how did that, how old were you when you got married? And how long did you stay together? And just tell us about the marriage. Speaker 2: That is a book and a feature film-- Speaker 1: Okay, well just give us a little? Give us a quick Speaker 2: --that we're working on, okay, called "Confidence or Love," okay. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Give us a quick little snapshot view of it? How old were you then? Speaker 2: I think I was thirty-five. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I must have been 35, 35 or 36, something like that. Speaker 1: And he was, you had known him all your life just about? Speaker 2: I met him--interestingly, I met him when I first started working at SOLAR [Records, Sound of Los Angeles Records]. And Cheryle, I mentioned Cheryle Appling earlier. And Cheryle and I were walking down the street going to get some lunch. And you know, we see this young handsome guy driving down the street in this white convertible Rolls Royce. And the next thing you know, within the next couple days, he's in the reception area trying to make a meeting with Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey]. He's trying to get a meeting with Dick Griffey, and I'm at the reception desk. And so, you know, we began talking and casually, you know, dating. And you know, he'd pop in and out of town. And anyway, over a period of I guess fifteen years or so, he would always keep up with me from, you know, following, you know, my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] and calling my mom. And then one of my best friends worked with me, Niles [ph.], and he lived with me and, you know, that kind of thing. And so, he would stay in touch with Niles and stay in touch with my mom. And then he'd track me down in Atlanta [Georgia]. And he said that, you know, he was, you know, done running the streets and doing his thing in the streets. And he had become a minister, you know, and anyway, anyway, so-- Speaker 1: So, you all got married? Speaker 2: We got married and lived together for four months. And I can't tell you the rest, I can't. (Laughter). It's like, it's too deep. It's too deep. I mean, it's too deep. But we're working on it; we are working on a feature film, because actually it was very tragic. (Laughter). Speaker 1: But he is-- Speaker 2: You know, I laugh, you know, but anyway it--yeah, it was very tragic. Speaker 1: So, you did get a divorce? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You got divorced? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to get a divorce, yeah. And I didn't believe in divorce, but I had to get a divorce. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Did you do up front like, what is it, Madea told Tyler Perry to do when he was interviewed on -- Speaker 2: Well, you know, what? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no--and I lost everything. Speaker 1: Did you get the yellow pages-think (unclear)? Pre-nups? Speaker 2: Nope, and I lost everything. But it's okay, it's okay. Because, you know, like I said, you know, God is faithful. And you know, it's like everything that--you know, everything that the enemy comes to steal, kill and destroy, you know, he will restore, you know. And so, you know, that's, you know, my faith, you know. Speaker 1: So you did get a divorce-- Story_ID: 111791 Speaker 1: And that trauma is going to be put into a book? Speaker 2: Well, it's been put into a book and-- Speaker 1: And a film. Speaker 2: --and a feature film. And my girlfriend, Kelly [Kelly Jackson], that was here, she's been writing--you know, working with me on the writing thing. And I'm, you know, I'm now looking for an agent, and that kind of thing. 'Cause it's-- actually, it ties in my whole industry--my career, you know, in the entertainment industry from, you know, the early SOLAR, Jimmy/Terry [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III and Terry Lewis] days, and then it jumps to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the Pebbles [Perri "Pebbles" Reid and P.T. Entertainment], you know, the Pebbles/TLC stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because that's where he found me, you know, at that office. And then you know, it covers the marriage, and-- the brief marriage. And the tragedy of it is--I said I wasn't going to tell. But anyway, the tragedy of it is-- talking about the music industry, and how this whole thing ties in--you know, record promotions--the music industry--there's some very wonderful things about the industry. And then there's some very dark, you know, areas as far as the industry is concerned. And people who have very dark shaded pasts, you know, can come in and get involved. And even now, you know, all of the music that we're talking about, you know, the hip-hop, the booty and, you know, all of that--they're breaking these records in strip joints. That's where they promote their records, you know, in strip joints, and break them. And this--what ended up happening, was the guy that I married, he ended up murdering a twenty-two-year old stripper, and posing as an industry executive. And I don't think that it was his intent to do that. But what the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] told me was that they were like two of a kind. You know, she thought she was going to play, you know, this older guy, and he thought that he was going to play her. And something happened, you know, something happened, you know, during the interim, you know. And she--you know, that's what happened. But anyway, so, you know, with my whole--my whole purpose is to open the eyes of people--to educate, you know, from women to--from women to youth and young adults. You know, for the youth and young adults, it's about the music, you know, and teaching them how to pen a song, you know, that can be about something, you know. And then for women, you know, it's like what happens is--going back to childhood, you know, you feel abandoned because your father left. You feel like, you know, you lose your identity, because you think that you're somebody, and you find out that you're really not. So, you're seeking love, you're seeking the comfort of--you know. And anyway, so I'm taking all of this stuff, you know, and putting it into a Hollywood movie. And you know, I'm hoping that, you know, with work--with me being transparent and, you know, opening my situation to, you know, to the world--that women will, you know, begin to say "Hey, you know what? I need to be more careful. You know, I don't need to get married that bad, you know. And even though I might feel like my clock is ticking, you know, there's women that are having children at forty-six. There's women--you know what I mean? So, it's like, you know, we--you know, what's going on with me? Why do I feel like, you know, I have to do this? And for these young girls, you know, why are they, why are they accepting, you know, these relationships? You know, they're going around talking about, "My baby's daddy." What happened to "My husband?" You know. Story_ID: 111792 Speaker 1: I'm going to start by slating. My name is Evelyn Pounds, I'm the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer. This is a completion interview from February 14, 2006. Please state your full name. Speaker 2: Dina Ruth Andrews. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: I don't know. February 21, 2006. Speaker 1: And the location of this completion interview? You don't have to give the street address. You can just say "in my home." Speaker 2: In my home. Speaker 1: In Fairburn. Speaker 2: In Fairburn, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Story_ID: 111793 Speaker 1: The last time we talked, Dina, we were talking about, I think we had gotten up to your move to Atlanta [Georgia] and your transition, or moving to gospel. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, we had started there. But I wanted to kind of back up a little. We, you, do you want to give a phrase that we had asked you at the beginning of the tape, your favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And that phrase is what my mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] used to say all the time, is "Pretty is what pretty does." And it's like, no matter how we look on the outside. We may be pretty, you know, in the view of mankind. But what we do, and what's in our heart on the inside is really what pretty is. It's not all about the outside. And, you know, being in the entertainment business, everybody, you know, is all about, you know, how you look and what you wear, and what size you are and, you know, all of that. But if you have a bad attitude, if you have no self-confidence--you know, if you don't act pretty, if you have an ugly attitude--you know, you're ugly, no matter what you do to the outside. Speaker 1: That is so true. Now, let's see. You moved to Atlanta in 1992, right? Speaker 2: The first time I moved here was 1992. And I stayed from '92, [1992] to '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I left and went on a journey. (Laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And from-- Speaker 1: You want to tell us something about that journey? What journey was that? Was it a journey back to California, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on the way to California. But I made a couple of stops. I stopped in Oklahoma, and I got married. And I went to New Mexico with my husband, or on behalf of my husband. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I stayed there for a year. And then my mom died, and I went back to California in January of '98 [1998], and ended up--and I laugh, you know. The thing is, laughter heals the soul. (Laughter). And I have to laugh, because my life has just been, it's been real interesting. And a lot of the things that I've gone through, like I said earlier, have been quite devastating. But I've managed to get through them, and now I can laugh. I can laugh, you know, at the situation; I can laugh at myself, you know. I can laugh at, you know, just, just, just the greatness of God, to bring me through and to keep me alive and, you know, to keep pressing. So, that's, you know, that's my healing. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's-- Speaker 2: My healing balm. Speaker 1: --on the inside. And that's true of so many--well, life, period. You know, there are always some hills and valleys, ups and downs. But that's basically life. Because during a lot of these interviews, I mean, everybody overcomes something. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it varies from person to person, and career to career. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, when you, had you been to Oklahoma before? Had you visited, or had you lived in Oklahoma before? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And what part did you go to? Speaker 2: I was in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: All right. Was that different from what you had experienced, you know, in California? And, you know, your growing up days was-- Speaker 2: Night and day. But what was interesting is that my father, Gene Andrews [her stepfather, Eugene Ellis Andrews], they were from Oklahoma. And, you know, and it's interesting, because we never know where life, you know, life's path or journey is going to take us. But it turned out that my father, that's where he was born, in Oklahoma. That's not why I went there, but I was in Oklahoma City. It's just, I don't know. I guess I would say it's kind of under-developed, you know, in comparison to places like, you know, California and Atlanta and-- Speaker 1: Well, it was the rural South, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess. I didn't want to say that, but that's, you know, that's what it seemed to be. But I enjoyed myself there. And actually, I made friends there. And one of my best friends and my sisters in Christ is Nola Bedingfield [ph.], that I met while I was there. And she's like a big sister, kind of mother person. And that was in, what, 1996. Speaker 1: Nineteen Ninety-Six [1996]. Speaker 2: And you know, here it is, you know, today is like, you know, I call her. And, you know, if there's anybody in the world that's praying for me, I know Nola is praying for me. You know, through everything that I go through, through everything that I walk, you know, into-- you know, the whole bit. So, there was a lot of good that happened there. Mother Davis is another person that I became very close to, she and her husband. And she's another one. You know, she's a spiritual mother to me. And, you know, for all these years, you know, I call her. And you know, "Mother Davis, how are you?" You know, she'll call me and, you know, just an encouragement. She's such a wonderful person and woman. And her husband was a pastor. He died, and so she's got a, you know, about five kids, you know. They're all grown--and grandkids and the whole bit. But she still makes time for us. Story_ID: 111794 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in Oklahoma, did you do any of the management, or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --any entertainment? Speaker 2: Yes. Actually, I was managing Percy Bady. And actually, it was an interesting time. Because I had given up mainstream general market R and B music, and started doing gospel. And it was like, I mean, actually it was like at the poverty level, you know. (Laughter). I mean, really, for real. Because when my client came to me, he wasn't making a lot of money. And then I had stopped doing the things that I made a lot of money at. But I was able to live, and so--and I was working. But the thing that was beautiful about it is that I had been working towards a certain goal with Percy and his career. We were working to build him as a producer, because he was known as a noted songwriter. He choraled "Hold up the Light" on The Winans. And what is it? I mean, that was BeBe [HM BeBe Winans] and CeCe [CeCe Winans]. And then, "Love Has No Colors" [sic, "Love has No Color"] on The Winans, and several other things--Yolanda Adams and, you know. Anyway, so when I met him, he was just noted as a songwriter, not so much a producer. And he had co-produced for the Thompson Community Choir [sic, Thompson Community Singers]. And the project that he was doing when I started managing him was "Shout." But he wasn't, you know, he didn't have that producer credibility. So, we had been working towards a certain goal. So, what ended up happening was even though things were really, really tight for the first couple of years, I finally was able to make a deal for him with GospoCentric [Records], that turned over--you know, it was one of the first six-figure deals, you know, for a songwriter/producer. And I know, you know, the only reason that it came that way was, you know, Vicki [Vicki Mack Lataillade] had success with her label, GospoCentric with Kirk Franklin. And she came from the general market and she understood, you know, how to do business on that level, because most gospel companies were not doing it that way. So, Percy, you know, just an incredible talent. I mean, I still, you know, his music is just incredible. And you know, to this day, you know, I still put on some Percy Bady songs or productions. So anyway, along with his talent, you know, and my business acumen, we were able to, you know, flip it, even though we had drought, you know. Speaker 1: Right. So, from drought to fruition? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: About how long did that take? You started with him in Oklahoma when it actually-- Speaker 2: I started with him in Atlanta [Georgia]. But in my business as a manager--and I don't take a lot of clients. I have like a boutique kind of situation. I'm not trying to be, you know, I'm not trying to be, you know, the big manager with, you know, with all the clients and, you know, the multi-million dollar homes and all that kind of stuff. That's just not me. But so, I always just kept like a couple of clients. And so, no matter where I went, it's like--and primarily songwriter/producers, okay. Recording artists are a whole other story. Because I was still managing the group, Virtue, during their first album that was released on Verity Records. And so, I had Virtue and I had Percy. Virtue required me to travel and do other things. With Percy, I was a songwriter/producer. And basically all I did was deals, you know, sell songs, get on the phone--you know, work with the attorneys, you know, to get the deals closed. So, as long as I had a fax machine--and still today, you know, as long as I have a fax machine--as long as there's Federal Express or whomever, you know, whatever overnight courier--you know, email--it's like, we can do what we do. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when did Percy--well, let's say where were you when Percy actually hit the six-figure mark, when his, when you helped to bring him to where he really started to pay off? Were you in, what city were you in? Speaker 2: What city? Well, actually we been working towards, we had been working towards this from the time I was in Atlanta-- Speaker 1: Right, you started in Atlanta. Speaker 2: --and I first signed him as a client. And then, I mean, from Oklahoma to New Mexico, the deal finally closed, you know, that we were going for, because we had several different companies bidding. So I was actually, I was in-between, I was in-between Albuquerque, New Mexico and California. I hadn't settled in New Mexico; I had just stopped there for a moment. And I went home and spent some time with my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews], and finished doing my business there. Because it was not easy to, you know, do business from there if I had to create new business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's the thing that's really important. It's like when you're creating new business, you have to be where the business is. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 111795 Speaker 1: So we were talking about Percy Bady and New Mexico. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you were between New Mexico and California-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --when his deals actually came through? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Now, when you went to New Mexico, now that was an experience. So, I know you were married. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, did you do work in New Mexico also? Did you get clients? Did you do your business in New Mexico? Speaker 2: No. The only client that I maintained was Percy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we, you know, we'd built it up; we were at a comfortable place. And I could manage that and try to have a family. Speaker 1: Okay. So, about how long did you stay in New Mexico? Speaker 2: Just a year. Speaker 1: A year? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And in Oklahoma, how long did you stay? Speaker 2: A year. Speaker 1: A year. Then back to California--did you go back home in California? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. And that was Velincia? Speaker 2: Valinda [now City of Industry, California]. Speaker 1: Valinda-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --California. Speaker 2: Yeah. Good memory. Speaker 1: All right. So then, still married? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Divorced very quickly-- Speaker 1: After you got back to California? Speaker 2: --after, after I got back, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 111796 Speaker 1: So, when you look back at the marriage--let's just ask? What were some of the positives of the marriage, from a business perspective or a personal perspective? One thing, you got a chance to travel. Speaker 2: I traveled anyway. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't need that. (Laughter). Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Well, you got a chance to live in some different states and different places. Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Let me see. What can I say the positive would be? The positive was I had a life lesson that I can pass on to some other people that will hopefully keep them from making the same mistake. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is that lesson? Because we learn lessons either way--even from people who marry and stay married for, you know, from death to--you know, marriage to death. Speaker 2: Right. Well, you know, as a Christian, you know, I believe, you know, God is a God of more than second chances. And, you know, the whole Christian experience is about redemption and, you know, salvation and Christ dying, you know, for us, and you know, the forgiveness of sins and all that. And I believe that, you know, with that, I'm not--I try not to be real judgmental as far as other people and, you know, what they go through. You know, because we all, we all have issues. But what I found is that--and I guess, you know, part of my upbringing did not give me the insight as far as judging characters of people. And I think that, you know, sometimes we can, we can, we can go a little bit too far as far as our accepting or bringing certain people into our life. And I remember my mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] saying--and I wish she would have said this before I married William. But she said that he wasn't good enough for me. And, you know, I mean at that point I had already married him. And so, you know, I think, you know, the lesson is, you know, a lot of times you've got to look a little bit deeper, you know. Unfortunately, you know, with William--as brilliant as he was as far as his mind was scholastically and, you know, a good looking guy--he had some personal issues from childhood that carried on into adulthood. And I believe that he married me because he felt like, you know, my lifestyle would help him. You know, my character would help him to become a better person. And you know, we have to, we've got to carry our own cross, you know what I mean? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: It's like, you know, for each and every one of us, you know, we have to deal with ourselves and our own issues in order to get to the next level. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And you know, it's just like, you know, your grandparents or your parents, or whatever, you know, they can't, you know, they can't make you who you are. You have to choose. They can, you know, give you an introduction. They can instill certain values and principles. But at the end of the day, you've got to make those decisions. So, I knew I was taking a risk when I married him. And, you know, I don't want to go into all the details of it. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: But, you know, I knew that there was a risk. But I did not really realize that it was to the extent, you know, that it would be. Because I didn't know if people did the kind of things that he did. Speaker 1: Well, was he in the music industry, or was he-- Speaker 2: Well, when I met him, he was, he was--well, he was in the music industry. He was dating one of the girls in High Inergy. It was a group that Motown [Records] had. He hung out with the Motown people all the time. He promoted some concerts and, you know, he was managing. He never made it to, you know, the level of success that he desired in the music industry. But that's where, that's where I initially met him. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where... yes, so okay, all right. Story_ID: 111797 Speaker 1: So, you're back in California? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You've been a mother, because you took on your cousin's [sic, Aunt Lisa's]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --children. And now you've had a chance to be a wife. So, you're back to being a mother again. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, yeah. Because Tiffany [ph.] was there with me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she was pregnant with Lisa at seventeen. So, you know, I had William and Tiffany and Lisa in the womb. Speaker 1: All right. (Laughter). All right, so what did you do then after you moved back to California? Did you pick up the business [Dina Andrews Management Special Projects], you know, your business that you started in '83 [1983]? Or just tell us what you did then. Speaker 2: Yeah, I continued. I continued, but it was, it was devastating. My mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] was my best friend. And you know, everywhere I went, everything that I did... I'm not supposed to, I'm trying not to cry. But you know, I just remember--and my mother died, that's what happened. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She ended up, she had--anyway, she ended up dying. She had her leg amputated, and died five days later. Speaker 1: And this was in 199-? Speaker 2: This was 1998. Speaker 1: Nineteen Ninety-Eight. [1998]. Speaker 2: In January of 1998. Speaker 1: And this is about when you make it back to California? So, you had-- Speaker 2: I went back because she got sick. I mean, I was headed back there-- Speaker 1: Anyway. Speaker 2: I had begun packing in New Mexico, because I knew the marriage wasn't going to work. You know, the promises that were made--the covenant that was made was broken--was broken immediately, you know. And you know, we had already agreed that, you know, certain things that happened that--you know, I didn't have to stay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, it was like--so anyway, that's just the short of it. So, I was headed back to Los Angeles [California] anyway; I had started packing. But what took me all the way there was that my mother got sick, and I ended up going home. And when I got there, they had moved her to a nursing home. And the nursing home was supposed to be working with her for recovery. Instead, they just let her lay there. So when I got there, her foot had already lost all its circulation and was, you know, blood red up to her ankle. And they had to call an ambulance and do surgery, you know, to try to get the blood flowing. And so, I stayed there for two weeks. And then, you know, we left, you know, two weeks open to see, you know, if she was going to recover from it. And there was no recovery. And they called me, you know, because I had gone back to New Mexico. Because, you know, the Lord told me that my mother was going to die. He told me my mother was going to die, and he told me William was going to leave. And you know, because we know--I mean we know about the spirit of God, you know, what's going to happen, you know, in a lot of instances. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I went really went back home for that two weeks. And when I say home, to New Mexico, for that two weeks to gather my strength for what was coming. And so, two weeks after being at home, the doctors called and they said that, you know, I needed to come immediately because my mother's, they had to amputate my mom's leg. And so--and that she would not have the surgery until I got there. And so I went home. And they, you know, they did the surgery, and she died five days later. And you know, at the same time, you know, the whole breakup with William, you know, was happening. And, and and- And so, basically what I did was I--you know, because I always, I keep working. You know, I keep working. That's the thing that keeps my mind; that's the thing that holds me. But in this particular case, Percy [Bady] decided that he wanted to split and go in another direction. So that was devastating, you know. Because here it is, you know, we've been friends; he was like my brother. And I had worked, you know, so hard to build him--you know, to the place where he was making, you know, the kind of money where, you know, I didn't, you know, I didn't have to necessarily have to go get a couple more clients, or take on some clients. It was a place where I could breathe. You know, because after, you know, twenty-five years in the business, and you're out here hustling and you're running. I mean because with recording artists, it's like they do concerts all the time. And if you've got somebody that's hot, you know, you're running, and you just don't have time to breathe, you know. And so, that was a place where, you know, I was ready to breathe. And then he ended up leaving. And so, that--you know, I got into, you know, a whole other--that was just like-- Speaker 1: But I mean look at the, look at the pattern. When you were with Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey], and here comes tragedy and separation-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --from the company [SOLAR Records, also known as Sound of Los Angeles Records]. And then you become an entrepreneur. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And thanks to Griffey for kicking you out. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then now, here's Percy-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and tragedy. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so you still, as the little children say, "picked up your marbles" and went and shot marbles someplace else. You didn't quit. Speaker 2: No, uh-uh, I'm not a quitter. I'm not a quitter--never quit, never quit, never quit. Get mad, I'll get mad, and you'll know I'm mad. But I'm not going to quit. Speaker 1: So every time, every time you get that cushion, and you think that it's time to kind of just enjoy that cushion, it's time for a change. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's like-- Story_ID: 111798 Speaker 1: So what was the big accomplishments after this? Because you got your management company, and even started Knew Beginnings [Knew Beginnings Entertainment] eventually. Speaker 2: Well, right. And actually, the vision for Knew Beginnings came while I was in Atlanta [Georgia], in like 1994 and '95 [1995]. Flying back from Los Angeles [California] on a plane, the Lord gave me the name "Knew Beginnings Entertainment" and told me how to spell it. And then I got back--and I'd never done that business plan before, and particularly this business plan. And you know, and so it's like, and so I'm just, I'm living that thing, but I was living it in pieces. Because Knew Beginnings was the, it was the gospel, spiritual side, you know, of my career. Where Dina Andrews Management was, you know, was the general market side. And so, and I say "general market" rather than "secular" because I just, you know, feel like that's more comfortable, you know, for me, and it's more of a general market, yeah, than, you know, the "secular" and "sacred" thing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It's like it just kind of, it gets kind of religious to me. So anyway, but so, anyway with the whole thing, you know, with Knew Beginnings Entertainment, that vision had begun in 1994 and '95 [1995]. Speaker 1: And that's when you picked up-- Speaker 2: Picked up Percy [Bady], right. Speaker 1: Percy came into your life. Speaker 2: Right, Percy was the first client, you know, that I was working with under that umbrella. Then Virtue was the second group that I worked with under that umbrella. Speaker 1: And what does Virtue, what are some of the-- that Virtue did? What are some of the-- Speaker 2: Virtue--gosh, you know, what? Everybody refers to them as the three [sic, four] girls with the orange suits. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And their very first record--and, okay, I love that record. I can't think of the name of it ["Virtue"]. But now it's the three sisters-Karima [Kibble], Ebony [Holland], and the younger sister [Heather Martin] was in college when they started the group with two other girls [Negelle Sumter and Shavonne Sampson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So now, it's just the three, and they're still on Verity Records. But anyway, I can't think of the name of the record-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right, okay. Well, go on. Speaker 2: But anyway, so that's where we started with it. And after, after--actually, this is so deep. Because Percy left, okay, I'm totally devastated. My mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews], my mother, who was my best friend, is dead. I literally want to die with her, okay. It's like, you know, just take me home, you know. I don't want to re-marry again. I don't want any kids. I just don't want to be bothered. And you know, even with, you know, my kids [her Aunt Lisa's children, whom she looks after] and Baby Lisa and, you know, my brother--I mean I had my first, you know, biological niece and nephew, you know. And it's like for a year I couldn't do--I really, you know, I couldn't do anything as far as-- Speaker 1: So, when you say you had them, that means your brother had -- Speaker 2: Right, yes-- Speaker 1: --had children? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you didn't have them with you, though? Speaker 2: No, no, we were-- Speaker 1: Okay, but-- Speaker 2: --in California. Speaker 1: --they were- Speaker 2: While I was in Atlanta [Georgia], our family was continuing to grow. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: You know, because the twins were twelve when I left. And there were no babies in the family; they were the youngest ones. And then by the time I got back to California, there was A.J., my grandson. And Tamika [ph.], the oldest girl, her son was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then Sierra [ph.], my niece was born. And actually, she was born on January 26. She just turned ten. That was 1996, '96 [1996], and I was still in Atlanta. And we had our first entertainers' Bible study at my house the night that she was born, and ended up praying her in, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she had some complications. So, anyway, the whole thing with trying to stay on track is that after I got back home, the mom died. I'm devastated. Percy leaves, I'm still trying to work, okay. And actually, I did some work for Bishop Noel Jones. He had a, he had a library of sermons. I mean, like five hundred sermons that had never been cataloged, never been copy-written or anything. And one of my former business associates, Jonathan Moseley, who worked for MC Hammer [Stanley Kirk Burrell] when Hammer was hot at Capitol [Records], was one of the ministers on staff at Noel Jones' church. So, he contracted me to put together this library and copyright these songs for Noel Jones. So, I did that, and I did a few things. But it got to the point where I just couldn't function. It was like, you know, I couldn't do anything. It was like I had to shut down. And where previously, you know, where we had the 1983 deaths, you know, I was able to keep going, this time, you know, I had to stop. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 111799 Speaker 1: So, you moved back. Well, you left Mexico [sic, New Mexico] and then you moved back to California, and you stayed there even after your mother's [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews'] death? Speaker 2: Yeah, I stayed there after my mom's death. I actually went through a homeless period. Okay, literally, I'm not on the street homeless. But, you know, I was staying with my friends, Tiffany. Well, actually--oh God, this is the ministry portion. (Laughter). This is--and you know, I'm thinking about all this stuff. And you know, I haven't really thought about all of this stuff in a while. But I, that's where, you know, I went on another journey, and I traveled back to Oklahoma. I did ministry there; traveled back to New Mexico, did ministry there. I traveled to Las Vegas [Nevada]. My Aunt Dorothy had moved to Las Vegas. And her son, my cousin, Vincent and Tiffany [ph.] moved there. And so, I went and got involved with ministry there. And you know, so that's what I did for like a year and half or so. It was kind of like, my younger brother said I was a vagabond. (Laughter). Arthur [Casperson] said I was a vagabond. Speaker 1: So, you weren't doing your business then? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: You had changed totally, and was just-- Speaker 2: I just--right, I did not do anything in the business--nothing, absolutely nothing. My business was ministry, you know, and that was it. You know, I just, I mean, I served people. You know, I served people; I prayed for people, you know. I helped Tiffany with Lisa and, you know, and then one day, you know, the Lord said, "You're going back to work." June, I think it was in June 2000. And, you know, it's like people, you know, people say "Well, how do you hear from God?" You know, "Well, how do you know God's talking to you?" You know, a lot of people say that. But you'll know by the spirit. It's like there's impressions, you know, there's words that come to your mind. And then if they come to pass, you know that it was really Him. You know, everything that you hear is not God, because sometimes we hear ourselves. But he said June first. And so, I got on a plane. It turned out that there were some people who found me on the internet. I was writing, that's what I did. I started writing a column for GospelCity.com. And some people found me here and they wanted, they flew me in about consulting them. And-- Speaker 1: When you say here, you mean Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right, to Atlanta. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I'm in Las Vegas. And two, my brothers and I, that was like a whole other story. My brothers and I were going through some things, you know, about, you know, the property that my mom left. And you know, so it was just, it was a crazy time, you know. So, anyway, I was camped out in Las Vegas helping Tiffany. You know, we were taking care of each other. Tiffany was like, "Mama, I'll work, you know, and you just stay home and take care of Lisa, you know, and take care of the house, you know." And I'm like, "Tiffany, Mama got to go back to work. Mama's got a life, you know, I've got a career. You know, I'm helping you get it together now. You've got everything together. You know, Lisa's in nursery school--" Speaker 1: What--and you're all of what, thirty-something years old at this time? Or were you-- Speaker 2: Let me see. How old--yeah, thirty-something. Yeah, about thirty-six, I guess, thirties. Speaker 1: And she was ready for you to take retirement. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, just--yeah. "You know, Mama, stay home. Stay home. You know, I'll work, you know." (Laughter). I'm, "Tiffany, Mama got a career." So anyway, I got on the plane, came to Atlanta-- Speaker 1: Well, let's stop for a tape change. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 111800 Speaker 1: Yeah. So we were, so we were in Atlanta [Georgia]. And I just, like, you know, was getting ready to start working again. And one gentleman, I can't even remember his name, but he flew me in to meet with his female client. And gosh, I'm so sorry, I can't remember her name. (Laughter). But anyway, she was looking, she wanted a manager or whatever. But at that particular point I was clear that I'm a consultant, you know, I'm not managing anymore. I had, you know, gone through enough. You know, I'm sure you've heard the management stories, you know, where you spend all this time, all this energy and effort, you know, and sometimes money, and you know, then you can't get paid. And you know, you have to sue people and you still can't get paid, and all that. (Laughter). So, I was done with management at that particular point. So, she hired me. She said she wanted to take me on as a consultant. And then from there, and then what happened was they brought these guys in, the manager, the person who was managing her who found me on the internet, brought this group of brothers in, these five brothers. And so, they came and they presented their CD and they wanted to have a meeting. And I was like, "No. You know, this lady flew me in to meet with her. And I don't think that it's appropriate, you know, for you guys to, you know, come in here on her time like that, you know. I'll take your CD and listen to it later, you know, and get back to you." So, anyway-- Speaker 2: They wanted you to manage them? Speaker 1: Well, they wanted anything they could get. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, they-- Speaker 2: Explain the difference between managing someone and consulting for someone. Speaker 1: Well, the difference in managing and consulting is that managers work strictly on a percentage basis. And consultants charge a fee for their services. Speaker 2: Okay, that was the main thing. Speaker 1: Right, that's the main thing. It's like, you know what? If you want my services, you have to pay for them now. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: You know what I mean? We've done the--you know, we work with you until you make money. And then when you make money, you think you're paying us too much money, when we haven't made any money with you, you know, for two or three years. (Laughter). Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And then, you know, when the money finally starts flowing and you can pay us, you know, then you don't want to pay us. So, basically, you know, on the consulting thing, it's like okay, you pay me a fee and I'll do you a service. Speaker 2: So, we're around 1998 now, or-- Speaker 1: We are in, no-- Speaker 2: When you made your-- Speaker 1: We're in the year 2000. Speaker 2: We're in 2000. Speaker 1: Yeah, we're in 2000, right. Speaker 2: We're in the year 2000. Speaker 1: Right, I'm--well, yeah, this is just a trip; this is a business trip. Speaker 2: Oh, this is a business--not a move? Speaker 1: No, not a move. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's a business trip to Atlanta. And from Atlanta, there's a business trip to Boston [Massachusetts]. There's a minister of music over the youth at New Covenant Church, Leroy Hampton, that I had been building a relationship with for three years prior to all of the devastation. And Leroy wanted me to come in and meet the church administrator and associate pastor, which were the sons of the Bishop. Because they had a group, a youth group, that Leroy was producing, and they wanted to do a record on them. So, I go from Atlanta to Boston, you know, and do the meeting with the guys. You know, I get back and they ask me to put together a proposal. And this is so awesome. Now, my older brother [Mark Andrews]-- Speaker 2: This is going to be consulting again, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, this is consulting. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is consulting. Speaker 2: All right, you're through with managing? Speaker 1: This is consulting. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I'm consulting, you know. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: That's-- no management. So anyway, the thing that was so awesome about this is that before I left Las Vegas [Nevada] going on these two business trips back to back, I was staying with Tiffany [ph.], my daughter that was--I don't know, how old was Tiffany? That's 1998, that was eight years ago. So, she was like nineteen at the time. Okay, she was nineteen and Lisa was what, two years old or something. But anyway we had, we were having, you know, family issues, you know, with the property. And, you know, my mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] had told me, you know, what was going on with the property. My older brother was living in the house, he and his wife and his two girls. And you know, I'm, you know, in the meantime, I'm a vagabond, you know. (Laughter). My younger brother, Arthur [Casperson]--you know, Arthur was the one that had always been on my hip, you know, like through the music industry and everything else. Speaker 2: Now, this is the younger brother, not the one--? Okay. Speaker 1: Right, the younger brother. You know, the younger brother was like, you can come stay at my house, you know. Speaker 2: Okay, and where was he? Speaker 1: He was there in California, too. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Everybody was in California. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: That's where everybody is. So, he's like you can come stay at my house. And so, I was staying, you know, I stayed with him for a couple of weeks and then, you know, we had a little tiff. So, you know, I was on, I was in Vegas with Tiffany-- Story_ID: 111801 Speaker 1: But the thing that happened was when I got back to Las Vegas [Nevada] from these two business trips--now, I had not worked since 1998. It was April 1, 1998 when Percy [Bady] called and said that he no longer wanted to be in the relationship with me. I mean contract or no contract, he did not care, okay. And he did not pay, either, okay. And you know, but I still love him. You know, when we see each other we kiss and we hug and, you know, everything, you know. But that's just, you know, that's how people are in the business. And anyway, that's, you know, we can go past that. But, so when I get back to Las Vegas, my grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] calls. And she says "Your brother has abandoned your house," okay. So, I was like, okay. So now, here comes--now, and this is like, everything just works; I mean everything just works. You know, you just never know. So here it is, I don't have a car, because [her ex-husband] William has, you know, done away with my car. He's sold all my furniture. You know, so this is part of the story that I haven't been telling. (Laughter). And you know, anyway, so and I was just like, you know, just out there, right. And I don't have a home, you know, nothing. And so, my grandmother calls and says that Mark has abandoned the house. So, I was like okay. So my cousin, Paul Jackson, Jr. who is the guitar player and the only other person that's a professional in the business--his mom and dad who grew with my mother--my mother's first cousin lived in Las Vegas. And some kind of way, I guess Blanche and Paul called. Paul, Sr. and Blanche called my grandmother and told her that they were coming to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] from Las Vegas that weekend, right? So, I called them and they picked me up and took me back to L.A. I stayed at my grandmother's. Biggie had sold her house; we sold her house. Because after my mom [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] died, the next year she got cancer, and she wanted to get rid of, you know, sell her house and stuff. So, she had sold her house, and had a senior's apartment. So, I stayed there with her. You know, I always slept in the bed with her, you know, stayed there with her. I went down and called my brother, Mark, you know, and asked him for the keys. And he gave me the keys to the house and, you know, we worked it all out. You know, Arthur wanted his percentage, you know, because there was equity in the house. You know, there was a lot of equity in the house. And so anyway, you know, as it turned out, I ended up getting the house back, you know. I had to clean, I had to scrub, had to, you know, get--work out new loans and all that stuff. And here it is, I'm like so into whatever this world is, you know, that I have in the entertainment business, that I forgot that I co-signed for my mother's loan to refinance the house. (Laughter). Speaker 2: So, it was yours all along? Speaker 1: Right. And the loan--yeah, and the loan was in my name and her name, you know. And so here it is, you know, the house is now in foreclosure. And, but you know what? The thing is so awesome. Because after I got in the house, now here it is I don't have any money, okay. I have no money, I have no car. I'm just like--you know, and I still had not fully recovered, you know, from the pain of my mother's death and, you know, William leaving and taking all my stuff and selling my stuff--you know, and all that stuff and, you know, all the rest of it. And so I get in the house, and all I do is clean. You know, I'm cleaning, I'm cleaning. Every day, I'm cleaning. Speaker 2: Now, you're cleaning the house that's in foreclosure? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm cleaning the house that's in foreclosure, okay. And it's like, as I'm cleaning, I'm praying. And then finally, you know, I said, "You know, Lord, you know, you said you were giving me my inheritance. You know, but I don't even have any money to pay the mortgage." (Laughter). So anyway, anyway as it turned out, you know, Arthur--I called Arthur up and I said, "Hey, you know, look, Arthur, the house is in foreclosure, you know." Arthur's like, "You know, all I want is my money, you know." And I'm like, "Cool, you know, let's do this. You can't use my credit, because the loan's in my name and mom's name, you know. And I don't have any income right now anyway. So, let's use your credit, you know, let's get the house re-financed." Thank God for friends. I have a friend, Carlton, Carlton Robinson, that I went to--well, actually he didn't go to the same college I went to. He went to Long Beach State [California State University, Long Beach, California], but he hung out. All the people from Fullerton [California State University, Fullerton, California], you know, and Cal State, L.A. [California State University, Los Angeles, California] and stuff we all hung out, you know, and we used to date. You know, he was my boyfriend, and that kind of thing. So anyway, I called Carlton up, you know, because Carlton always did, you know, did loans on our homes and stuff. And so, I called Carlton and said, "Carlton, you know, Mom died, and this is the situation. We need a loan on the house." So, Carlton did all the paperwork and stuff. And so we got the house, you know, we got a new loan on the house. So, you know, and I'm like, okay, I still don't have any money to pay the mortgage. And as soon as I was saying that--now, I'm literally on the floor in my mama's room, okay, praying. And the phone rings, and it's the woman that I met with in Atlanta, I think, or her brother. And they said that they were ready, you know, to hire me, you know, to put me on as a consultant. They would wire me--it was like something little. But it was big for me at that, you know, at that moment and time. You know, when you're broke, you know, anything is big. And so, I don't know, it could have been fifteen hundred, twenty-five hundred dollars, you know, something like that. Speaker 2: That was a big sum at that time. Speaker 1: Right, it was a big sum. Story_ID: 111802 Speaker 1: And now, as soon as I hung up with them, the phone rings again. And it's the people from Boston [Massachusetts], okay, it's Leroy [Hampton]. And he's like, "Dina, they approved your deal point memo." And now, so that was, that a real deal, you know. So, that was a real deal; that was real money. And actually, you know, we had a three-year run, you know, with them. And you know, we established a label for them, Axiom Entertainment [Group] and introduced their first artist, Freda Battle and Temple Worshippers, and you know, left them to, you know, go ahead and continue building. And so, you know, it's so incredible. You know, because people will tell you these stories, and I used to hear these stories before it happened to me. And it's how you could be so...? And like a client, another former client of mine, Vincent Bradley, he wrote, he wrote I think "Cool It Now," New Edition, Bell Biv DeVoe. Anyway, he did a lot of things. And Vincent was telling me his story, where he said that the lights, you know, were turned off at his house. He didn't have any money, you know. It was like he didn't know where the next, you know-- Speaker 2: Meal was coming from. Speaker 1: --morsel of food was coming from. And the phone rings, and its ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers]. They'd been looking for him, you know, trying to pay him money, like over a hundred, I think it was like, it was over a hundred thousand dollars. It could have been more than that. But he had money he didn't even know about. And it's like, it's like we go through these things. And I mean, that's just how life is. You know, I mean whether it's the McDonald's Corporation where they filed bankruptcy a zillion times before they ever hit--you know, to a Tyler Perry, you know, was what we were saying, who was homeless and, you know, lost all his money. You know, it's like stuff happens. So anyway, the short of it is I started, you know, I started, I did the three years with Axiom. I was just, you know, just back everywhere again; you know, everything re-established, you know. I got me another car. Got me, you know, had my house, had the house refinished--not refinished. What do you call it? Speaker 2: Refurbished? Speaker 1: Refurbished. Speaker 2: That's where everything just about gutted out and everything. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, I had the house refurbished. And, you know, I was there with my family. And like I was saying, we didn't have any babies in our family when I left and came to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, I had the babies. You know, I had A.J. We had, Sierra [ph.] was next, then Hunter. Then Lisa was, anyway Lisa, Hunter, Shane [ph.], you know, I mean we just had babies. So what happened was, the babies were actually who helped me recover from the devastation and loss of my mom. Because every weekend, you know-- Speaker 2: They were there. Speaker 1: I'd have the kids. You know, I mean that's who was loving on me. A.J. stayed with me, A.J. was the oldest. And like, he's only ten now. But that's, that's how old they are. But you know, he stayed with me. You know, he would come to the house and he would stay with me and love on me. And Sierra, you know, she'd never spent the night at anybody's house. She was two years old. And it was so funny, because Arthur--you know, that's my younger brother--that's his first child. And he wouldn't let her stay with anybody until I got back home. And he cried, he cried when he left her, you know, that was his baby. (Laughter). You know, but that's how I recovered--you know, the love of my family, and then friends. You know, I mean I have friends, and I thank God for that, you know. Speaker 2: Say that's, that's amazing; that's an amazing story. Story_ID: 111803 Speaker 1: So, you were in, you're still in California. So what did you do next? That's around 2000. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was in California to 2000. And then 2003, the summer of 2003, I ended up coming back to Atlanta [Georgia]. I always felt like I was going to come back, and it was time to come back. So, I sold the house in California and then I started a new division of Knew Beginnings Entertainment, which was Knew Records, and signed my first group. And it was the five guys that I met that June of 2000 when I--. Speaker 1: In Atlanta? Speaker 2: In Atlanta during that meeting. And so, we put out a five-song EP on the group, and promoted that for a year. And then I've been working on my books. Because we're back to today now. Okay, we're-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, we're still in 2003. Speaker 2: Oh, no. (Laughter). Speaker 1: We've still got--you signed the, you signed the deal with the five brothers. Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter). Speaker 1: The young lady that you had-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --initially come to Atlanta for. You said that she was the one that got you, her contract came through at the time when you were (unclear) in California. Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually, it was--yes, yeah, she didn't do a long-term thing. You know, it was just, you know-- Speaker 1: But she came in-- Speaker 2: --a couple months, right. Speaker 1: --in the nick of time? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 111804 Speaker 1: So, let me see. If I'm an artist and I have some talent, and I can sing--so, if I had come to you in 1983, you would have managed me if you had decided to take me on, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But in 2000, you would have consulted-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with or for me? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me, what would you have done for me in 1983 when I came to you? I know we've been over this, but we just want to get the total picture of what your management company was about. Speaker 2: Okay. Basically, what happens, and what happens as far as management is concerned is an artist or songwriter/producer or something, they seek out management representation who is connected to the powers that be in the music business that can help further their careers. And we, a lot of times, you know, we work off of potential. You know, it's like they may have potential to be great. And so, we will help to develop them to get to the point where someone else is interested in them, and will do business with us. And so, that could be like--if it's a songwriter/producer, and their songs are, you know, their songs are good but they're not great, we may put them with another producer/songwriter that is great. You know, or they may have the opportunity to have, like we call it, a B cut on a record, you know, where you don't have the multi-platinum producer producing, but they save a couple of slots down there, you know, for about fifteen hundred dollars a song, you know, to produce. Speaker 1: Okay, uh-huh. Speaker 2: You know, plus royalties, you know, if it sells. And where you get an opportunity, you know, to show, you know, how good you really are. Speaker 1: So, you helping to develop-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: --the person or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we help develop. We help to put their team together. Because, you know, not only is there a manager but, you know, there's management. There's attorneys, and there are financial managers that we call business managers, and everybody works together. And sometimes, you know, there's publicists that need to be hired. And so, the manager is the person who coordinates all the activities and refers, you know, their clients to other people. So, they have a cohesive team that works. So, when they start making money, everything's already in order. They've got, you know, the lawyer has already helped negotiate the deals or to negotiate the deals with the manager. The business managers, you know, they're making sure their taxes get done, that their money's managed. If there's investments that need to take place, you know, those things are done. So, you know, everyone works as a team. So, all of this stuff behind the scenes that--we take the burden; we take a lot of the burden off of our clients. Speaker 1: So, you built a portfolio for this potential candidate for reproduction of music, or whatever he's come to you for-- Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, yeah, we-- Speaker 1: --and put a whole package together for them? Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly. Speaker 1: Now after you've done this then you get, you said, a percentage-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --of what that person actually brings in? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, do you get this on continuing basis, or it is a one-time percentage, or-- Speaker 2: No, it's a continuing basis, you know. Speaker 1: Monthly, or--? Speaker 2: No, well, see, this is the thing. In our industry, you know, you make money when you close a deal. You know, so I mean we could close, you know, five deals in a week, you know what I mean? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, you could close, you know, more than that. You know what I mean? So, it all depends; you could close no deals. (Laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 111805 Speaker 1: Now, Dina, let me ask you this. When you started out in the industry as a manager--and I'm going to say that this happened almost right after you were with Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, actually it happened during the time. Speaker 1: The time that you were with Dick Griffey? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: How many women managers were there basically in the business? Do you know? Speaker 2: There weren't many. Speaker 1: And how many black females were there? Speaker 2: Not many. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about men? Were there many black managers in the industry? Speaker 2: There were, there were a few. I mean, but not many. I mean, we're always a minority. You know, we're still a minority, you know. Speaker 1: Are there any that you could actually call? Names that are still in the industry today doing the same thing-- Speaker 2: You know what-- Speaker 1: --that might have survived over the years? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, actually Benny Medina is doing very well. Benny started working out at Motown Records, and he began managing. And I think he's managing J-Lo [Jennifer Lopez] right now and several other people. Speaker 1: Now, was he at Motown when you were there? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He was, that was before you were there? Speaker 2: No, I was at SOLAR [Records, Sound of Los Angeles Records]. I think I was working at SOLAR when-- Speaker 1: When he was there? Speaker 2: Or, either--no, uh-uh. No, I think I was independent at that particular point. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But it was, it was back then, and he does very well. Let's see. I think Ramon Hervey [II], who was married to Vanessa Williams, Ramon is still managing, and he does very well. Let's see-- Speaker 1: But it's just a very few. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And those are men that you mentioned. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So far, you still haven't come up with a female. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, you were actually-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Because I know that Stephanie Mills used to manage during that time. But then she took a job at a record label. And I think now she's in a whole other profession. Who else? And then, let's see. Wesley Snipes was managed by the female--her mom--what is her name? She's a female actress, and her mother manages her. And she managed Wesley Snipes years ago. I can't, I can't--Holly Robinson-- Speaker 1: Peete. Speaker 2: Holly Robinson Peete's mom [Dolores Robinson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her last name is Robinson, and I can't remember her first name. But anyway there are just, you know, not many. Speaker 1: There weren't that many? Speaker 2: No, and what has happened now... And then too, well [HM] Michael Mauldin, he's a manager, Jermaine Dupri's dad, and he's doing very well. He worked in corporate at one of the record labels, you know, but now, but he's got his own company; he has his own company. But I really--let me see, my brain's not ticking too well. Speaker 1: There weren't that, there weren't that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. And see, what has happened in recent years is most of the young hip-hop artists, they don't go out and get professional managers that have been in the industry. They generally use their friends or their family, you know, or somebody that they feel like they can trust. So, a lot of times they're not looking for, you know, our level of expertise. Oh, I know, Hiriam Hicks is still managing. He's here in Atlanta [Georgia]. And Hiram, I think Hiram started out with Boyz II Men. And let me see, I can't... There are---I know Tashia Stafford. I think she may have been managing about ten years or something like that, eight to ten years. But there's really, you know-- Speaker 1: There weren't that many. Speaker 2: No, uh-uh. And generally--well, and then Shiba Freeman [Shiba Freeman Haley], Shiba Freeman has been managing for some time now. She manages Yolanda Adams. But generally what happens is, you know, we get like one or two good clients and, you know, either we--they stick with us--you know, because they trust us and we're doing a good job for them. Or a lot of times artists just flip from, you know, one person to the next. Speaker 1: To the next. Speaker 2: Somebody comes along and tells them a story that they can do something better, or that everything can be going good. (Laughter). Like, I have one client--and like I said, I still love them. You know, I love them, love them, love them. You know, the guy, you know, he came to me when he was broke, you know, didn't have any projects. And I pulled up my sleeves and started working for him, you know, and everybody's making money. And this is when I was living in Atlanta. And everybody's making money, everything's wonderful. (Laughter). And then I took out an ad. BRE had their conference, and I took out an ad. I did a split page with another manager. Speaker 1: BRE? Who-- Speaker 2: Black Radio Exclusive. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I think they call it Black Renaissance now. They have the Black Renaissance Magazine as well as the Black Radio Exclusive Magazine. So, anyway, who was it? I think it was Leon. Was it Leon Burnett? Anyway, it was one of the other managers. So, we decided to take out a full-page ad. Now, the purpose for me taking out the ad was to let people know I'm in Atlanta, and these are my clients, and this is where you can find us. These jokers called me at midnight, "Dina, come over to the studio. We need to talk to you." So, I go in the studio, and I'm like, "Hey, you know, what's up? What's going on?" "Well, you know, you took out this ad and, you know, you're getting large. And what's going to happen to us?" You know, and I was so stupid. (Laughter). I mean, and I have to say this. You know, I was so stupid. I listened to what they had to say. And I had an offer, and I'm going to leave it nameless. But if this person sees this interview, she knows who she is. And she called me up and she said, "Dina, you know, I got a position for you." I mean this was like an incredible position, okay. And I told her that I didn't want to leave my clients. And do you know, probably within a year, that one that had all the drama going? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They left me for somebody else who didn't know anything about him, you know, just because he felt like I was getting large, and that we were going to, you know, be disconnected and he wouldn't have the time. And I'm like, you know. So, that's, you know, like part of why-- Speaker 1: That was-- Speaker 2: --you know, I can't, you know, I can't do this anymore. Story_ID: 111806 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so let's do the flip side of that. I'm coming to you as a potential artist, and you're consulting. So, I ask for your services. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, how do we form a partnership? Or how do we work it out? Speaker 2: Well, we negotiate a deal. I'll tell you, you know, the fee that I'll charge you. You know, I'll find out what you want and charge you a fee. You know, and it's usually against the percentage. And-- Speaker 1: So you don't go through all of the developing of me as an artist? Speaker 2: Well, no. If you want to be developed you're going to pay for it, not me. (Laughter). No, for real, and it may sound, it may sound like a little hard and callous. But if you've, when you've been in the industry and you've gone through so much drama, and it's so unthankful--you know, at the end of the day, it's like, you know, you just can't afford to lose anything else. And, you know, and that's basically where it is. Speaker 1: And you've been consulting ever since 2000? Speaker 2: Yeah, since 2000. Story_ID: 111807 Speaker 1: We want to just re-visit some of the people that you've worked for or with in the past. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And just tell us about some of the ones that you worked with. We were talking about Whitney Houston and [HM] Dionne Warwick, with what we would call a manager? Speaker 2: No, no, actually, you were talking about Clive Davis-- Speaker 1: Clive Davis. Speaker 2: --who was Clive Davis? And Clive Davis is the founder of Arista Records, and he is noted for the success of Whitney Houston and Aretha Franklin. And LaFace Records, he gave them the deal. And that's L.A. [Antonio "L.A." Reid] and Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds], who I worked with at SOLAR Records [Sound of Los Angeles Records]. And then he started J Records, and he's got Alicia Keys; I think he's got Jamie Foxx. He's just this extraordinary music mogul executive that has been in the business for probably my lifetime, and has done incredible things in music. And interestingly, the way that I met him, he sent us a telegram. But Gerry Griffith--this is back when I was managing Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what, and we were talking about what do managers do. Well, managers introduce their clients to key people in the industry that are going to help further their career, as another function. Speaker 1: But in order to be introduced to these key people, then the manager--well, in order to introduce a client, the manager has to have some type of relationship, or had some type of relationship-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or know these people before the introduction. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: And that's what we're talking about now, your relationships with these people who have come on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and have grown to be successful. Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. And actually, my relationship was with Gerry Griffith. He was one of the key executives in urban music. Well, they called it black music then, at Arista Records. And he was in charge of A and R [Artists and repertoire], and he may have been over the entire black music division. So what I would do is, I would call Gerry Griffith or--and you know, sometimes, you know, with [HM] Clarence Avant, he was running his own thing. I would call them, and I would say, "Hey, you know, I've got these new producers. You know, the guys, you know, that were in The Time, you know, Jimmy and Terry. One plays bass and one plays keys, and these guys are hot. You know, you've got to hear their music," and blah, blah, blah. And so, what I would do is, I would open that door of introduction, you know, by sending my client's material, and then setting up meetings to take them in or to send them in. And that's how, that's how relationships are established. And so, say, Gerry is working on a Whitney Houston record; he might be working on an Aretha Franklin record; he might be working on a Babyface record, or whatever. And so, if he feels like the music that these particular songwriter/producers write fit with what he's doing, or they could be a good match, then he'll put them with the artist or either they will write for the artist then submit the materials. So that's how, that's how we got their careers started. Because with my relationship at SOLAR, there were a lot of people that I knew that I met that I was connected to. Because we went to conferences, you know. And at the conferences, you'd have record company representatives from everywhere. SOLAR was hot. If somebody wanted some tickets to something, you know, we'd call each other at different record companies and say, "Hey, you know, I need your product. Send me your new product. You know, send me-- you know, hey, you know, I'm going to be in this city, you know. Will you send me tickets? Or are you going to be at this conference?" So, that's how we made friends with one another within the industry. And so, I had established a lot of relationships. And then people knew my name, and I knew different people's names. So, I could call to make these introductions. And so, a lot of--during that--from 19--not--1982 is when I began representing Jimmy and Terry. And-- Story_ID: 111808 Speaker 1: Now, tell us what Jimmy [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Lewis] went on to take on under their wings. Speaker 2: Yeah, Jimmy and Terry are most noted for Cherrelle [Cheryl Anne Norton], Alexander O'Neal, SOS Band, Change. Then more so than anything, Janet Jackson. And let's see, I was trying to, I was trying to think. Anyway, just, you know, numerous projects--soundtracks, you know, for films and various things like that. So basically what happens, you know, what I do is I introduce my clients to the people that they need to know. It's like marketing, you know, Marketing 101. You know, but you need to be connected, and your clients have to have hot music, and they have to maintain consistency with it in order to stay with it. You know, the relationships are good and the relationships work. But you've got to, you've got to maintain a certain balance as far as, you know, the music that you're writing. Because it's a business, you know, and it's about making money. And so, you know, if you're delivering hit records, you know, you keep getting projects and you keep making money. Story_ID: 111809 Speaker 1: Okay. Now all in all, we come on up to 2003, and you're in Atlanta [Georgia]. Just tell us now what happened after 2003, and bring us on up to the present as it relates to your life and your career. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, 2003, I think I released my first independent project under Knew Records, which was, you know, this five-- group of five brothers. And I spent literally two years marketing and promoting that project, and preparing to record a second record with them, which we will not be doing a second record with them, unfortunately. But anyway, anyway, preparing for that. And I thought, when I started the record label I thought, okay, I'm not managing any more. You know, this is in consulting. But I'll take my money and invest it, you know, into starting launching this label. Because there was a certain, you know, particular thing that I was trying to get to musically. And you know, I wanted to bridge the gap, and still do, you know, want to bridge the gap between the general market, urban hip-hop, and gospel, by basic stuff, you know, stuff like my mama [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] told me. You know, treat people like you want to be treated, you know. Just, you know, just basic kinds of things, you know. And even, you know, we talked about earlier, you know, Ciara's song like "No Goodies" [sic, "Goodies"]. You know, girls, you don't have to give up the sex, you know what I mean. I have had a career of twenty-seven years, and I have not had to have sex with any man for a job, for a contract, for anything else. You know, and you don't have to do that, you know. You can have relationships with people, you know, if they're real and you want to. But you don't have to, you don't have to give up yourself for that. Story_ID: 111810 Speaker 1: Anyway, okay, let's see. Here we are, 2005. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And our focus now is more on our own intellectual properties. And eight years ago when I started--well, when I went through, you know, the divorce with William and all that stuff, I started on a book called "Confidence or Love" and a feature film. So, I picked those things back up and started working on them. It's real interesting, you know, because we mentioned Tyler Perry, you know, a few times. Everybody's talking about Tyler Perry. You know, this guy, he's so hot, you know what I mean? And the faith, you know, there's a faith-based audience that we know exists. And you know, we had even done some research, you know, eight years ago, because we were putting together a proposal for a Christian distribution center--I'm sorry, a Christian distribution system. Michele Clark Jenkins, who's a girlfriend of mine that I actually met through Dexter King when I first got here, began to put together her ideas. And so, we knew that there was this faith-based market that hadn't been tapped into. And now it's like, you know, the real world meets the faith-based marketplace, you know, with the Tyler Perry films and other things that are coming. And with "Confidence or Love," you know, what I felt was important is that I not live through something like that and not do anything with it. And when I say not do anything with it, that means that, you know, I just like get beat up, kicked, defeated (laughter) and, you know, lose everything--lose all my money and all my property and all that stuff, you know, and just keep living with it. And so, you know, the whole idea is to be able to share the story in a way where people, especially women--you know, I mean we're going to start with "Confidence or Love," you know, as far as women are concerned. But to be able to show women, "You know what? No matter what you go through--you know, you can go through a divorce, you can go through losing everything, you can go through murder, you can go through whatever, you know. But with faith in God, there is hope for tomorrow." So the movie, it's an entertainment. You know, it's all about the entertainment business--tying in my life as far as, you know, the different things that I've done in the entertainment business and bringing, you know, that whole excitement and flavor of the entertainment business, but a much serious, a much more serious story as far as real life--a real life situation where this female music industry executive ends up with an imposter. And he ends up murdering a twenty-two-year-old girl, and then stripping her from everything that she has, and how she overcame. And you know, eventually, you know, hopefully by the Grace of God, it will be a hit, you know, a hit film, and we can do a series deal where we not only talk about "Confidence or Love" from, you know, the female side but also from the male side. And it's interesting, because Terry Cummings, who is a very good friend of mine, and Percy's [Percy Bady] cousin that I met through Percy, you know, years ago, he and I are very close. And actually, he's my spiritual covering. And you know, I was telling him about "Confidence or Love," you know. And he said, "Well, Dina, you know, what about men? You know, because men go through the same thing." And you think about, you know, Kenya West, you know, and his song about gold diggers ["Gold Digger"]. You know, really, and I mean women--you know, I don't know. It seems as though women used to have a reputation, you know, of being the more stable in the relationships, and that kind of thing. But now (laughter), it's like the girls are kind of, you know, the girls are kind of off the chain, you know. And it's like, hey, you know, if the guys can do it, you know, the girls can too. And so the men are feeling the brunt of, you know, the same kind of things that women have been saying. So what we want to do is, you know, do the feature film and then do a series, a television series, where we can have, you know, the stories intertwining. And-- Speaker 2: Now, when do you project that the film will actually be in the marketplace? Speaker 1: Well, we're not sure yet. Kelly [Jackson], my girlfriend here, sitting on the sidelines (laughter) we are, we have been working. We've been writing, and we've actually got to get a script done. And that's, you know, that's one of the first steps, you know, getting the script done and, you know, the same thing we do for the--that I do as a manager, or did as a manager for my clients--finding an agent, you know-- Speaker 2: That's going to come in handy. Speaker 1: --finding a manager, you know, all-- Speaker 2: The skills used now for-- Speaker 1: Exactly-- Speaker 2: --for your own promotions. Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly, exactly. So really, you know, where it is now is, you know, taking, you know, the intellectual properties that are within me and using those things, you know, for, you know, Phase 2. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 111811 Speaker 1: Now, give us the name of your business again. Speaker 2: Knew Beginnings Entertainment. And that's spelled with a 'K,' K-N-E-W. And we, our slogan is "Knowing that it's so." And, you know 'Knew' is K-N-E-W, like you know something, or knew something--past tense, you know, being it into presence. And you know, my thing is like, whatever God says is so, it is going to be. Speaker 1: So, you moved from the music industry. Are you still doing gospel under Knew Beginnings? Or is it going to be film only? Or are you doing gospel and film? Speaker 2: Well, actually, I don't like to categorize the music as far as it being gospel or non-gospel. Basically, I still, I still desire to do music. And I do have some clients. I don't want to forget them, you know, because I have a couple of new clients that I am consulting with, that I'm working with. And they're both from the urban side, you know, and the gospel side. But what I, what I desire to do personally through Knew Beginnings Entertainment is biblical-based principle-oriented kind of projects where, you know, like I said, we're not preaching the Bible. You know, we're not throwing the Bible over your head. But we're instilling some values and principles in the music--having a message in the music, some consciousness to it. And I love urban music. I love hip-hop music, I love the tracks. You know, I mean, Destiny's Child, they had one song out. And gosh, I can't think of the name of it. But it was an up-tempo song, and the track was just hot, you know what I mean? And so I loved, you know, I love, you know the tracks, the music tracks that urban music affords us. You know, but as far as the lyric content, you know, I think that we need to come up. You know, I think we need to become more responsible. And I don't think that it's good enough for us to say, "Well, you know, I'm making money off of this." You know, it's like you might be making money off of it, but is this the same thing you're telling your kids at home? You know, and it's like for these young kids who are out in the, you know, in the hood listening to this stuff and believing it--you know, it's like even with reality TV, you know, it's like people, they actually believe it. I mean, you know, I will talk to people who call me on the phone sometimes just to see what it is that they think, and what it is that they believe. And they believe that stuff, you know. So, I think we have to become more responsible. And it's not just about money. Because the thing is, if you are an artist and you are selling millions of records and you are a multi-millionaire, you have power. And you don't have to succumb to, you know, "bitch," "ho," you know, and all of that. You don't have to do that. Because the record company, as long as you are making hit records and you're making them money, and you tell them "Hey, you know what? I don't want to do that. You know, I'm not doing that; I've got a different kind of message." As long as you've got a consumer base, they'll do it. You know, but what we do is we say "Oh, you know, well, so-and-so said, "Well, we've got to do this this way." Or "This is how I'm making money." You know, but what about your community? You know, what about the kids? You know, what about the kids who don't have multi-million-- Speaker 1: So, you're saying that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You're saying to hold them accountable. Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: And to let them know that there is a flip side-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: --to what's being pitched-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --by the-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --by the media. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Because subliminally, some messages, lots of messages, are being transmitted across-- Speaker 2: Blatantly, blatantly, you know. You got women on--you know, I mean and girls. You know, y'all don't have to do all that. You don't have to be--that's not cute. You know-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: It's not. You know what I mean, it's not. And what do you do, what do you do beyond twenty years old, or twenty-five years old, half-naked, or three-quarters naked, in a video, humping on a pole with your ass out? (Laughter). Okay, and I'm sorry. You know, it's like what do you do beyond that, you know? I mean, where is it going to take you? You know, I mean, you've got to think about it. Speaker 1: And that's one of the reasons why you moved away from-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: --hip-hop-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to do something-- Speaker 1: --urban music? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 111812 Speaker 1: And I mean it's not moving away from it. Because I still, I still consider it urban music, but urban music with a consciousness. It's like I don't want to do gospel. I don't need to do church. We've got enough people doing praise and worship. We've got enough people, you know, talking about Jesus. You know, but where are the people that are just living? It's like, just be. Just be who you are, you know. And so, that's my whole thing. You know, it's like--and so I do know with the film projects, you know, with the television... music is involved, you know. And yeah, I mean I still want to break new artists; I still want to break new songwriter/producers. And so, as the vehicles become available, there are certain people, you know, that I'm working with right now that I'll pull into. There are new people that will come along. There are people that are already established, you know. Buster [Louis "Buster" Brown, III] and Shavoni [Scott "Shavoni" Parker], you know, they're real good friends of mine, multi-platinum producers, you know. They did the "Prince of Egypt" soundtrack. They did Yolanda Adams. They've done a lot of things, you know. I mean, we come from the same place. We think the same; we have the same values. You know, so I mean there are people out there who do the type of music that I want to do, and its urban music. You know, it's urban, it's hip-hop. But it's just, there's some consciousness in what it is that we're saying. And that's all, you know. And that's the thing that I feel like we need to be change agents. So, yes, I'll continue with the music. But the film and the television, that's an open door; that's a new arena. It's a new, you know, medium for me--well, kinda new. I mean, because I was in television for a brief period of time. And even, you know, even more than Suzanne de Passe over at Motown Productions. Fred Tatasciore [ph.] Productions, I did some things with them. You know, so there were some different things. But it's like, you know, over the years you do so much. And you're just living, and things are just moving, and you forget all the things that do. But at this particular point in life, you know, I want to be, I want to make a difference, you know, in our culture, in our society with the music that we produce--the movies, the films, the television, entertainment overall. Story_ID: 111813 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Is there anything else you'd like to add, or something I didn't ask? Speaker 2: Um, you asked so many questions. (Laughter). You asked so many questions. You asked more than I wanted to tell. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, no. You know, no. I guess, you know, I just feel like, you know, we're making history every day. You know, and we just don't even know it. And you know, as we, you know, move along, you know, in life I just feel like, you know, we should be cognizant of what is that we're doing, you know, and what we're doing and who we're doing it with, and how we're doing it, you know. Speaker 1: And I think you've reiterated this one that I'm about to ask now in numerous statements throughout the interview. But for those going into--and I'm going to say the entertainment industry--doing what you're doing. What advice, or what suggestions do you have for them? Speaker 2: First, I think you should learn as much about the business as you can--everything, you know, from reading contracts and having the understanding of them to the economics of it--you know, deal structures, how budgets flow. Familiarize yourself with the people not only who are presently, you know, movers and shakers, but those who came before you. We don't like to burn bridges. You know, it's like the industry is very small. And you know, as long as you're, you know, there's this philosophy that as long as you are selling records and you've got hits, people will tolerate ignorance because you're making money for them. But beyond your ability to create hit songs and make music for a company, nobody has to tolerate you. And so, it's very important that you don't believe your own hype, and you don't, you know, get caught up in the glamour of it all, the lifestyle that it affords you. And you take it seriously because it's a serious business. And you respect people. You know, you respect people and, you know, you try to treat people well. You know, it doesn't always come back. You know, and that's the thing I was thinking about. You know, my mama [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] used to always say, you know, you treat people like you want to be treated. Well, just because you treat people well doesn't mean that they're going to treat you well. But you keep being who you are, and somewhere along the line, it's going to turn around. It's going to come back, you know, and you're going to find that you have friends in places--I mean you can't survive in the business for 25, 26, 27 years by being a jerk, you know, by being an idiot. You know, so you have to be careful, you know. You've got to be careful what battles that you choose to fight, you know what I mean. You can go around suing everybody; you can go around, you know, cursing and acting a fool. You can feel like, you know, "Hey, I'm the hottest thing in the industry right now, so I'm going to, you know, I'm going to do what I want and say what I want." But, you know, you've got to get along. You know, because really it's teamwork. And the way that the business is designed, I mean it was designed for everybody to be able to make money--from the artists to the executives to the record companies. But, but most creative people don't understand it. And I look at the music industry, and I look at the sports industry. And generally, in the sports industry, your athletes have graduated from college. They were required to go through college. They graduate from college and they play professional sports, you know. Now and then, you know, you have a few who don't go to college, you know, who slipped through. But they're generally, they've got a different kind of academic foundation. With the music industry, you have people who are mad creative who are generally uneducated. They don't want to become educated, they just want to do their craft. And so, you know, everything--and you know, we wonder why everything is so crazy--why, you know, somebody's talking about suing somebody; why somebody's not honoring their contract; why somebody's filing bankruptcy to try to get out of a contract, or whatever. In most cases, the artist didn't take the time to understand to the best of their ability, you know, what the contract said. If they had an understanding, they felt like, well, hey, I can get out of this anyway, you know, because I'll go file bankruptcy or I'll, you know, file a federal lawsuit or I'll do whatever. I'll lie, I'll whatever. You know, and so I just think that, you know, people--you know, we need to overall become more responsible, and we need to treat it better. And even for consumers, you know, downloading songs, you know, swapping CD's, you know, not paying for them. I mean, you know, that's why the music industry, the music industry is a wreck right now. You know, we've got a lot of sales; we've had a lot of mergers; we've had a lot of downsizing. And you know, so I just say to people, you know, just, you know, stop and think. It's like, you know, we do this for our livelihood. You know, this is our living, and this is how we eat, you know. And just, you know, just be more responsible, you know. Story_ID: 110269 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: I don't know. As it stands, people think of me as someone who helps other people. And I enjoy, you know, being able to help and support other people. One of my girlfriends, Gale, that I went to high school [William Workman High School in City of Industry, California] with, she sees me as resilient, like a lot of other people. My stepsister, Rhonda, she says "Dina, you're the only person I know who can just, like, take yourself totally out of the industry and then you're right back in it. (Laughter). You know, so I guess if people just see me, you know, just as, you know, a good person who loved folks and who made a positive impact in encouraging and motivating other people, that's good enough for me. Story_ID: 110270 Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I never thought about it. I guess, I don't know. I don't know--training, training young people. I don't know, loving my family. You know, just the things I do and I am. You know, I mean it's like forty-seven years in, and it's like, just to be remembered, you know, for the things that I've done and, you know, from the heart. You know, not, not that I think, I think the business stuff is kind of superficial. And that's why I don't--it's like you asked me about different things that happened. I don't remember a lot of that stuff. You know, I mean, you know, I've traveled. You know, I've met a lot of people--Muhammad Ali, the greatest man... What does he say, "The greatest of all times," you know. Speaker 1: "I'm the greatest." Speaker 2: You know, [HM] Reverend Jesse Jackson when he was running for president, you know. But it's like, you know, those things are great, but I just--you know, I'd rather people see me as someone who just loved people and, you know, was a good person. Speaker 1: Well, we want to thank you, and thank you for being so gracious with your time. And we want to thank you for the life that you've lived. So, now we'll move on to the recording of the photos. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 110271 Speaker 1: That is me and my brother, Mark [Andrews]. And I think we may have been like four and five years old, or something like that. My grandmother [her great-aunt, Katheryn Johnson] and my mother [Vera Olivia Jackson Andrews] used to dress us alike and, you know, we used to do the little family pictures. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead, next. Speaker 1: And that's my mommy. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: That's my father [Eugene Ellis Andrews]. Speaker 2: Do you remember what year? Speaker 1: Ooh, nope. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Probably in the, probably in the early, probably, you know, I'm thinking the nineties [1990s], maybe either the late eighties [1980s] or early nineties [1990s] maybe. Speaker 2: And that's in California, or where? Speaker 1: California. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that is my mommy. And I think, gosh, my mom was probably about thirty-five, I guess. Let me see. Speaker 2: Do you remember the occasion? Speaker 1: We were taking family portraits. There's another one that's going to come up. Speaker 2: Okay, next photo, please. Who is this right here? Speaker 1: That is me at one of our photo-shoots for one of our artist. I think that's a Shalamar photo shoot with the photographer and the art director, back in the SOLAR [Records, Sound of Los Angeles Records] days. Speaker 2: Okay great, next. Speaker 1: And that is me and Mr. Muhammad Ali. We were at the SOLAR offices. I think that was the first day that he came there. And Dick Griffey [Richard "Dick" Griffey] took him around to all of, you know, gave him a tour, and he stopped in my office. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that is Dina. That's, I don't know, that's one of my professional publicity shots for business. And probably, what year? I think that was before Atlanta [Georgia]. It was before I moved to Atlanta. Come on Dina, what year? Maybe, I don't know, mid-eighties [1980s], I think. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that is Dina when she was a little girl, probably, I don't know, probably about three or four. Classic black and white. Speaker 2: Okay, good, next. Speaker 1: And that's Dina. (Laughter). Oh, gosh, how old was I there? Probably about nine, I guess. Speaker 2: And was that, what school were you in? Speaker 1: Probably, it was probably Manchester [Avenue] Elementary [School in Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead, next. Oh, did you describe this one? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, good. Next one, please. Speaker 2: And that is my stepmother and sister, Delfrancis [ph.] and Andrea. That was Gene's second wife and daughter. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Could you give us the description one more time. Speaker 1: That's Delfrancis and Andrea, my stepmother and--okay, forget it. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that's me and Mark again around that, I guess three or four year old age. Speaker 2: That's one heck of a frame there. Hold on one second. Okay, go ahead, next. Speaker 1: Okay. And that is me and Biggie [Katheryn Johnson]. That was after [Aunt] Lisa died. Well, actually, we had those three deaths in our family. We took a cruise to the Virgin Islands and the Bahamas, and somewhere. So, that was us on the cruise ship. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's another picture of us on the cruise ship with one of the guys who worked on the ship. Speaker 2: You've got a lot of those cruise pictures, right? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: That is my bunny rabbit. That's Lisa. Speaker 1: And Lisa was-- Speaker 2: Lisa is Tiffany's [ph.] baby. That's the one that God told us to bring into the earth, and not abort. How about that? Speaker 1: Okay, good, next. Speaker 2: And that is my girlfriend. That's my oldest girlfriend. That's Kathy [ph.] and her former husband, Ronnie. And Kathy and I went to junior high school together that first half of the seventh at Bret Harte [Preparatory Middle School in Los Angeles, California]. Kathy and I became friends, and we've been friends ever since. And I'm the godmother to her daughters. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: And that is Mark. That's Mark as a man, and his wife, Debra [ph.], my sister-in-law. Speaker 1: And that's your younger brother? Speaker 2: That's my older brother. Speaker 1: Older brother, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: And that is my Uncle Virgil [ph.]. That's my mother's only brother that she and her--well, actually they've got stepbrothers and sisters, but they were really the only two with the same mom and dad. Speaker 1: Hold on please. Okay, next, go ahead. Speaker 2: And that is Biggie, my grandmother about, probably about in the eighties, I guess, something like that. Speaker 1: And Biggie raised your mother, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Along with her-- Speaker 2: Yeah, with her grandfather. Speaker 1: And that- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Go ahead with your description. Speaker 2: And that is Arthur [Casperson]; that's my younger brother. And I think that's his graduation picture from high school in like 19-- early eighties [1980s], I guess. Speaker 1: And how many years younger is he? Speaker 2: He's eight years younger. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's Dina in Atlanta [Georgia] in 1996. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead, next. Speaker 2: That is Jimmy's birthday party somewhere around in- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. That's Jimmy's [HM James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] birthday party I think somewhere about 1984. (unclear), a model, in the middle. You may still see her and Howard Hewett [Jr.] from Shalamar. Let me see, Reggie Andrews, our producer, back in one corner. And I think that's, is that Ndugu Chancler [Leon "Ndugu" Chancler] behind Howard? So, anyway we had a big surprise birthday party for him. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm going to do my mother. Speaker 1: Is that it? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Right here, no, right here. And then I've a Dick Griffey and Muhammad Ali picture in there. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, just tell us about your mother. Speaker 1: Okay. That's my mom, that's my mom. I think that was probably in the eighties [1980s] as well. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. That's a family picture with my grandmother, my mother, my Aunt Lisa that got killed, my brother, Mark and me. Speaker 2: Okay, next please. Speaker 1: And that is, that's the SOLAR staff after we started growing. Regina Griffey, Dick's daughter, my best friend, Niles [ph.]; Clyde Wasson's sister who worked there, he was the general manager. And Jan, and Cheryle Appling who started, it was me and Cheryle. And then Margaret Nash who was in publishing, and who was my boss. And Margaret died in a car accident. Speaker 2: Okay, approximate date? Speaker 1: That was, let me see, 197-- probably 1980, '81 [1981], something like that. Speaker 2: Go ahead, next. Speaker 1: And that's me and Ray Parker, Jr., and that's in the early eighties [1980s]. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That is me preparing, working with The Whispers at one of their photo shoots in the early eighties [1980s]. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: And that's Dick Griffey and Muhammad Ali. And I don't remember what that party--it was a party that Dick Griffey hosted. And I'm not sure if it was for [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson's presidential campaign or what. But anyway, it was some event that Griffey did. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: And then that's me and Muhammad Ali at the party that Mr. Griffey gave. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: And those are, those are my girls that I inherited. Tamika [ph.], Tiffany [ph.], Tracey [ph.], and that's A.J. A.J. was the first baby that came after I had left Los Angeles [California]. He's ten years old now...