 Story_ID: 223000 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: It's Melvin Eugene Banks. Melvin, M-E-L-V-I-N, Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Banks, B-A-N-K-S. Speaker 1: Do you have any nicknames? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October 15, 1934, Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. And Sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a publisher. Speaker 1: All right. You're a publisher, and a little bit more, isn't it? Speaker 2: Well, founder and publisher of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the company called Urban Ministries, Incorporated. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Are you a minister as well? Speaker 2: Yes, I am. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I am an ordained member of a little church called Westlawn Gospel Chapel [Chicago, Illinois]. It's an independent church, so it doesn't have the ring of some of the major denominations, but that's where I belong. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: September 1st, I believe, isn't it, 2004. Speaker 1: It's the 2nd [September 2, 2004], I think. Speaker 2: The 2nd, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're located in the headquarters, facilities of Urban Ministries, which is located at 1551 Regency [Court], in Calumet City, Illinois. Story_ID: 223001 Speaker 1: All right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Probably sweet potatoes (laughter), cooked in a certain way. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Blue is my favorite color. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: That's a good question. Each one has its own distinctions--every one but the winter. So, probably spring and fall would be my best--I'm more like a temperature man, you know. About 68 or 70 [degrees], whenever the temperature is in that range, I'm happy. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. In fact, I don't take too many vacations. I suppose it would be south, where the humidity is low. But not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't think of anything in particular that--other people might think I have one, but I cannot identify something that I would call my favorite, or characteristic of me. Story_ID: 223002 Speaker 1: Well, I'd like to pursue your family history. And I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Jerry Banks] side of the family. We'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Her maiden name was Survilla, S-U-R-V-I-L-L-A, Survilla Ellis, E-L-L-I-S. And you asked her name and-- Speaker 1: Her full name, and I want you to spell it for us. You did that anyway. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in 1903. And I am not certain--it was in Alabama, probably Eutaw [Alabama]. I think that's where the family came from. So, someplace in that area. Speaker 1: How do you spell Eutaw, Alabama? Speaker 2: I think it's E-U-T-A-W. Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I thought, all right. What do you know about her side of the family? How far can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Just the immediate family I think, pretty much. Her parents, of course, were my grandparents. So, I was aware of them. Their names were Lemuel, L-E-M-U-E-L and Clement, C-L-E-M-E-N-T, Clement Ellis. And so, I know them. They had like thirteen children, and my mother was the second oldest in that family. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any stories from that side of the family about life in the 19th century? Or, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, let me see. I know a little bit of my own experience with them. They actually, my grandparents actually reared me up until about age eight. That's because my mother had lived away from the town teaching in one of the rural schools down there. So, my grandparents reared me. And my--I recall my grandfather was a very stern type person who didn't take any stuff. My grandmother was, of course, very accommodating. And I can recall as a child that he always wanted a dessert with his dinner. And if she had nothing more than a penny, I can recall her telling me, "[HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], take this penny," because a penny would buy something then, "go to the store and buy an apple." And she would take that apple and make him a dessert, because she just, she knew that he wanted some kind of dessert with every meal. That was the kind of person he was. She was of course a very giving type of person, and took care of my sister [Margaret Banks] and me while my mother was away teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did they--so, they didn't talk about any--there's no talk in the family about slavery or about-- Speaker 2: I never heard any discussion about slavery. I do recall my grandmother telling me on one occasion--there was an old song that apparently was a slave song, talking about "Old John Henry, that old hammer killed John Henry." And I can recall my grandmother saying, "Don't sing that." And I never knew why she would say that, but she always stopped me from--I heard somebody singing it, and I picked it up, but there was something about it that said to me, "No, you don't sing that." But I don't know the significance of why I wasn't supposed to sing it (laughter). Speaker 1: Was it because it was a song out of slavery, that she didn't want you to sing it? Speaker 2: I suspected that was it. But I, I was so young at the time that I could not put any, you know, interpretation on why I wasn't supposed to sing it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did your grandparents do for a living? Speaker 2: My grandfather, in the early days when I was not around, I was told that he and his oldest son worked on a boat that used to go up and down the river there in Alabama. But when I was conscious of his work, he worked for a grocery distribution company. He drove a truck to deliver groceries around to stores around Birmingham [Alabama] and that was his work. She, my grandmother, never worked, to my knowledge. But that's what he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 223003 Speaker 1: So, did your mother [Survilla Ellis Banks] tell you, talk about growing up? Or what do you know about your mother's growing up [in Eutaw, Alabama]? Speaker 2: I never heard a lot. I hear her sisters and her siblings, of course, just talk about how good she was, how nice she was, that she was kind of a nice person in the family. But details of her early life, I do not recall any--offhand I cannot recall any specific stories about her. Speaker 1: But she had a chance to go to school and everything, right? Because she taught school. Speaker 2: Yes, and my assumption was that it was like through high school. Down there, you could teach in rural areas, even if you didn't have a college education. So, I, my assumption is that she had a high school education and a teacher's certificate, which enabled her to teach school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you raised in Birmingham [Alabama], or were you raised in-- Speaker 2: I was raised in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, I was born there on First Street, that's what they tell me. And the house still stands there in Titusville, Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've been by it, because we still have the house in Titusville, kind of a homestead. Well, it wouldn't be a homestead, because the place where I was born was probably the homestead. But the family lost that one, but it stands there in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, your mother, did she teach in Birmingham? Speaker 2: She taught out from, away from Birmingham. So, she was not living in the place where I was living in those early years. But after, after my grandmother [Clement Ellis] passed away, my grandfather [Lemuel Ellis] felt that--I guess there must have been a half a dozen kids still living there--that these kids needed to make their own way, so to speak. So, my mother took me and my sister [Margaret Banks], and got a house for us to stay in when I was about nine years old. Story_ID: 223004 Speaker 1: Now, tell us, give us your father's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Jerry Banks. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was his date of birth? Speaker 2: I do not know. Oh, I do have a birth certificate. I think he was a year older than my mother [Survilla Ellis Banks]. So, I think, I can safely say he was born about 1902. Speaker 1: Okay. Was he born in the same region [Eutaw, Alabama]? Speaker 2: In central Alabama, although whether it was the same town where she was, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Not much. In fact, to my knowledge, I only saw my father once. They got divorced; they were married when I was born, but they got divorced. And of course they were together when my sister [Margaret Banks]--I have an older sister--when she was born. But soon after I was born, apparently is when they separated. So I never, I saw him once when he came to our house. And I guess I must have been two or three years old at the time, and somebody said, "[HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], there's your father." But apart from that, I don't recall ever seeing him. I grew up without the benefit of a father, as such. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he live in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: No, he lived down where--they lived together someplace in central Alabama, but I am not sure of the town. And soon after, I believe my mother was pregnant with me when she came back to Birmingham. Because I was born in Birmingham, and he stayed there. He was a farmer, to my recollection. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there any story about how they met or anything? Speaker 2: No. It's, no, I have no recollection and no stories of how they met, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 223005 Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about growing up. What's your first childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably the thing that I can recall is, I must have been around four, I guess three or four. And my cousin and I, who was about my age, a year or two younger, were at our grandmother's [Clement Ellis] house. And she had some kind of meeting where people had come together, the ladies had come together. And we were back in the kitchen, and we had a cabinet that had shelves on either side, and they connected at the top. And while she was having her meeting, my cousin went up one side of the cabinets and I went up the other side. And we got about halfway up, and the cabinet fell over on us. (Laughter) And I recall my grandmother coming in there and said, "You just wait until my company leaves." (Laughter) That's one of my earliest recollections of a child, growing up in my folks' home. Speaker 1: Yeah, that should make a big impression. I mean, from what you described (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) The other early recollection--and again I can't get the dates exactly right, but probably about the same time was--I mentioned my grandfather [Lemuel Ellis] was very stern. He came home one evening, and for some reason he was upset. And he went outside and got a piece of a tree limb, and chased everybody out of the house. And then he put the tree limb next to his bed and went to sleep. (Laughter) And my grandmother waited until he was asleep, and she took us all back into the house. But I never forgot the fear I experienced when he chased everybody out the house. Because for whatever--I don't know what he was upset about. That was, again, one of my early experiences. Story_ID: 223006 Speaker 1: Now, what side of town did you all--I mean was there a black section of Birmingham [Alabama], or were people scattered all over? What did they call your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, I lived in Titusville [Birmingham, Alabama], initially. I was born in Titusville, and I moved to several other communities within Birmingham, but I started out in Titusville. Speaker 1: Now, that's what--a lot of people might pronounce it-- Speaker 2: Some say "Tytusville." Speaker 1: Some say "Tytusville"-- Speaker 2: It was named after, you know, one of the Roman generals, Titus. Speaker 1: Okay. But they call it "Titus" down there? Speaker 2: Yeah, down there, they do. Outsiders, they call it-- Speaker 1: Titus. Speaker 2: --something else, but they call it "Tittusville" in Birmingham, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's the area of town--were black folks congregated in one part of town, or were they all over the place? Speaker 2: They were in several places. As a rule, the city was divided. And of course, in my early years it was difficult, because you know my little circle was probably just in Titusville. So, I was not as conscious of the whole city, but I was aware that there was a boundary beyond which white folks lived. So, yeah, I'm sure you could regard it as segregated. However, many times the white family might have a little house in back where a black maid stayed. And so you had some of that, or a yard man that stayed. So you had some of that, so it wasn't entirely separated. But for the most part, you had your white sections and you had your black sections of Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay. In a town like Birmingham, there were probably a lot of black people living in town, I would guess. Speaker 2: I think even back then, although I don't know the statistics, the majority of the town was probably black, and the white people lived both in Birmingham and perhaps some of the suburbs. Of course, they controlled everything, but I, my guess is--because we lived in like at least three sections of Birmingham, and all of them were totally black. I lived in Titusville, and Sipico [ph.] and Collegeville [Birmingham, Alabama], and those were all black areas with whites kind of around them. In my memory, they were like around the periphery of Birmingham and certain sections of Birmingham, that's my recollection. Story_ID: 223007 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 2: Well, there was a steel mill in one of the communities where I lived. And the sulfur fumes I can recall, and the smoke, because we lived not too far from that. So, those--and you also had the residue that would settle down over the community. And so, I can recall those sounds and those smells. But also there was a whistle that would blow for lunch every day. And I can still remember that whistle blowing, and everybody would stop and go eat lunch for half an hour and then back to work. That's, that would, that's one piece of my early memories of sights and sounds down in Birmingham [Alabama]. I'm trying to think if Birmingham itself, I mean, if Titusville itself--I do not recall any sights. We lived not far from Red Mountain. And on top of Red Mountain there was what we called an iron man. But it was a, it was a, I believe it was a Roman general whose image was erected there. And you could see this man, iron man, from a distance. And from anyplace, anywhere close in that community you could look up and see this iron man erected on top of this mountain. Speaker 1: Was this supposed to be Titus, the general? Speaker 2: It probably was, although I was so little and didn't at that time, you know, didn't pursue--as a kid, it was just the iron man (laughter). Speaker 1: And Red Mountain, was that because of the red dirt? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a lot of red dirt. In fact, my grandmother [Clement Ellis] used to eat red clay, and I was delegated to go and find her some good red clay sometimes. And you looked in the side of a place which had been hewn out and get her some red dirt-- Story_ID: 223008 Speaker 1: Now, this is something that, this is one of the oddest things I think I heard about when I was a kid, when I realized that people actually did this. But a lot of people from the South, like, send back for bags of red dirt and eat it, you know, women, especially, pregnant women would eat this red dirt. What do you make of that, you know, during, you know--? Speaker 2: Well, it was kind of a, you know, my guess is--I don't think--I might have tasted a little bit. But my guess is it was like a snack. And I'm not sure if there was any medicinal value to the red dirt, and I don't know where it sprang from--whether it's something that the people there came up with, or whether it was handed down from some previous generations. But I guess the very fact that you don't find red dirt everywhere, red clay, suggests that it probably originated in that area. But of course, again, perhaps even because of the poverty of the area, people would tend to look for things that could fill the stomach. And it is conceivable that that's the, that could be the origin of it. But I don't, I can't be sure about where it came from. Speaker 1: You know, some have speculated that because it has high iron content, you know-- Speaker 2: And that could very well be. Speaker 1: --and makes a red-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it could very well be. But I do recall being asked to go out from time to time and buy, get some clay for her [Banks' maternal grandmother, Clement Ellis]. The other thing that I recall is both my mother [Survilla Ellis Banks], and I think my grandmother, too, they used to dip snuff. And I would be asked to go and buy them a box of snuff. (Laughter) And my grandfather [Lemuel Ellis] chewed tobacco, and that was pretty common down in that part of the South. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what, now, we used to see, when I was a kid I used to see signs in the black community in Dayton [Ohio] on the side of the stores that would say things like "Willie Mays uses Alaga Syrup." (Laughter) Was Alaga Syrup a big thing in Alabama? Speaker 2: It sure was. That was my grandfather's favorite, and sorghum. And I think the sorghum was a greater delicacy for him, but the family in general would--Alaga Syrup was the syrup there in the South. And of course another favorite of his was, especially when he lost his teeth, was to eat pig brains, (laughter) because they were soft. And he would take them and mix them with scrambled eggs and made, I can recall him enjoying pig brains and scrambled eggs. Speaker 1: I've heard that, too, scrambled brains and eggs. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah. I had them too, they weren't too bad. (Laughter) It was my first--and they used to, of course they used to drink coffee. And it seems so--because they would drink coffee and they would say, "Oh, how delicious this is." And I recall once, I said, "Boy, they seem to be enjoying it so. Let me try some." I tasted that coffee and it was so bitter. I said, "What in the world are you folks drinking?" (Laughter) But that was, you know, a little kid, that's how he reacts. And my grandfather would never take anything in his coffee, no cream, no sugar. He'd say to folks, "I want coffee, not pie." And that was his preference on coffee. Story_ID: 223009 Speaker 1: When you think of Alabama lore in the North, you think of also gospel music and some of the, I mean, Birmingham [Alabama] is the home of the Five Blind Boys, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the Mighty Clouds of Joy, are they from there, too? Speaker 2: Yes, I believe so, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And we used to enjoy, you know, even as a kid, I enjoyed those quartets. In fact, you know, we'd go around wherever we found that they were singing, and I would be one of those who would go and listen to them. There was also the group that came over the radio, Wings Over Jordan. And while I learned to like their music initially, you know, it seemed too--my folks enjoyed it, and it seemed, like, better. But after a while, I began to realize that Wings Over Jordan had some good music. And so that was also one of the groups. And of course, as time went on, when gospel music began to take the place of quartet music and more women got involved in singing, and mixed groups sang more, I would--in fact our little community had a little singing group that I was a part of when I was in one of the communities down there in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Now, you made a distinction between gospel and quartet music. And I think the Five Blind Boys, I guess they would be a quartet? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There's a certain style that seems to come from Alabama. You know, even though I don't like to get myself in these things, I had neighbors across the street that were part of a group from the Sunlight Baptist Church in Dayton [Ohio] that had a singing group, I mean, a quartet. And they practiced all the time. They practiced like the Five Blind Boys' repertoire. And on the, you know, pieces, there's real distinctive music. Speaker 2: And of course it was, it was, basically it was composed of four people, that's why they call them quartets. And for the most part, they had no accompaniment. It was like, you know, they were patting their feet, or clapping on the side of their hands or, I can remember one way of doing--they had something they called "calank, calank, calank," which was like a beat that enabled them to keep up with the music. But that was, basically, my earliest recollection probably was of quartet music. And then this transition--of course, there were spirituals that were sung, black spirituals, Negro spirituals as they were called. And they were a combination slave song and kind of the blues, singing about the desperate situation people were in, and trying to find some comfort in the midst of sorrow. So, those seemed to have been both the spirituals--I guess my--if I--I could be wrong, but the sense is that the spirituals were first, and then came the quartet music, and then came the gospel music. And the gospel music was a more freeing type of singing, where you could, you could, an individual could shine within the group. You know, the larger group was like background, and a lead singer would be out front to be more expressive, and sing usually about heaven and that sort of thing, but often about problems that people were facing, but how God could help to deal with their problems. But I could kind of see that evolution. And I guess I can see it better as I look back--evolution of music over a period of time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 223010 Speaker 1: What church did your family attend when you were coming up? Speaker 2: My mother [Survilla Ellis Banks] went to a spiritual church, and not a--I have to distinguish between a spiritual and a Spiritualist--a spiritual church. They believed in seeing and receiving visions. In the dark sometimes I can recall my being in that kind of a setting, once or twice anyway. And women would be doing the preaching. They were free to preach, I should say, during that time. And I was very young, probably seven or under when I was a part of, when I went to that church; that's where my mother was. And then when I accepted Christ and became a Christian when I was about nine years old, I went to a, what would be called a Brethren Assembly Church. The brother who led me to the Lord started a little church there. And I was a member of his church, which was like an independent group that was not a very big church. But that's where I went until I was around eleven years old, then I joined a Baptist church so I moved to a different community. Story_ID: 223011 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself growing up? Now, you grew up in a household with your--it was your [maternal] grandparents [Lemuel Ellis and Clement Ellis] and your sister [Margaret Banks]? Speaker 2: Yeah, up until I was about eight years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at eight or nine years old, that's when my grandmother passed away, and my grandfather wanted each child to make it on his own. And that's when my mother [Survilla Ellis Banks]--well, first, I guess we moved, two or three of the siblings moved into the house. But it didn't, that didn't last too long. My mother took us, her children, and we moved into Collegeville, which was North Birmingham [Alabama]. And that's where I finished grammar school, at that school in Collegeville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I started at [Booker T.] Washington [School; Booker T. Washington K-8 School] in Titusville [Birmingham, Alabama], and then when we started to move, I moved over and went to another school just for half a semester until we got into Collegeville. Speaker 1: Now, what was the school in Titusville that you attended? Speaker 2: It was Washington School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was where I started. Speaker 1: And then you moved-- Speaker 2: We moved to-- Speaker 1: Collegeville? Speaker 2: Yes. And interestingly enough, I cannot remember the name of the grammar school I graduated from right now. Speaker 1: Okay, but was in Collegeville? Speaker 2: It was in Collegeville, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, can you describe yourself as a little kid, I mean, as a little boy? What kind of child were you? I mean, and what did you like to do? Speaker 2: Well, let me see. As a youngster, I guess I played with kids. I can recall over in Collegeville at least, we didn't have many toys. And we used to take automobile tires and roll them, and that was our fun. And sometimes we'd play inside of a tire, and somebody would roll you. That was, that was our play. I was fairly studious in school, did my homework. So, I was considered one of the better students in our class. And once we moved into Collegeville and I went to this little Bible class that my mother found out about, that's where I really learned that Jesus loved me, and what it meant to become a Christian. It was from that point on that I started to go to that little Bible class about three times a week. It was held three times a week because kids had nothing else to do. So, the lady who had this class opened up her home so we could come and be there. I would spend time there, and of course at school, doing my homework after school-- Story_ID: 223012 Speaker 1: My mother [Survilla Ellis Banks], for the most part, even when we lived in Collegeville [Birmingham, Alabama], had to stay--well, she was working for some white people, and they wanted her during the day, during the week. She stayed there and came home on weekends. So, like she would be there from Monday to Friday, something like that, and then she'd come home. And my sister [Margaret Banks] and me and my cousins stayed at the house. And we found that we were poor, it was a poor area. So, we didn't have a lot. And there was a little store across the street that would let us have some credit, and we found ourselves going there during the week to get food. And we would do the cooking, just my sister and my cousin and I. And my mother would come home on the weekends. And she'd sort of manage us by telephone. We had a telephone, and she would call us and find out how we were doing. "And [HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], you stop doing that. And Marvin [ph.], you do this," that kind of thing, even while she was away. And that was part of my life. Speaker 2: Now, your sister is older than you, right? Speaker 1: Yes, but she's passed away now. Yes, she's two older-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --almost two years older. Speaker 2: So when you were eight, she would have been ten. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: And your cousin was how old? Speaker 1: Was like eight, because he was a year younger than me. Speaker 2: So, that was young; there were some young kids in the household. Speaker 1: Right. When you stop to think about it--and I'm not sure how long that went on, probably maybe a year, that's my best guess. Then my mother started taking in children, and having a little nursery school where she managed that for a while, and she was home more. But I do recall that period where she was not there, and would come home on weekends to look after us. Speaker 2: Well, how did you all feel--well, how did you feel about that when you were, like, by yourself? Speaker 1: It was just the way it was. And now that I look back, I never thought about that until you said it, that we were--how old we were, and during the week by ourselves. (Laughter) But that was, we managed. And that's interesting that we were only eight to ten or eleven years when that was going on. Speaker 2: Did you know any other family that had a similar situation? Speaker 1: Not really. And of course we lived in what was called a double tenant house, where we lived on one side, and another family lived on the other side. And the lady next door would kind of look out after us to some degree, not really try to be a parent, but she was there and we had a good relationship with her. So, I guess that sort of helped us. And then there was another family two doors down. The head of the house was a minister, and we got to know that family. And so it was to some degree like a community. There was a house across the street where my mother knew the folks, and they would kind of look in on us from time to time. So, now that I look back and put the pieces together, it was like a village taking care of us while my mother was away. Speaker 2: Now, did you all know how to go to sleep on time and that sort of thing when your mother was gone? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, pretty much. Because you know, when it got dark--and I guess we did have electric light, but you just knew that it was time to turn in. Yeah, that's--I guess we were in that sense kind of mature. And then she would check on us, you know, from time to time. But I never thought about the fact that we were that young when that was going on. So, yeah, that's the way it was. Speaker 2: So, this is like about 1940, I guess almost, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, it would have to be in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Forty--yeah, in fact, early '40s [1940s]. Forty-two [1942], '43 [1943]-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah, '42 [1942], yep, right. Story_ID: 223013 Speaker 1: In fact, I can recall when they said the war [World War II, WWII] was over. We were just there and all the whistles were blowing, saying that the Second World War had ended. Speaker 2: Did you know any men that had gone off to war? Speaker 1: I had a couple of uncles that went. And one of them lost his life in, he was in the [U.S.] Air Force, or the--what's the part where you jump out? Speaker 2: Parachute? Speaker 1: Parachute, right, yeah. And I'll never forget when he came home on furlough once, and one of his sisters said--and his name Lem, Jr., "Lem, what do you do when that parachute doesn't open?" He said, "Oh, we just take it back and get another one" (laughter). But he lost his life, and they gave some other excuse, but we're pretty sure that it was because he was jumping, yeah, right. But yeah, the war ended while we were staying there in Collegeville [Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Now, did you have a radio there when you all were growing up? Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, we had radios. And I don't know whether we had one in our house. I can't recall, but you know, radios back then were not as plentiful as they were, as they became. But I believe, as I recall, I think we did have some kind of a radio, yeah. But, of course everybody was talking about the fact that the war was over, you know. Story_ID: 223014 Speaker 1: You grew up during the Joe Louis era, right? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, yeah, when that was the--that was the big event, when Joe Louis fought. And you could--there wasn't a person out on the street when his fight was being broadcast over the radio. And of course, Joe Louis was the hero of the whole black community, so people were pulling for him like mad. And I can't recall who he was fighting, but he lost. And we kept thinking he was going to pull it off at the last minute, but he never did. Speaker 1: Okay. Are you talking about the early, the fight with Max Schmeling in Germany, or the-- Speaker 2: No, the one, the one where he--I think it was probably his last fight. Speaker 1: Was it [Jersey] Joe Wolcott that beat him then? Speaker 2: Maybe it was. But I was very young when he fought Schmeling in Germany. In fact, I don't know that I can recall that fight. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in '36 [1936]. You would have been two. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah. I've heard about it, but I guess I would not have heard that one. But yeah, he was our hero, he was our hero. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, he has an Alabama connection, doesn't he? Speaker 2: I think he does. I-- Speaker 1: Because he was in Detroit [Michigan], but a lot of people from Detroit are from Alabama. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Yeah, I didn't know his early history, but I think I heard later that he, you know, after he kind of, was no longer fighting, that most of his money was gone and he was just dependent on people to help him to survive. Speaker 1: Yeah, he got a job shaking hands in casinos-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 223015 Speaker 1: So, well--so, you were in grade school [Booker T. Washington School; Booker T. Washington K-8 School, Birmingham, Alabama] and you were a good student. And so, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You got interested in Bible study, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, first of all this Bible class was being taught by a brother that, a man, that came down from Detroit [Michigan] as a missionary. It was the first time I'd ever seen a black--well, of course at that time you didn't see any missionaries at all. But he was a black man who had been led to the Lord by a man who originally had come from the Bahama Islands [Bahamas]. There were three brothers who migrated from the Bahama Islands to the United States, the Nottage brothers. They went from the Bahama Islands to New York [New York], and they stayed there for a while. And these three brothers decided they wanted to scatter so they could have a witness in different parts of the country. Speaker 1: How do you spell their name? Speaker 2: N-O-T-T-A-G-E. Speaker 1: The Nottage Brothers. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. So, one went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], one went to Cleveland [Ohio], and one went to Detroit. And the one that went to Detroit started to share the gospel in Detroit. And the first person that he led to the Lord in Detroit was William Rudolph, and that's the man that came down to Birmingham [Alabama] and was teaching this little Bible class there in Collegeville [Birmingham, Alabama]. And he pointed out to me how to really get into the family of God, and how to be a Christian, and that it was by believing in Jesus Christ, and not just running to church. And that's where my whole journey started, with him explaining to me how to become a Christian there in that little Bible class in Collegeville. And so, from there I spent two or three, several years, I was just going to that little Bible class and going to grammar school at the same time, of course. And when I was twelve years old, he asked me to go with him to go out into the back side of Birmingham. He said he wanted to preach the gospel to the people out there. So, he took me with him and we drove for--where we got to where we were. But it was a rural area, and he got permission from a family to hook up his record player. And he put it on top of his car and played some records. And then suddenly turned to me and said, "Now, [HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], after I play this record, I want you to give your testimony of how you got to be a Christian." And so, I took, you know, got my courage up and shared how I had accepted Jesus Christ as my Savior. And it was after sharing that, that this old man sauntered up to me. And he had gray hair, and he was just sort of--hands behind his back, and he complimented me on my little testimony. And then he quoted this Bible verse from Hosea 4:6. He said, "You know, Hosea said it a long time ago, my people are destroyed for lack of knowledge." I had never heard of that verse before, but when he quoted it, it suddenly became a very important verse for me. And I, in my own little twelve year old way, said "Lord, if knowledge of your word is what our people need, then I want to volunteer to help make that happen." I didn't know how it was going to happen, didn't know what the future held, but I just knew that I wanted to be part of giving the word of God to our people. And that's where this--I never got away from that concept, although as I went through high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], you know, you do what high school kids do. But tucked away in the back of my mind was, someday I want to be a part of that, getting the word of God out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 223016 Speaker 1: Tell me more about this ministry. You said that he [William Rudolph] had a different way. What he taught you was more or less that church was not enough, just going to church was not enough, you had to do something else? Speaker 2: Right. You know, a whole milieu of life in the South is you grow up and you become a member of a church, and you get baptized. And sometimes kids would do it without much consciousness of what's really going on--that you just get baptized, get in the church, and you start doing the best you can. That was what I had been exposed to. In fact prior to that, I guess I was about seven years old, at church they made me the junior superintendent of the Sunday school. But what that meant, I'll never know. But I really didn't have a clear understanding of what--to consciously invite Jesus Christ to come into my life, and to know that it was a personal relationship with God that I needed, and not just to be the member of a church. And so, he explained to me that salvation consists of believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, the person, and inviting Jesus Christ to come into your life. And when I understood that--and he used, in fact, I think he happened to be teaching on that--on the story in the Bible about the Philippian jailer who got saved when Paul and Silas was locked in jail. And the earthquake came, and when they got out of--when the earthquake came the jailer wanted to know from Paul, "What do I do to be saved?" And Paul said, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved." That's found in Acts 16. Well, this Bible teacher was explaining this, and using that to help me understand that believing on Jesus Christ will bring salvation, and not just giving the preacher your hand. That is what is clarified it for me. And my mother [Survilla Ellis Banks] told me later, "Boy, you were already saved. This man just maybe helped you, but you were saved before that." But consciously in my own mind, that's the day and that's the time when I really understood that Jesus Christ wanted to come into my life and save me. And that's when I, that's when I--that's the time when he pointed this out to me. Then the next week, on my own, I thought about what he said and I prayed, "Lord Jesus, come into my life and save me." And I point to that time as when that transformation really took place. And interestingly enough, I'd been baptized before that. And after I really understood what it was all about when I joined this Baptist church, I got baptized again. So, I got baptized twice, because now I understood what it was all about; baptism ought to come after you really accept Christ, and it's not just a routine that you go through. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how, I mean how did your approach to life change after you were baptized a second time? Speaker 2: Well, I think it was just a matter of wanting to be faithful to what I think the scriptures teach--that once you've made a confession of faith, then baptism is a way of saying to the world, "I've made this decision to follow Christ." It's a confession. It's a way of saying to everybody--and since--when I did it the first time, I did not have that clear understanding; in my mind I needed to do this the proper way. So, having been baptized a second time, then of course I became more involved in that particular local church, and tried to live in a way that reflected the teachings of Jesus and the teachings of the Bible. I guess it was also about that time, after I had made this decision to accept Jesus into my life, that a man [Harold Peck] came along and apparently saw some potential in me and a couple of other guys. And he took us on some trips up north. He took us to Winona Lake [Indiana] to a Bible conference grounds where they had a lake out there and all kinds of fun things to do. And while we were with him, he would encourage us to have, each day, a time when you read the Bible and to pray. You know, this was our daily devotion, and he pointed out the importance of this. And that helped me to begin to have a better relationship with God by getting into the Bible and seeing what God was saying to me from the word, and praying. And interestingly enough, this brother helped me to establish a pattern of doing this, which I discovered later on became so valuable to me as a person after I started this business. But back then it was just, "Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin E. Banks], you need to have a daily quiet time with God." While I was with him, we'd do that for about a week or two. I'd come back home and then I'd forget, and wouldn't do it. And he'd come back again and encourage me. That must have happened two or three times before I really started to establish a pattern of daily devotions. And as I said, later on I found out that that was what sustained me through the early days of getting Urban Ministries [Inc., Chicago, Illinois] going when the times got rough. So, that was a very important piece in my development in learning how to feed myself from the word of God, even as I was trying to live, you know, in ways that pleased the Lord. Story_ID: 223017 Speaker 1: Tell me about high school. Now, you're in high school during this time, right? You'd just started (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, eventually, of course, I was graduating. I graduated from the grammar school, and the next stage was to go to [A.H.] Parker High School [Birmingham, Alabama]; that's where I went to high school first. They had their high school annex where freshmen and sophomores went, and that was in a different location. And then we started, you know, we transferred to the main high school in our junior and senior years. So, so, I graduated. And then of course, the high school was probably, I don't know, several miles away from where I was living. So we had to walk at least a mile to the bus, and the bus would take us to high school. And that was our routine for getting to, getting to our high school. Speaker 1: Parker was, was that the only black high school in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: There was another one, but that was the one that was for us. I think there was an [Samuel] Ullman High School [Birmingham, Alabama] at that time, but that was so far away that it was not--Parker was the closest one to us. So, that was the high school of choice for us. And when I first got there--they'd been telling me when you first get to--going into high school the first time--all the kids were saying, "Boy, you really have to buckle down and study hard, or you're going to flunk out." So I buckled down real hard, and that first marking period I got all A's on my report card. And I said, "Oh, this is not bad." And so, I started to slack up, (laughter) until I really got ahold of myself and realized that--well, actually, I kind of coasted through most of high school until my last year in high school. And it was about that time that another brother, another person, another man, actually started early--starting building a relationship with me. Interestingly enough, I can point to three men that have made a profound impact on my life. The first one was this guy, William Rudolph, that I mentioned, that led me to the Lord. A second one was Harold Peck, P-E-C-K, he's the guy that encouraged me to have daily devotions. And the third one was Harvey Birkey, B-I-R-K-E-Y. Harvey Birkey was the guy that entered my life and encouraged me to take some Bible courses by mail. And as I neared high school, neared the end of high school, he encouraged me that I needed to have some kind of training beyond high school. He was like the person--and I believe God sent these people into my life, since I didn't have a father to encourage me, at these strategic times. He said, "[HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], no matter what you're going to do in life, it wouldn't hurt if you had a year of Bible school." So, he arranged for me to get to Chicago [Illinois], but that's maybe a little bit ahead of the story-- Story_ID: 223018 Speaker 1: What was the name of your--your school was [A.H.] Parker [High School, Birmingham, Alabama], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, when you were at Parker, did you engage in, you know, the usual high school activities? I mean, were you involved in sports or social activities in school? Speaker 2: I tried to do track once. And I had a cousin, an older cousin, who was a guy who was teaching athletes. And he tried me out a time or two, but I wasn't really the greatest guy as far as track. Probably most of the time at school, in high school, I worked on the school newspaper. And I also did some--for the last semester, some oratory in that context (unclear). But I loved the print shop, where we did the school newspaper. And I spent, all of my outside classroom time was pretty much spent in the print shop learning how to run the presses and setting type, and that sort of thing. And it just so happened that as I coming up to my last year in high school, I was doing well with my grades. Because this guy had said, "You know, if you're going to be anything beyond high school, you've got to get some good grades in high school." So, that encouraged me to do so. But the teacher, my English teacher, my homeroom teacher said to me, "[HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], if you cut my class one more time to go to that print shop, I'm going to drop your grade." And we had to get the school newspaper out, so I cut one more time, and she dropped my grade by a point (laughter). But other than that, you know, my grade for the semester for that class was an A. My last semester, I got all A's on my report card, just as I had at the very beginning. So, I could do it. It's just that, you know, kids just sort of lay back and don't do their best sometimes, yeah. But that was--and that printing experience, again, later on I could relate to that when we got into publishing. But that was, I never knew at the time that that's where I'd end up. But that was a part of my experience growing up, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were a senior, did you have a career goal? Did you know what you wanted to do when you grew up? Speaker 2: Not really. I just knew that this idea of--I thought I would probably either be preaching or teaching the Bible, but that was very vague. I didn't know when or how, that sort of thing. So, it was not like I knew at the time that I was going to start a publishing house. That was, that was the furthest thing from my life at that time. It's just that, well, I guess--now that I recall, people used to call me "Preacher" (laughter). That was one of those tags I got, but that was not a nickname. It was just that some people would call me that. Speaker 1: Now, were you popular in high school? Speaker 2: Fairly much so, I think. How can you put a, can you size that up? I was--a couple of guys and I, we used to run together. And we would, you know, they knew me as somebody who would not do certain things. And I think that's why I got that tag of being called "Preacher" sometimes. I was always, you know, a pretty sharp intellect as far as the grades, the courses, were concerned. And I guess in high school I ended up being the, I think this was high school--yeah, I ended up being the third highest academic level. There was one guy ahead of me, and another girl. But so, I was known, you know, for my academic abilities. But you know, I didn't think that was any big deal (laughter). Speaker 1: Probably a bigger deal than you thought. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 223019 Speaker 1: Well tell us about Moody [Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois]. Now you came to Chicago [Illinois]--is this is your first time out of Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And is this, so I take it you didn't travel around in the South much in those days? Speaker 2: No, I did not. In fact, I think that was probably--well, except for this guy [William Rudolph] carrying me around. We drove into like Winona Lake, Indiana. And I should say this guy that ultimately paid my way, also in younger days would take me and another guy with him, because he was a missionary in the South, and he would come back north. He was from Illinois, central Illinois. And he would bring us up to what they called deputation, where he would talk about his work in the South. And he brought me and a couple of other guys up, and we would give our testimonies of the things that they were doing down in the South. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you would, you had been to Indiana and to Illinois? Speaker 2: And Illinois. That was as far north as--and I remember being so shocked at the flat land, compared to Birmingham, all the mountains down there. Story_ID: 223020 Speaker 1: We didn't talk about this. Before we leave Birmingham [Alabama], what were race relations like in Birmingham? I mean, I know everybody pretty much thinks they probably were not good. But what's your personal recollection of what things were like? Speaker 2: Well, you know, you pretty much knew your place there in Birmingham. You knew that you didn't, you didn't go into certain areas or you would not be welcome. You knew that when the football team was playing, that you couldn't just go anywhere. The high school reserved what was called Legion Field [Birmingham, Alabama] for their football games, and the white folks were going to be there, and you didn't go to any white activities. When you walked downtown, you knew that you had to deal with white policemen, and that you didn't dare disobey. You know, of course, obviously, you say you respect policemen anywhere. But you knew that in that environment, it was more than them just giving you a ticket. You didn't know what they were going to do to you. So, you kind of lived in fear pretty much, most of the time whenever you were in the presence of white people. And that was--I'll never forget. One of these brothers, the guy that taught me to read my Bible [Harold Peck], knew about a white family, the host of the Bible class. And this one brother challenged this white family once on their treatment of, their attitude toward black people. And their response, well, from these white folks was, "Well, my maid knows her place. And so we get along fine, because she knows her place." And in fact, I recall a time or two I went to work with her, to work for this white family, and I was not permitted to eat inside of the house. They gave me lunch on the back steps, that's where I had my lunch. Of course, I'm a boy. What am I? Nine, ten, eleven, somewhere in there, and maybe they could rationalize a different reason for my eating on the back steps. But she never ate with them; nobody ever ate with them. That was the, that was the attitude of white people toward black people at that time--keep them separate, except that, you know, you can wash the dishes and do the work that we want you to do. Speaker 1: Okay. But, correct me if I'm wrong. Now, they were involved with Bible discussions with you, you're saying? Speaker 2: Not the white family. Speaker 1: Family, but the-- Speaker 2: The lady who hosted the class was black, and she worked at the white family's-- Speaker 1: Oh, she worked for them. Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Right. And that's-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And interestingly enough, the people she worked for wanted to help this little black boy, and therefore I was able to go along with this maid to do a little work around the house, you know, like cutting some grass, and stuff like that. Speaker 1: You say the gentleman that started the class challenged her about the relationship between her and her-- Speaker 2: That was a different person. Speaker 1: A different person? Speaker 2: A different person, yeah, who challenged her. In fact, the person who challenged her was white also. And so, he felt he was safe enough and comfortable enough that he could challenge these white people and their attitude toward black people. And that's when this white family informed him, "Well, the black folks who work for us know their place. So, we don't have a problem." But that was, you know, that's just one little example of the attitude of-- Story_ID: 223021 Speaker 1: And while this happened a little bit later, when I went back home after starting at Moody [Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois], I went back home and rode the bus. In that area, in Titusville [Birmingham, Alabama], pretty much the only people who rode the bus were black. It was pretty much an all-black area. But black people still came on the front and went out the back. And this particular time-- Speaker 2: I mean, just to be clear, you pay your money in the front? Speaker 1: Right, to get on. Speaker 2: Then you've got to get off and walk to the back of the bus to get on? Speaker 1: No, you can get on the front. But once you get on, you can't go back out the front. You've got to go out the back. And so, since I was sitting relatively closer to the front, I was closer to the front door than the back door. And when it was time to get off--this was of course after 1954--I felt well, I'll just go out the front door. The bus driver seeing me heading for the front door, stopped the bus so that it straddled a telegram post, and gave me about that much room to squeeze around to get off. That was his way of saying, "Who do you think you are, coming out of this front door?" Just another one of the little experiences I had as a black person there in the South. But that was, probably the biggest thing was fear. You never knew if you were safe in the presence of white people. I remember once I took a bus ride from Birmingham to Jackson, Mississippi. And the fear I experienced in riding on that bus going through neighborhoods that were unfamiliar to me, and wondering whether or not I would arrive safely at my destination, that was not uncommon for people taking public transportation. You just didn't know when white folks would turn on you, and you had no recourse. You couldn't say I can count on the police. You can't just say I'll call the police, because the police would treat you worse than the other folks did. Speaker 2: Yeah, that must have been something. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 223022 Speaker 1: Now, in Chicago [Illinois], now how did you come to Chicago? Did he [William Rudolph] drive you to Chicago, or did you all-- Speaker 2: I took the train. Speaker 1: Took the train? Speaker 2: Yeah, I took the train. And I'll never forget the first day when I rode into Chicago. It was fall, it was rainy, and I was passing--it wasn't Robert Taylor [Homes, Chicago, Illinois], but they were tall buildings, as the train was coming in. And I saw all these folks hanging out the windows, because it was hot and rainy. And I'd never seen buildings that tall, number one. And number two, I could see all of the filth all around. And I'm saying to the Lord, "Lord, where are you taking me? I hope you get me out of this place as soon as you can." But that was my first experience in heading to Moody Bible Institute [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now, where did you stay when you got here? Speaker 2: I stayed in the dorm. But interestingly enough, I had requested a double room, because that was cheaper than a single room. But I ended up with a single room. And-- Speaker 1: So, you were going to be a roommate with somebody, I mean, share with somebody? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. So, you know, with a school that's 99 percent white, you assume it's probably going to be a white person that you'll be rooming with. But somehow they figured out a way to give me a single room even though (laughter) I paid for a double room. And, but that was back in 1952 in that area, while they were accepting a few black people, they really were not accepting them in the fullest sense of the word. But they were permitted to come and stay there. As I said, I was one of about eight or ten people that were there. Speaker 1: Out of a thousand students, roughly? Speaker 2: Right. And you could sense a certain kind of distance between--even though the kids would--the other students would show evidence of accepting--and in fact I recall writing home after I'd been there for a semester, during the semester, saying "Man, this is almost like heaven" (laughter). And then I began to realize over a period of time that what glitters is not necessarily gold--that there's still a distance between, often between black students and the white students. And while I don't recall a lot of overt racism except for the experiences like that, after a while you start to pick up on it--that people are not as--in many cases some of those kids, they'd never seen black people before. They'd come from western suburban areas, western states, and so for some of them I was like a monkey in a cage, to see somebody black. This is again, the late '50s [1950s], early '50s [1950s] when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 223023 Speaker 1: What were your studies like? I mean what did you--is there--now you've been to theological school, too, right? Speaker 2: Well, that was probably the most specific Bible content that I was exposed to. But all of the classes were related somehow to the Bible. I was in what was called the general Bible course, for three years of Bible survey, Bible analysis, book by book study, and Christian education, how to teach in Sunday school; that kind of content is what I got at Moody [Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois]. And so, that was three years of basically Bible study, and related. I also took some public speaking, they had things like that. Because the focus of all the training was to prepare people to go out to be either pastors or missionaries, or people who were going to engage in Christian work. So, but when I left there and went to Wheaton [College, Wheaton, Illinois], that's a liberal arts college, so you're getting all of the history and all of the other stuff that goes with being in college. But Moody was a Bible school at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, when you were at Moody did you get involved in, did you get involved in life in the City of Chicago [Illinois] otherwise, other than the circle around Moody, or did you get a chance to? Speaker 2: Well, you were pretty much contained on campus. There were activities there that you could engage in. There was, you know, sports, and of course I wasn't deep into sports, but they had certain things that anybody could do--volleyball. And I was an avid table tennis player, and I did a lot of table tennis while there. Story_ID: 223024 Speaker 1: Interestingly enough, after I had been there about a year, the man--I described the person [William Rudolph] who led me to the Lord. Well, the man that led him to the Lord--he was Bahamian--was invited to speak at Moody [Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois]; they have an annual conference in February. He came there and he saw me there, and knowing that I'm in the midst of mostly white people, he said to me, "[HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], this is good. I'm glad to see you here." He said, "But you need to find some of your kinfolks in the Lord," meaning some black people, and have some contact with them (laughter). And he pointed me to a little church on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], and said, "You ought to find this little church so you can have some contact outside of your contacts here." And I went trying to find this little place, and I couldn't find it. He came back again the following year and he asked me how I was doing, and I told him. And when he found out that I had not been in contact with this church, he says, "Melvin, you need to be finding some people, some of your kinfolks." It was his way of saying, "You're here in the midst of all these white folks. You need to have some contact with some black people." And then I found this place eventually. But it was, as I look back, it was so insightful of him to recognize the need for my own identity. Because apart from that, I would have grown up thinking that only what white folks gave me constituted what was good. And leading me out was so helpful in establishing my own identity, that even while I was going to a school that was largely white and getting some good stuff, I needed to know who I was, and that was very helpful to me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I was, I was giving gratitude for him. Speaker 2: Now, what church was it? What was the name of the church? Speaker 1: It was a church a little bit similar to the one I'd gone to with the guy who led me to the Lord, the Brethren Assembly Church, historically known as Plymouth Brethren, but they changed their name to Brethren Assembly in recent years. But it's, it's a kind of, they never grow very large. There must be about seventy of them in the United States now, black Brethren churches. I discovered that there are parts of Africa where they are very prolific. They started in England back in 1820 as a group, and they've spread in various places. Speaker 2: So, the three brothers [Nottage brothers] from the Bahamas are associated with them, the Brethren? Speaker 1: Right, yeah. And some missionaries from England went over to the Bahama Islands and led them to the Lord; they came to the United States and they started these fellowships across the country. And so I found this little place, and that's where I started to have fellowship there and-- Story_ID: 223025 Speaker 1: Actually, it was there that--well, as I neared the end of my stay at Moody [Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois], I started to get antsy wanting somebody that I could, some female I could have a relationship with, and there wasn't anybody around Moody (laughter). At the time there was one black girl there, but she didn't seem like she was interested. So, I was complaining to a lady who was going to the little church that, "You know, I need a girlfriend. I need somebody that I can have some fellowship with." And she said, "Well, I have a sister." And she gave me the name of her sister, who was, they were from Sturgis, Michigan. And her sister had gone down to Fort Wayne, Indiana to attend a Bible school down there, a Bible college [Fort Wayne Bible College, Fort Wayne, Indiana] down there. And so she gave me her name and phone number. I wrote to her, we started corresponding, and eventually she came to Chicago [Illinois]. There's a little more detail there. I can tell you if you want me to (laughter). But that's how I met her, while I was at Moody. Speaker 2: Okay. So this is a person, this is a special person who--this isn't just a date for that period of time. It was somebody that you eventually-- Speaker 1: It's the one I married [Olive Perkins Banks] (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Eventually, yeah, right. She was, she was attending school there. And we corresponded and talked on the phone a few times. And then that summer I went from Moody down to Mississippi to help in a camp. And while I was down there, she decided to come to Chicago. And she said she was coming to work in order to get some money to go back to school. So, when summer was over, I came back to Chicago to go back to Moody, and she was now in the city staying with her sister. And I met her for the first time at her sister's house, and I--her sister invited me to have dinner with them. So I come to the house, and here she is at the dining room table sitting across. And I tell people the little emotion that went through me as I looked at her. She was so beautiful. I said, "The Lord is my shepherd, I see what I want" (laughter). And that started the relationship that eventually ended in marriage. We've been married now for forty-nine years. Speaker 2: That's a wonderful story. It's the kind you don't hear that much of anymore, where people meet like that and they stay together for, you know, forever I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: That's a wonderful story. Speaker 1: She went to, she took some courses at Moody while I was at evening school, when I was there. And we courted over the telephone. And then when she would come up for evening school we'd take some walks down to the lake [Lake Michigan] and downtown. And she plays organ and piano, so she was taking those lessons. And we'd find ways to hook up together (laughter). Speaker 2: So, was she studying for the ministry? Speaker 1: No, just to know how to play better. She was just--at Moody, people who were not necessarily going into the ministry would just take classes to know more about the Bible, and just to--and they had a good music department, and a lot of folk would come to learn how to play--church music was the focus. So she came to take organ and piano, and she took some Bible classes, Bible courses along with that. But that's where we developed our relationship and eventually got married. Speaker 2: Now, when did you get married? How long did it take you to-- Speaker 1: We met, I think it was in the summer of '54 [1954], yeah, the summer of '54 [1954]. And we courted that year, and got married in November of 1955. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I graduated from Moody in '55 [1955] with the intention of going on to school in September to Wheaton College [Wheaton, Illinois]. I'd been accepted there, and I had proposed to my sweetheart while Moody was still, while I was still at Moody, before I graduated. And we had agreed informally that we'd get married after I finished Wheaton College. But then we decided--she said to me one day, she said, "You know what? If we got married, I could help you get through Wheaton College" (laughter). So, we said, "Let's get married before I go to Wheaton College." So, we tried to get married in September, sometime before. But I was only twenty years old, and in Illinois you had to be twenty-one. So, I needed my mother's [Survilla Ellis Banks] approval (laughter) to get married before school. I asked her for it, and she said, "No, no, you just wait until you get twenty-one." So, I was, my birthday was in October. And so once I turned twenty-one, we got married in November, and then I started school in January the following year. Story_ID: 223026 Speaker 1: Now, did any of your credits transfer to Wheaton [College, Wheaton, Illinois] from Moody [Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. In fact, half of them transferred, so I was only required to take two and a half years in Wheaton College to get the full bachelor degree. But then I stayed on for another year for graduate school at Wheaton after I graduated. Speaker 1: Now, were there any professors either at Moody or Wheaton College that, you know, sort of stand out as outstanding people, you think, you know, when you look back on it? Speaker 2: At Moody, probably there was a guy by the name of Dr. Martin [ph.], who I thought was a very deep theologian, and I had a fair amount of respect for him. There was another professor there who didn't have, wasn't that deep theologically, but he knew his Greek, and he taught classes in Greek. The Bible of course was written in Greek. And I enjoyed his classes because he would, he would, he would give us all the things that he said were going to appear on the test for the first fifteen minutes. Then he said, "Now, class, just sit back and enjoy my teaching." And he would just go through the Greek and explain stuff to us. I always enjoyed his classes. Those are probably the--there at Moody. My best classes at Wheaton--I majored in biblical archeology, which some people ask, "Why in the world would you want to do something like that?" But in undergraduate school I majored in biblical archeology. Of course, you could take other courses to fulfill the requirements to get a bachelor's [degree]. But that's, that was--but that teacher, that professor, [Dr.] Joseph Free, a teacher of archeology, I thought was very helpful in understanding Bible archeology. But it was in grad school where I had two teachers that really stood out for me. One was the professor of the New Testament, Merrill [C.] Tenney, T-E-N-N-E-Y. Merrill Tenney was a recognized biblical scholar, and had written several books on the New Testament. And I always regarded his teaching as very insightful and helpful in the future kind of studies that I would do, because he showed us how to get into the Bible and really find out what's in the Bible. And then I had a Greek teacher there at Wheaton that was very insightful in understanding the Greek language, and I enjoyed him very much. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, when you graduated from--now, did you have a chance to go on any field trips, in terms of the archeology? Speaker 2: I did not. It was, they did, they did have some digging. The guy that was the professor had a spot over in the Holy Land called Golan [Heights], and he went over and did diggings. But I never--it was costly, and I didn't have the money to go. And then I kind of felt a little bit of a disconnect between--I was black and all these other kids were white. And I, that was, but it was a combination of that, plus the fact I didn't have the money. Of course, you had to pay your own way. I didn't have the money, so I never went on any of the digs. But he would bring back the results of his digging. Plus, all the other results of other peoples' diggings became the basis of the major, so that we were exposed to what had been found. But I never myself went on a dig. Story_ID: 223027 Speaker 1: Now, at this point, had you been exposed to any African American history, or African history or culture on any level? Speaker 2: Not really. I'm trying to think if--I think I was probably--in fact just the--well, it was all pretty much European exposure. And so, all of my African orientation to the Bible, all that came apart from school. The books that I read, the workshops that I attended, the research on my own, pretty much has given me the greater African scholarship, and not much within--. Now, I should say that even when I was in school in the South, there, I got African history and black history of America. 'Up from Slavery' [Booker T. Washington] was so insightful in terms of knowing our past. So, I got it before I got to Moody [Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois] and Wheaton [College, Wheaton, Illinois], but not while I was at Moody and Wheaton. Speaker 1: So, in Birmingham [Alabama] they taught Booker T. Washington's 'Up from Slavery.' Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, right. And think that is one of the reasons why kids in the South, I think, had a head start on kids in the North. Because in the northern schools, to some degree they were more mixed, but beyond that, there was not the emphasis on Negro--as it was called at that time--Negro history. And so, they had no knowledge of our past. And I remember especially in the '60s [1960s] when all the turmoil was going on, these kids were clamoring for black history to be taught in the schools; they never had any. And we had it, you know, growing up in the South. So, that was a plus there. But again, we got very little of it either at Moody or at Wheaton, it was beyond. Speaker 1: And did you get any indication through your studies in biblical archeology of maybe what the people of the Bible looked like, or what they may have been like, and the way they--did they seem similar to, you know, black people or African people? Or did they seem, I mean, was there any sense of-- Speaker 2: I do recall taking a field trip. I recall taking a field trip to The Oriental Institute [of the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] while I was at Wheaton. And I'm seeing all these mummies, and they're all black. And in my, in my mind, I didn't have the consciousness to raise the question. But in my mind, "I wonder what happened to these mummies? If they were white--thinking all Bible folks were white--if they were white, how did they turn black?" And it was only later I realized they were black to start with, (laughter) they didn't turn anything. But that was a certain consciousness that I became aware of while I was there. And of course there were people who would--I remember so distinctly when the guy in Detroit [Michigan] came out with a [Shrine of the] Black Madonna [Pan African Orthodox Christian Church]. Speaker 1: Reverend [Albert] Cleage, right. Speaker 2: Right, right. And at first he was soundly rejected by most people, to even suggest that Jesus could be anything other than white. And, but I think the thing that really got my attention was Elijah Muhammad. Story_ID: 223028 Speaker 1: --Yeah, let's go begin our discussion--Elijah Muhammad again. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I guess what I said was that he was the first person who really got my attention in terms of the whole question or issues surrounding blackness. As he would say, black people need to know their history. And initially, you know, I thought he was just talking off the wall, until after a while he started to get my attention, in terms of who black people are. And even that did not leave the same impression, because I didn't think that he was approaching it from a scholarly fashion--he was just saying it. But then when I came across this book by Bishop [Alfred Gilbert] Dunston [Jr.] on 'The Black Man in the Old Testament and Its World,' that opened my eyes some more, where I could see some scholarship behind the statements. And that's what I was starting to, what I was looking for. Don't just tell me; show me, you know, so to speak. Speaker 1: Now, just--when Bishop Dunston--he's an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] bishop, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. And he was a contemporary of, was he writing in the 1950s and '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was about, he was like a contemporary of Elijah Muhammad, I believe, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he was the one that, the first one, I should say, that started to open my eyes to the facts of, the origin of the Bible. Speaker 1: Okay. And this is an interesting point here, about when black people in America say black or Negro, they're describing really a range of colors which define all of us, those who are not white, basically. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure if we had as clear a perspective on that. I think maybe in some people's mind there was a recognition that it did not necessarily mean everybody was black as coal outwardly. But I think the more you probed, you discovered that it was not the intent to say that every North African was as black as coal, but that they were people of color; they were not European for the most part. I think that was the point. Speaker 1: So, they wouldn't match some of the images of Jesus you see on the church fan, where he's got blond hair and blue eyes and very pale, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. None of that would have been accurate to the geography of that time. I think my first notion was the fact that Palestine is at the apex of three continents, you know. It's Asia and Europe and Africa. And if so, then it just wouldn't lend itself to a totally European kind of person. And that was, that was, that was my first, one of my first recognitions as we--on this journey of seeking to understand what the biblical people looked like. But as we delved more, you could see that much of the biblical, the Old Testament world, came out of a North Africa or African milieu. And then on the other side of that, you can identify how the evolution came about that he suddenly became white in publications over here. It helps you understand the reason why you see that in such a way. Speaker 1: Now, there was a--I don't know if you ever heard of this. But there was a short story that was published in the 1950s or '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s], called 'The Boy Who Painted Christ Black'. And it was written by another black Alabaman, John Henrik Clarke, who became a historian in Harlem [New York, New York], one of the premier historians in Harlem, a black spokesman. That was one of his first short stories. It was about how, in--he was born in Union Springs, Alabama, but raised in Columbus, Georgia. It was about him actually painting the picture of Christ black when he was in grade school. And all the, the school superintendent had to come; everybody had to come, and it became a big controversy. Speaker 2: I think I remember something about that, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: They made a TV movie ['America's Dream'] with Wesley Snipes playing the teacher that defended the kid's painting. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Two of the white superintendents of schools in that region of Georgia, you know, who came down and took a delegation to take the painting and destroy it; they wanted to destroy it. Speaker 2: Isn't that something. Speaker 1: Just the very idea. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, this is dangerous ground you're talking about, you know, changing the color of--so this is, I mean you started thinking about that with Elijah Muhammad and then-- Story_ID: 223029 Speaker 1: Let's just continue the story. Now, how did--did you start, when you came out of graduate school at Wheaton [College, Wheaton, Illinois], did you start working for the publishing company [Urban Ministries, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]? What was it? Speaker 2: Well, not immediately. My objective at that point was to go back south. I was thinking I would leave-- when I graduated from Wheaton I would probably go back south and maybe start a little Bible school, or do something that would help to get the word of God across to people. But then I thought, I need to pay my bills. (Laughter) So I took a job as a caseworker for the county welfare in Chicago [Illinois]. And I worked there for four years with the intent of paying my bills and then packing up and going south. But while I was there, first of all, I got married [to Olive Perkins Banks]. But secondly, this brother wanted to donate some property to us in order to start a camp for black kids. And he says, "[HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], if you come and want for me," he was in the real estate business, "come work for me, and I'll let you have time off during the summer and you can help out with the camp." So, I took him up on it. I went to work for him and he gave us the property and we started this camp. But while I was working for him, I'd been there only four months, and somebody from this white publisher, Scripture Press [Wheaton, Illinois], came and asked me if I would come and work for them. And my first reaction was "Well, no. Because I just took this job at this realty, and what would four months on my resume look like? And besides, your company is located out in the white suburban area of Wheaton [Illinois], and my heart is with my black people. I don't see any connection." So, I turned him down. And about a month later this same guy called me and said, "Mel, can we have lunch again?" And I said, okay. But in my mind I'm saying, I'm going to tell you the same thing. But he came and we talked. And again, I told him I could not, I didn't feel the freedom to go work for them. But then he said, "But Melvin, would you just pray about this?" And it's kind of hard to tell a person you won't pray. I said, "Okay, I'll pray" (laughter). And then after--and I had to look for my commitment. I started then go give more serious thought to it. I said, "Now, Lord, you know it doesn't make any sense for me to go out there and work for those white folks, when all the black folks are in the city." And I struggled with it. But then the struggle started to come within, do you or don't you? And so one night I pulled into the parking lot where were staying in Lake Meadows [Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], and I had my head over the steering wheel, struggling. And again I'm saying to the Lord, "Lord, you know it doesn't make any sense for me to go work for them." And in that moment of frustration God brought back a Bible verse that I had memorized as a kid, from Isaiah 55 that said, "But my ways are not your ways, and my thoughts are not your thoughts." And that verse coming to me the way it did at that moment brought some clarity to my thinking. And I now realized that maybe God has something in mind that I can't see. And so, I decided to go ahead and work for Scripture Press. So I took the job, worked there for, I think I was there for about six years totally. Story_ID: 223030 Speaker 1: They [Scripture Press, Wheaton, Illinois] hired me to get their white material into black churches. They had a desire to get literature, good stuff, into black churches, but they didn't know how to do it. So, I went out with the idea that I was going to do that, but then I ran into difficulty trying to persuade black churches to take literature that was white. But also, black churches were so accustomed to the International Uniform [Sunday School Bible] Lesson [Series], that those two things just sort of made it impossible to make much headway. So, first I suggested to them, "Why don't--you guys ought to put some black folks in this literature." They did a little bit, but really not enough to say it was integrated. And then I say, "Why don't we just start another curriculum that can really address the needs that I think black people want." And initially they said, well, no, the founder of that literature was still alive, and they didn't like the idea of any other curriculum other than the one that they had produced. So, my idea was put on the shelf for a while until they hired a new marketing person. And Jim Lemon [James Lemon] came in as a marketing guy. He saw my proposal, and he said, "This makes a lot of sense to have a niched curriculum." So, he sold the company on the idea that this is the way--what they should do. And we went out to do research, and we discovered that people were interested in a publication that addressed the needs of blacks. And they said that we ought to start with something for teenagers rather than for little kids. But when it was time to print it--this was like in the late '60s [1960s]. And there was strong emphasis on black identity, black ownership, black economic development--about the same time the Black Enterprise started, the same year I think. I decided that if this company is going to really go, it can't be a part of a white company. It needed to be independent, so that we could make our own decisions and do what we think is necessary to make it go. So, I suggested to Scripture Press, let's start a new company. And they were supportive of that idea, so I went out and found some people to make up a board. And we established UMI [Urban Ministries, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] in the spring of 1970 and came out with our first publication that fall, which was dated for January, 1971. And that's how we got this started, but-- Story_ID: 223031 Speaker 1: It was with great difficulty. Because while they [Scripture Press, Wheaton, Illinois] were anxious to see us, glad to see us [Urban Ministries, Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] do it, they either did not have or could not put all the money into it that it needed to be. In fact, I think there was some sense of, probably we ought not to put all the money in it anyway. At any rate, we did not have all the money that we needed to get it, until we broke even. Then we calculated at that time that we really needed a couple hundred thousand dollars, and this is 1970s money. We only had about eighty, but people seemed so excited about the idea that we started off with eighty thousand, and soon ran into economic difficulty because we didn't have enough money. You know, when you're doing dated publications, you have to keep coming out with them, whether or not you sell all that you had before or not. And that was part of the struggle, trying to have dated curriculum coming out quarter after quarter. And so the bills piled up high, and we struggled. The first year was very exciting, but after the first year it dawned on us that we didn't have the money that it would take to carry this through. And I found a couple, a few people, that gave us some money, but that was part of that eighty thousand and it was not enough. And so, after about the second year, the red lights were going on everywhere saying that this company may not make it. We were living in Chicago [Illinois], and our publishing house was located in our basement at 9917 South Green [Street]. And my board even was saying, "Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin E. Banks], we're not sure if this is going to make it." But somehow in the midst of that, I kept getting this assurance from God, inwardly, that it's going to make it. And it was that assurance, helped by the fact that as a kid, this brother [Harold Peck] had encouraged me to have daily devotions. And God, in those moments, kept assuring me from his word and through his spirit that it's going to make it. If it hadn't been for that, I would have given up, but that was what sustained me. And for about five years, we were sinking. And, but only at the end of that, did things start to pick up. And our salvation during that time was the printer, who allowed us to build up monies, thinking it's going to turn, it's going to turn, it's going to turn. But I'm struggling, because I see the bills piling up, and there's something in me that said you just don't do that, you pay your bills. But we had no choice. And so, they were kind of our salvation. And even though they were pulling like mad trying to get some money out of us, at the same time they were not willing to abandon us, and they sort of became our salvation in those rough years. Speaker 2: Now, who was your printer? Speaker 1: Dickinson Press up in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and they're still doing printing for us today. And years later, I asked them, I said, "Those years when we were having such a struggle, what was going on with you guys?" And he said, "You know, we were getting good business elsewhere, and that's what gave us the encouragement to put up with your bills." So, God was helping us on another level while we were struggling to make ends meet on the other end. So, I--God didn't tell me he was doing that for (laughter). But those were the, those were the rough years. Story_ID: 223032 Speaker 1: And as a result of that, as a result of that experience, I, in looking back, have had to conclude that during that time God was carrying UMI [Urban Ministries, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] and me in order that I would never try to take credit to myself for what has happened. You've probably heard of that little poem where this person is complaining that "Lord, in my worse time, I noticed that your foot tracks left me." And this person is complaining that God left him. And as the little poem goes, God says, "Well, when you saw only one set of footprints, that was me carrying you. So I was sustaining you when you didn't know it." And I'm convinced that God did that so that Mel Banks [HistoryMaker Melvin E. Banks] would never be able to say, "Look how bright you are," or "look how sharp you are." In fact, maybe I'll share this little experience that helped me along that way. It's on the clip that you saw. I was having my devotions one morning, and I was arguing with God because the bills were so high, and I didn't have any way to pay for them. And I'm saying to God in prayer, "God, why did you ask me to take on this job? You know I don't have the money. You know I'm not a great business person." And I'm saying, "Why did you ask me?" And at that moment I had the very unusual experience I'd never had before, and never had since. But I was aware that God was talking to me. It was so real that my body kind of vibrated. And God said to me in that moment, "Melvin, I did not ask you to do this because I thought you were so smart. I asked you, do you want to know why you? I asked you because I thought you would stick with it." And I had to say, "Who said that?" (Laughter) And I was aware that God had encouraged me in that moment. And if it had not been for that kind of experience, and my learning how to take time to listen, I'm sure I would have thrown in the towel. In fact, I was thinking about that, but God's encouragement helped me. So now I have to, I have to say that it was because of his encouragement in those deep moments that UMI is here today. So, I can't say I was so bright (laughter). Story_ID: 223033 Speaker 1: When did UMI [Urban Ministries, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] turn the corner? Speaker 2: Well, 1976 is when all the red ink came off the--we started in 1970, but it was 1976 before all the red ink was off the books. And of course, you know, it was growing, but it was never growing enough to take care of all the bills until about then. Speaker 1: So, initially, you were doing these Sunday school lessons? Speaker 2: That was the focus, right. We started with the idea of doing a Sunday school curriculum. And we started with teens the first time. Two years later we did a junior publication, and a couple of years after that we did a primary, going down to the youngest level. And then we did a, we used our adult, our teen teacher book, and turned it into an adult book--first a young adult book, an adult book--until we finally got all the age levels covered in the Sunday school. But it was all Sunday school material until about 1980, when we started publishing Vacation Bible School [VBS] material, which is a once a year program. And I took one of the Sunday school publications, one of the quarters, and edited it and turned it into a Vacation Bible School course. And from that point on, we've been also doing Vacation Bible School material every summer as well as the Sunday school. And as a part of the Vacation Bible School material, we would do a special adult book that was like a paperback. And we did those every year. So, we developed a list of undated paperback books that became a part of our line. So then we had Sunday school material, Vacation Bible School material, and separate Bible study books. And while doing one of the Vacation Bible School courses, I came across a video that somebody else had done, and we made that a part of VBS. And we saw that people responded so well, that for about eight or ten years after that we also developed a video that goes with the VBS. And those were stand-alone products. So now our videos, some of them are kind of obsolete, but we still carry about five or six of them, and we're trying to add some more to it. Speaker 1: Do you produce your own videos? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Those were, well, when you say we produce it--we did the writing, the script, and then we had somebody to do the shooting and stuff like that. But we've never had any equipment; but we just hired that to be done. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 223034 Speaker 1: This is a, you know, an impressive facility out here [Urban Ministries, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. And you know, employee--I mean, from the number of cars out there, there's a lot of activity going on. Speaker 2: Well, and much of that has occurred since about 19--when did Jeff [C. Jeffrey Wright] come here? Jeff came here in, well, let me back up and tell that little story. Jeff saw one of the videos that we did. Speaker 1: Now, this is Jeffrey Wright? Speaker 2: Jeff Wright, yeah. Speaker 1: Jeff saw one--he was working for Bristol-Myers [Squibb, New York, New York]. He saw one of the videos that we did, and he and his wife had been thinking about doing something like that. But he said, "Look, somebody started this already. Why don't we go and see if we can be of any help to them?" So, he called me up from Evansville, Indiana. He came up and we talked, and I recognized what a sharp person this was. So I asked him to be a consultant to me in developing some more videos and some products. And after about a year or so, I said, "Jeff, why don't you come on the board and help me run this company?" And he did so; he came onto the board. And after he got on the board I said, "You know what, Jeff? I think you ought to come into this company and run this company. I've taken it, you know, about as far as I can go." And the board was telling me, "Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin E. Banks], you know, people that start companies usually can take it to a certain point, and then they've got to get somebody to take it from there on." And so, I started talking to Jeff about that possibility. And every time I'd think I'd got him so he was ready to come, Bristol-Myers would give him a big raise and a big promotion. So, this happened about three times, about three different times (laughter). But finally he said, "I think I'm ready to come." So, he came in 1994. And we were then, we went from my basement at 9917 South Green Street; we were there for twelve years. From there, we went to a little place on 103rd Street in Chicago [Illinois], 1439 West 103rd Street across from Beverly Bank [& Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois], and stayed there for I think four or five years, something like that. And then we out-grew that, and moved across from the bank the other way, up over a cleaners. And it was so bad that--it was a bigger space, but the cleaning--they used to actually do cleaning on the first floor. So the fumes were coming up to the second floor, and sometimes our employees had to leave and go home because it was so bad. So, when Jeff came in, he said, "Man, we need to find some more space," that was his first assignment. We went looking for space, and we were going to lease some out this way, just find something that was already built. He came upon this guy who had this, owned this property. And he said, "Look, I can put you up a building just as easy as you can find something someplace else." So he worked with him, and then within a couple of years, we had the first part of this building. At that time, it ended just where you came in the front door; that was as far as it went. But we soon out-grew that, and we added on this space over here and added on to the warehouse. So we've got, I think it's about forty-six thousand square feet, something like that here now. And it's starting to get tight again. But we're here, and-- Story_ID: 223035 Speaker 1: --This is a business [Urban Ministries, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] with so much potential. I mean people were, had been talking since the late '60s [1960s] of the potential of the black church to educate black people in terms of cultural identity and, you know, political identity, and that sort of thing. Is there, I mean, the growth has got to be like, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, it's very encouraging. You know, we started out with just a handful of publications and people, and it has continued to where now we have about ten thousand black churches that are on our, that we serve every quarter or every year, if you put the VBS [Vacation Bible School] in there. We have sold something to about fifty thousand. They say there's seventy thousand black churches, and we're starting to think that maybe there's only about fifty thousand. But nevertheless, we sold something to fifty thousand of--if there are seventy thousand churches. Speaker 1: Who says there's like--who says this number? Speaker 2: Well, we've done some various perspectives. You know, the Howard School of Religion [sic. Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] does an annual, not an annual, but a periodic book on the black church. So, that figure comes from them. But it's, it's generally from various circles of surveys and statistics. That seems to be a fairly--obviously it's an estimate, because nobody's really--you know, they keep forming all the time. So, we've stuck with the figure of between sixty-five and seventy thousand African American churches in the country. And that includes those who are part of white denominations as well as all those that are totally black. Speaker 1: So, you've done business with fifty thousand? Speaker 2: Something like that, over a period of time, right, yeah, right. Speaker 1: That's amazing. Speaker 2: Because that's what our database consists of, about that, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. I would have thought there were more, actually, you know. But I guess--I don't know. Well, there seems like there are so many. When you drive down any community in Chicago [Illinois], most of the streets--the storefronts that don't have stores anymore-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --are churches. Speaker 2: And you could very well be right. It's just that that's the figure that most people seem to be comfortable with. And until somebody can prove otherwise, you know, we've been sticking with that. You know, if you were to, actually if you take--and this book that Howard University [Washington, D.C.] has been doing, they list all the denominations with all their claimed memberships, and you come up with, you come up with about thirty million that are identified with these various denominations, which would be about--if the population is about thirty-seven million, then if you've got thirty million going to church, then that's about three-fourths, or 80 percent, of the population that's going to church. But it gets tested from various perspectives, and it's probably somewhere in there. But I don't know. You know, if somebody told me there were ninety thousand and they could prove it, I'd accept that (laughter). Speaker 1: I'd believe it. Speaker 2: It's everybody's estimation, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, do you sell, like, to all denominations? Speaker 2: Yes. I think every Protestant--well, even Catholics, we sell to Catholics. Every denomination except, let's say the Muslims or Jehovah's Witnesses--except those two sort of way out groups who blacks are involved with--we are selling something to them, yeah. And that's been one of the, one of the secrets of our success--that we have not tried to zero in on any one particular group. We find those common theological beliefs that most people would agree to, and we seek to stick to those. And we don't get into the specific denomination of distinctives, like whether or not a person is supposed to speak in tongues or not. We just don't deal with that, or, whether you get baptized by being dunked in the water or sprinkled. We just say you get baptized, (laughter) and leave it to them to interpret it the way they want. And by presenting our material in that way, we've been able to embrace a wide spectrum of denominations. And they all find great help in our approach to them. And even some groups, because they recognize the need for material that has blacks in it, in some cases churches that would not ordinarily want to embrace some of the--even our--not theology--it sort of tends to be like in the middle; it's not real conservative and not real liberal. But some groups that may have some questions otherwise would say, "What you do is so important that we think we ought to be using this material." Story_ID: 223036 Speaker 1: Largely white denominations will have some black members, and sometimes even all-black congregations. As a matter of fact, [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.]'s bigger group is primarily white, Church of Christ, Church of, what is it--United Church of Christ. Speaker 2: United Church of Christ, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah right. Well, that's different from the Church of God in Christ. Speaker 2: The United Church of Christ. Speaker 1: [Trinity] United Church [of Christ, Chicago, Illinois], yeah. They have a, he's the biggest black church within that denomination. I was asking if there's--how, first of all, how do--has it been easy to produce materials that depict African Americans or people who look like African Americans--or people of color--in the context of the Bible? Is it easy to do that? Or is it well-received? Or it is like-- Speaker 2: That's a good question. Because initially, while there were some who understood what we were trying to do, there were a lot of others who did not understand what we were trying to do, and who chastised us. Because they said, "This material is too black." I'll never forget, (laughter), I'll never forget doing the research I was doing. And I had InTeen, the first publication, and I was showing this to some Sunday school teachers to get their reaction to it. So, I showed this lady this cover. It had this beautiful black girl with hair, you know, hair on her. And I asked the lady to respond to it, and asked her if she saw anything in it that bothered her. She looked at it, and she said, "Child, that gal's too black" (laughter). And that was typical of some of the attitudes about seeing yourself in publications. But even, but on the other side of that was our portrayal of biblical people as people of color. Initially, some folks understood it, but the majority did not. But because we felt we were on a mission to help people understand that the Bible was for them, and that the biblical people were not European, that was one place where we would not, we did not compromise. And so, over a period of time--it has taken time--but over a period of time people have come to understand that in some cases the quality of the material is such that they cannot find an excuse not to use it. Or, on the other hand, they've come to understand that we're doing has a sound basis for doing so. So that now, it's rare to find somebody who would object to the way that we do the material, but that was not true in those early days. Speaker 1: It was uncharted territory then. Speaker 2: Yes, right, right. It was, it was uncharted, and they just couldn't--all they'd been exposed to was the European look. And so, it was, it was a challenge. But I'm happy to say not only have people come to accept what we do, but we've had influence on some other publishers who are also taking a look at this, and are starting to be a little bit more sensitive to the needs of African Americans and the stuff that they put out. They don't, the white publishers are still kind of reluctant to go all out, as far as portraying biblical people as people of color. They do as much as they dare, but they don't go all out to do so. Speaker 1: So, they might put a few in? Speaker 2: Yeah. And one of my competitors that I can mention, David C. Cook [Colorado Springs, Colorado], has started to--for editions that go to black people, they have started to show biblical people as people of color. And some of the denominations seem more comfortable in so doing now. So, our influence has gone beyond what we've been able to produce ourselves, and that's an encouragement to us, to know that we're on the right track, yeah. Story_ID: 223037 Speaker 1: --In terms of content, is there a curricular approach, I mean to the curriculum [for Urban Ministries, Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] and to the content that gears it towards the African American population and makes it different from what you generally get? Speaker 2: Well, yes, because curriculum, to be effective, needs to speak to the life needs of the people you're writing to. And, and, and, while, for example in those early days, almost 90 percent of people were located in urban inner cities. And their problems were different from people who lived out in the suburbs who were white. Now some black folks are starting to move out, so you have a little bit of a mixture, a little bit more of a mixture than it was at that time. But the basic idea is that if a person is going to be able to profit from the material, it needs to relate to their problems and to their needs, and to recognize that not every family, for example, has a husband and wife, or a father and mother. Sometimes they're single mothers, and we recognize that. In our, in our primary material, for example, knowing that not all kids are at the same level, reading level, we have three different reading levels and one publication. So, a first-grader who doesn't know much can read and grasp that story. A second grader can read a little bit more, and a third grader can read even more. So, we try to be sensitive to the educational variations within the black church. And of course we feel that all of the issues that confront our society can be, and should be, dealt with material in the proper way. It may not be that we take a particular political position, but we do deal with moral issues--any kind of issues that's out there. And we feel that it's, it's, it's appropriate, because we think in some way the Bible speaks to all of life. Now, there will be people who may narrow their focus, but we don't think that that's appropriate, and that we should be able to speak to everything. So in our publications, the lesson books draw attention to various kinds of things. And then we have additional articles--that if the scripture for that publication does not lend itself to some issue, we may have some articles that go along with it that will deal with some of the issues. So, there is a, there is a philosophy that we ought to deal with all the issues that confront the African American community. Speaker 1: And there are a lot of them now, too-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --to deal with. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --and they're specific to us and the nation as a whole, you know. So, what are some of the issues that you've dealt with? Speaker 2: Well, of course, obviously, you know, racism; that's one of the big ones. But we have dealt with the gang situation. We've dealt with parenting from an awareness that there are needs within the black community--the style of living that needs to be dealt with. We, we, we, we point out in a kind of way the whole issue of abortion without trying to be dogmatic, but recognizing that they're some issues there that need to be--there are some moral issues that need to be dealt with. And certainly when it comes to the politics, you know, without any endorsing any particular candidate, we can point to the issues that need to be, that need to be reckoned with. So, I, you know, those are just a few that come to mind that would be in some places dealt with. But again, you're talking about focusing in a way that's appropriate for that particular age level, and that's going to be true to the Bible text that we are dealing with, so that we don't try to impose issues on the text, but try to bring out the principles that are there. We think that's a sounder way to deal with issues, because people want to know that what you say has some authority behind it. And if it's just an idea that we throw out without any basis for so doing, we're on shaky ground. So, we try to expound the Bible and make application to the issues that we see, that it applies to. Story_ID: 223038 Speaker 1: Do you [Urban Ministries, Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] deal with, like, historical figures like [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], who was a great religious leader (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And world renowned as well as a rights activist, you know. Do you all deal with him? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he's been dealt with so many times, both as illustration as well as--we've got--with our Vacation Bible School, and that's one example, we do a poster of important people in the black community. And then along with that, we have content that describes the history. We have an audio tape that goes with that. And over the years, I suppose we have dealt with hundreds of black leaders in the country. Some are well known, some unknown, but always with the thought that these are people who helped to make the black community what it is, and in many cases have contributed to the life of the church. But we have not limited it either to just those in the church, but just all those people who have made contributions to the black community and can be viewed as a, to some degree, a model for young folks to know that you can follow a pattern yourself in some way after this person--inventors, doctors, lawyers, all the people out there who have--they're lifted up as models for young people. Story_ID: 223039 Speaker 1: Now, how do you all [Urban Ministries Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] approach this? Now, you've got like, I know various writers probably contribute, and educators contribute to this. But do you have like lively staff meetings about these issues? Speaker 2: Well, we have like an editor for each age level. We publish by age groups--pre-school, primary, junior, teens, and we have an editor for each of these levels. And they will do some of the writing, but in many cases they will assign Bible lessons to be written by people across the country. And they get these back and then they will edit them. And they do have editorial meetings in which they discuss issues both in terms of the emphasis or the graphics, or whatever the case may be. But they do have, and then we have an in-house graphics department that will design all of the publications. So, they're constantly meeting to explore how they're going to, what the publication is ultimately going to look like. Speaker 1: And how many titles do you have now? Speaker 2: Well, let's see, with Sunday school I think there are, there are about, we've got a teacher book. I think there're about sixteen or eighteen publications for Sunday school. And-- Speaker 1: Do they come out on a quarterly basis? Speaker 2: Yes, they're all, yeah, they're-so--and they work about two or three years ahead. So-- Speaker 1: So you've got sixteen different titles that come out once a quarter, and you're like ahead by two or three years? Speaker 2: Right, yeah (laughter). Yeah, right, and that's especially true with our, with our precepts. That's a book that has all the Bible lessons for a whole year. And so, in order to be ahead of the game, they are now getting back materials that will come out in the year 2006. They're already out writing and getting those materials back. Some of the quarterly material may be out a little less, maybe--they're working on, certainly they're working on next year's material, but they probably have assignments out for the year following. So, with that sort of a schedule that they work on, they keep it all flowing. Because we have to have the material, you see, three months in advance out in the stores and the churches before your quarter starts. It has be delivered to us so that we can get it out to them. So, we have to work ahead in order to make that work like it should. Speaker 1: Now, now, the books that are produced for primarily the adult population, are they mainly ethical pieces, or what are they? Speaker 2: Primarily Bible study. However, we have a bunch of books that are--one on money, how to manage money, how to help people in counseling. If you know anyone in your neighbor who has a problem, we have a book on that. Self-esteem books--this past year, meaning 2004, we had a book on television, because television is having such an impact on so many people. "Jeff" Wright [C. Jeffrey Wright] wrote a book on that, and we have the work to go with it. But it's, it comes at the content from a topic of perspective, to say here's this issue of television; here's what we think the Bible has to say about the way you watch television and what you can do about the things that are on it. And there are a number of issues like that that we deal with. But in our Sunday school material, we follow what is known as the International Uniform [Sunday School Bible] Lesson Series, which is a pre-determined set of scriptures that all the churches, all the black churches, make use of no matter who's publishing their material. And we follow that as a basic guideline. And we take those and re-write them. We take that passage of scripture and we develop it and write it in a way that we think will mean more to the young folks that we're writing for, so that it differs in some respects from other publishers. But at the same time, it's following the same Bible passage that makes it usable in any denomination, pretty much any black denomination. This is a series of outlines that's produced by the National Council of Churches, in New York [New York]-- Story_ID: 223040 Speaker 1: Being a black publisher in any kind of literature, is a risky business. And it's something that's relatively new, in terms of book publishing anyway. I mean, I think we've always had black newspapers and so forth, but book publishing has been a relatively new thing, although people did it in the past. At one time, I think in 1967, '68 [1968], there were like over forty black publishers, book publishers. Speaker 2: Newspapers or book publishers. Speaker 1: Yeah, publishing books on various levels. A lot of poetry was coming out, and political essays. And there even was an organization of black publishers at one time, in the secular world anyway, that were publishing materials. And I think by 1975 or so, almost all of them were gone. They're only about three left; Drum and Spear Press in [Washington] D.C. shut down. Quite a few of them shut down, Broadside Press in Detroit [Michigan]. The Third World Press in Chicago [Illinois] still is hanging on, you know. And it has quite a few titles itself, over and over again. You know, but nothing on the--nobody's published on this scale, of all the secular black publishing companies, anyway, that I know of. Speaker 2: There was also another publisher here in Chicago that had a bunch of small booklets for after-school kids. They were on black history, all kinds of-- Speaker 1: Impact, yeah. Speaker 2: Impact, right, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Impact Publishing [ph.]. Speaker 2: And I don't think they're in business now, are they? Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: We discussed earlier that Winston-Derek [Publishers, Inc.] out in [Nashville] Tennessee-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --published quite a few materials for the church. And a Bible, he published black Bible-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --publications and so forth. And a lot of the--but they also published secular stuff, like the fairy tale books by [Fred] Crump [Jr.], the artist. Yeah, and I hear you all are working with Crump. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: His first name escapes me right now. Speaker 2: Fred Crump, I think it is. Speaker 1: Fred Crump, I think so, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: A wonderful artist-- Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: --and storyteller, yeah. And I hear, I heard that your director, [C.] Jeffrey Wright, went out to California and met with him. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And he lives in a trailer in the desert, I think it was. He's a remarkable figure in the black publishing world, Fred Crump. Speaker 2: I never met him, but of course, I've seen his works, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, I haven't had a chance to talk to Jeff since he's been out there to get the details of how that conversation went, but I know there is a desire to see if we can't get more of his stuff and get it out, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. But it's-- Speaker 2: And of course we have one book ['Favorite Bible Stories,' Fred Crump, Jr.] of his now that we do. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What's the name of it? Speaker 2: You're putting me on the spot. Speaker 1: I know you've got David and Goliath on the cover, I know that. But I don't know the name of the book, I can't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one, but I don't remember the, I don't remember the name of it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. But yeah, that's, that's unfortunate. And to be quite honest with you, I did not realize that all those publishers had died, they'd gone out of business. That's remarkable. Speaker 1: And one of the strongest now, I guess, is Black Classics Press [sic. Black Classic Press, Baltimore, Maryland] out in [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They're still going pretty strong. They re-publish older materials primarily, but they did publish one of Walter Mosley's detective novels, you know. Mosley went in with them to try to give them a boost, actually, you know. His last [Ezekiel] Easy Rawlins novel was published with them, with Black Classics Press. Speaker 2: Now, the publishing house that did a lot of, you mentioned his name earlier. He's a professor, a black professor of black-- Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti of Third World Press? Speaker 2: No, he's out of, he's out East. I think he's at a school in New York. Anyway, he, with his students, he did a whole bunch of books on ancient black people--ancient Egypt and a bunch of those countries around there that his students--and they, he writes the introduction for most of them. Speaker 1: Oh, John Henrik Clarke you're talking about? Speaker 2: No, it's not Clarke, it's somebody else. Speaker 1: Dr. Ben, Joseph Ben [Dr. Yosef Ben-Jochannan]-- Speaker 2: I think it's either he or someone similar to that. Anyway, I think most of those books are published by some publishing company, and I don't know whether they're still in operation or not. I have a series of books. I have to go and look up and see what the publisher-- Speaker 1: African World Press [sic. Africa World Press, Trenton, New Jersey] was out of New Jersey. I think it's run by an Ethiopian. Speaker 2: Yes, that was it, yeah. Speaker 1: The African World Press is still, yeah, they're still-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right, that's the one. Yeah, okay, right, okay. Speaker 1: So, but you know it's a tough business for black people, you know. Story_ID: 223041 Speaker 1: I know there're more black bookstores now than there've ever been. Now, do you [Urban Ministries, Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] sell a lot of materials out of black Christian bookstores? Speaker 2: We do. Actually, we've limited ourselves to about eighty; I've got about eighty bookstores. There are probably about a hundred and fifty in the country, but all of them aren't selling curriculum. But because ours is primarily curriculum, we deal with them. And then of course we have in our database a couple of thousand bookstores, but most of them are white, and some of them sell material to black churches, and that's why we have them. Well, maybe not that many that we have; I think it's about five or six hundred that sell--that are white stores selling material to black churches, and we sell stuff to them as well. Speaker 1: Are most of your sales direct sales, or are they through-- Speaker 2: Most of ours are direct, yeah. And probably about 70 percent of our business goes directly to churches. And fortunately for us, it enables us to keep going when stores have difficulty. And by that I mean right through now, most stores, Christian stores, are struggling because of Walmart and Target. They're taking all the best-sellers and they're selling them, so the stores are having a rough time to make it. And I think, I understand in the last couple of years, a couple of hundred stores have gone out of business because of Walmart. And so, but fortunately for us we're dealing direct, so it doesn't impact us like it does some other businesses, you know. Story_ID: 223042 Speaker 1: What are some of your--we always ask this question, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I think probably if I try to rank the--in terms of the black community's spirituality, they are actually doing better than the majority of the population as a whole. All the surveys and statistics indicate that black people go to church more often, read Bibles more often, and pray more often than the rest of the nation does. So from that perspective, it's, it's encouraging that our people recognize the place of God and the place of spirituality. But having said that, there are still some issues. And I think probably the number one issue is economics. And sometimes it's hard to separate these, because education is, you know, what comes first, the chicken or the egg? You get the education and then you get the job. Or, if there's money available, then you can afford to go to school. But, but, but economics and education I think are two. And of course, there's the whole issue of health care. But in my judgment, to the extent that we can establish businesses and generate funds that encourage people to better themselves in that dimension, I think that's one of the key areas. Now, I make that secondary to the spirituality, because I think the most important consideration is a person's relationship with God. And that's where the church comes in. But because I think the black community is probably ahead of the rest of it, I make the assumption that they're probably doing a little bit better, even though there's a lot to be understood even in the spiritual realm, or spirituality realm. Because sometimes there is the perception of spirituality, and there may not be as much real solid content and a knowledge of the Bible and a knowledge of how to live the Christian life, but at least the desire for it is there. But apart from that, if I regard that as the number one, then I think the economic and the education are two areas. And of course, politics play a role. And I don't ignore the fact that whoever's running the country has an impact, but I think it's these other levels that inform politics. That is, if we were educated and had money, the political thing would not be as much of an issue as it is now with so many people out of work. There has to be this dependence on the government to supply what is lacking, but ideally, people would find their way with jobs and with education, and would need less dependence on the government. And I wish that that was so, but the reality is we're not there, and therefore you have to have these programs that get people across the troubled waters, you know, until they get there. But it does sometimes concern me that many people have made it a way of life to depend on the government, as opposed to seeking to get an education and to seek out a business opportunity so that they can be more independent from the government. And I'm not, I hope that's not interpreted to mean that I'm one of these persons that think that people can pull themselves up by their bootstraps. That's not it at all. Sometimes they don't have any straps to pull. But I do sense sometimes a mentality that says that I won't better myself, especially these young folks. They're so short-term, some of them. So, they're such short-term thinkers that they don't think ahead and recognize that in order to be survivors and flourish in the community, they need to get an education, they need to be thinking ahead, they need to realize that they have to be self-independent thinkers and workers in order to be the kind of people that they need to be. Story_ID: 223043 Speaker 1: When you look back at the things that you have been able to accomplish, is there any major thing that you would have done differently at this stage? Speaker 2: I'm not sure I would have started this company [Urban Ministries, Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] if I'd known what I had to go through (laughter). That's difficult to--because I think there've been some decisions that were, to me, were wise decisions, and I would not do them differently. And one of them is my understanding of who God is and who I am in relationship to God. The fact that early on, I was brought to the place of recognizing that I needed to entrust my life to Jesus Christ and to God; I wouldn't ever think of doing that any different. I suppose if I--my choice of education, I could wish that I would have been able to attend a school that would have given me all the academic knowledge and the theological knowledge. But if I could have had more blackness within that, I could have appreciated that more. But as it was, I had to scramble around and find it beyond what I was able to get in education. I had it up through high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], but post high school is where I kind of think that it could have been a better mix of education in order to prepare me for what I'm doing today. Those are things that come to mind right away, in terms of what I would have done differently. Story_ID: 223044 Speaker 1: You were describing the atmosphere here at UMI [Urban Ministries, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah. What we hear so often, and it's been reinforced again and again, is that people who come to work for Urban Ministries are glad for the atmosphere that they find here. It is, most of the people, if not all of them, make professions of having to be Christians, although we don't make it a requirement except in our editorial department. But people just sort of migrate to a place like this. And when they come, they find that the atmosphere is so different from places where they have worked before, especially those who have been in upper management in corporate America. It's such a refreshing environment, where we once a week have chapel and we have outside speakers come in and talk to people, and they enjoy that. We, with all of our directors, we have another time when we come together, and will be more specific in praying about their needs and their concerns. And any time if somebody comes in and they've had a mother that's sick or a child that's in the hospital, they'll tell somebody, and two or three folks will get together and pray for them. It's that kind of atmosphere that makes it, that encourages folks to want to come and work for us. And of course, our mission is a very positive mission. While we have to get the money to pay the bills, our real objective is not just to make money. Our real objective to provide life transforming literature that folks can use all over the country, and profit by it. And that, that, that bigger vision that people sense when they come to work here, causes them to want to pour themselves into it when they know it's not just a matter of a paycheck at the end of the week or the pay period. And you see, our goal is a big goal, you know. We, we, we would love to see every African American church in America get exposed to what we have, and make a decision of whether or not they want to use it or not. But even beyond that, we recognize that people of color around the world have had some of the same experiences we've had here, but they've been exploited and they've been manipulated, and they feel some of the same stuff that we feel. And we think that it's an opportunity for us in Africa and other parts of the world for people of color to get literature, and to be exposed to things that can liberate and help them to be better people. Story_ID: 223045 Speaker 1: I did not mention it, but we [Urban Ministries, Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] sponsor each year, a conference for church leaders, a national conference for pastors and Christian educators. And we invite leaders from churches to come together, and we'll have anywhere from 800,000 to 1,200 people come together to talk about how they can better do their jobs at the churches where they come from. And this, too, becomes an opportunity for us to impact churches. And some people come internationally, but most of them are from the [United] States, that come to benefit from the workshops. And our speakers come from all over, they're not just UMI speakers. We're getting people, the best that we can find in the country, to come and talk to us. Speaker 2: Who are some of the people, the speakers? Speaker 1: Well, this year--over the years we've had, let me see--well, the best I can--I can remember better this year (laughter). We have [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur] Brazier of Apostolic Church [of God, Chicago, Illinois] is going to speak. We have [HistoryMaker] Michael [A.] Battle from the International [Interdenominational] Theological Center [ITC] in Atlanta [Georgia]. We've got Alexander [ph.] out of, I think it's Virginia. And then we've got some old standbys, Dr. Goodwin out of Memphis, Tennessee, Benny Goodwin [ph.]. [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Floyd Flake and his wife [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Elaine Flake] are speaking this year. And we typically have somebody from Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Reverend [James T.] Meeks is going to speak this year from Salem Baptist [Church, Chicago, Illinois]. Those are just a few. There's a brochure, I think. I think I saw him with a copy of it that has something-- Speaker 2: Has Cain Hope Felder ever been part of it? Speaker 1: Yeah, Cain has been here a time or two, yeah, right. And some other people from Howard have been here, Dr.--both their names escape me now; they're professors there at Howard. [Dr. Cheryl J.] Sanders is the last name, a professor of ethics. And we've had [Reverend] Johnny [Ray] Youngblood from New York [New York]. Speaker 2: That's quite a group, you know. That's-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --some of the best known-- Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Robert Franklin from, he was at ITC, he's now someplace else. He was the president of ITC for a while. He's been here. Most of your--[HistoryMaker Reverend] Gardner Taylor was scheduled to be here, but he took sick and couldn't make it. Speaker 2: I was going to ask about him. Speaker 1: Yeah. Mitchell, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Henry Mitchell and [Reverend Dr.] Ella [Pearson] Mitchell were here last year for the conference. I don't think [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A. Wright, Jr.] has ever--he has spoken. Yeah. [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] has spoken, too, Jesse Jackson, some years back. Story_ID: 223046 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Survilla Ellis Banks] get a chance to see you become a success, you know? Speaker 2: She did not, she--I was working for Scripture Press [Wheaton, Illinois], I think when she passed away. She was living in New York [New York], so she never got a chance to see all of this. There's one little thing that I'll never forget about my mother. When I started at Moody [Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois], after I'd been there a year, I went back home [Birmingham, Alabama] and I was trying to tell my mother I was this new guy that had learned, been up to the school and learned all this good stuff. And I told her I'd learned all about the Trinity. Now, this may be new to you, but the concept of God manifesting himself as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is very controversial in some areas, and complicated. But I went back home telling my mother I now understood that so fully. And she said to me, "[HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks], you just keep on studying, because you don't have it yet" (laughter). But she was very supportive of, you know, my getting an education. But I was, she didn't see much of what has happened now. And my sister [Margaret Banks] has passed away. So, none of my family, immediate family, has been able to--although my sister, she passed away before UMI [Urban Ministries, Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] really got into it. So, she really wasn't aware of that either, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 223047 Speaker 1: Do you have any children? Speaker 2: Yes, I have three children. The oldest, Melvin [Banks], Jr., Melvin II, actually started his own publishing house down in Atlanta [Georgia], and it's still having some struggles. But he has Bibles, he publishes Bibles. He takes a regular Bible and he adds content, sort of like the [Original] African Heritage [Study] Bible. Speaker 1: Yeah, I-- Speaker 2: Only it's on a little smaller scale, but he does that. He's got a bunch of Bibles like that. That's my oldest. There is Pat, Patrice [Banks Lee], my daughter, in the middle who teaches school in the city. She's married and has no children, but she's mentoring a bunch of young people. And it just thrills me how she has mentored a few kids through school, and they're away in college now. And my youngest son, Reggie [Reginald Banks], who is, just got married again. He's doing these--marketing comedians, and he's doing fairly well at it. He has one son; we have one grandson, Regis [ph.], who is now thirteen years old. And Regis is quite sharp, both athletically and academically; he's generally at the top of his class. He's still--just finishing up grammar school now and about to go into high school next year. But that's my family. And my wife [Olive Perkins Banks], who started the business in the basement with us and has been right by my side until, what? About eight or nine years ago, I guess it's been that. But she's retired now. And we'll be married fifty years next year (laughter). Speaker 1: That's wonderful, yeah. Story_ID: 223048 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back at everything you've done so far, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to think that we [Urban Ministries Inc., (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] at least made a contribution toward placing in the hands of people who are concerned about others; placing in their hands resources that would facilitate them being able to teach and build moral fiber, moral character and spiritual content into people and the work they do in their churches. I could wish that we had embraced every church, but at least I think we're on our way to making an impact. And the testimonies we get from pastors and teachers and students across the country tell us that we're making a difference. You've heard of kids who despise going to church and Sunday school, until they picked up a publication and could see themselves in it. That's been refreshing, to see how lives have been changed and transformed as a result of that. So, I suppose if there is a legacy, it's the joy of seeing people brought into a closer contact; relationship with God. That gives me the greatest joy, anyway, if you call that a legacy (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 223049 Speaker 1: What's the future of UMI [Urban Ministries Inc., Chicago, Illinois] in terms of materials? Are you going beyond books to more audiovisual stuff? Or you, you think-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we have modified our company's mission. While it's always been resources, we've defined resources as much broader than just publications. But we're not all that we want to be, but of course even now we're going to the web, and we're doing a lot of stuff on the web. We started with some videos, and we're looking to expand that. We're doing, seeking to do more in terms of children's undated type books. We are exploring the possibility of getting on the radio. So, our, we believe we are a company that produces content, and then we have to decide the vehicles to deliver it. So, we're already doing the content, but we can take the content and put it in various ways to get it out, much like the big media companies do today, you know, where they take a big movie and they do a book on it and they put it on DVD, and then they go to movie houses. Then they go to all the places where they take this content and distribute it out there. So, we kind of envision ourselves ultimately as doing that kind of thing with what we do, and reaching out beyond the shores of the United States. Because, you know, the Internet gives you that opportunity, and so we're looking at places beyond these shores where we can reach people of color wherever they may be. That's our vision, and it may take a while to get there, but I'm convinced that we do have some good people who can help us get there. So, I'm encouraged by that. And it's just a question of time and some more money. That as we sell material, it provides us some resources that we can do that. So, we're encouraged by that. Story_ID: 223050 Speaker 1: Last question is--unless there's--is there anything we haven't asked you that you want to talk about, or something we didn't mention? Speaker 2: Well, looks like I've touched on--I didn't say much about the involvement of my family. They were with us [Urban Ministries, Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] from the very beginning. And the kids would stuff envelopes. So, they've made a contribution to what we've done today. And the very fact that my wife [Olive Perkins Banks] has stood by me all these years, through those real struggles, is a, says something about her character and about the way that God has sort of led me, to give me somebody like that who was willing to stick with me through thick and thin. So, I just appreciate how God has given us this family that has made this kind of thing possible, and of course, giving us people around us that--you can't ignore the place that people play in making things happen. No one person can do all the stuff that needs to be done here. It's got to be a group of folks. And how we've been able to find these folks, and how God has guided us to folks to make that happen, it's really a remarkable thing. Speaker 1: You mentioned you were the pastor of a small congregation, too. We haven't talked about that on tape, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm one of the elders in a church [Westlawn Gospel Chapel, Chicago, Illinois] that we helped to start. If you recall back--this fellow [William Rudolph] that encouraged me to find a church where I would be with my people. Well, at that particular church, I became aware that there was a church on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] where the neighborhood was changing, and wanted to keep the ministry going. So, three couples left the church on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] back in 1956. And we started a little church on the West Side, and I've been involved as one of the elders. We function with elders as opposed to one pastor, although we do have a senior pastor. But the church functions as elders, and I'm one of those elders, and we've been there since 1956. It's never grown real large, but there have been a lot of people who have been impacted by that. They come, they learn, they grow. And many of them go on to start their own ministries and churches. So, that's been refreshing to see how that church has had an impact. And in some respects, they've sort of been behind what we've done here, because of my being there. And one time they had to loan us some money to pay a bill (laughter). So, it's been refreshing to have that as a legacy. The other thing that I did not go much into, I just made reference, was to the camp up in Michigan that we helped to start. It's a camp that in its peak would have about five or six hundred kids go up during the summer. While I am not on the grounds now as I used to be, I still serve on the board. And Circle R Ranch [sic. Circle Y Ranch] is a summer resident' camp, and it's been one of my ministries, so to speak, where I've devoted some effort to see it develop and grow, and to see kids come up. This past year, we had about 350, and we are going to be growing even greater than that. We have about 140 acres up in Michigan where kids can go up and spend a week, and that's another one of the things that I take great delight in. Story_ID: 223051 Speaker 1: The last question then is, sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I hate to sound like I'm echoing somebody like [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. But if it could be said that here was a man who had a dream of seeking to communicate the truth of God's Word to people, and he was able to make some contribution along that line, then I think I would be pleased. But I'm not the, I guess I'm not the judge of that. It may be a dream of mine, but I have sought to dedicate my life to God and to Christ, and to the work of his kingdom. And if it can be said that I made a contribution toward that, and that I fulfilled what God had in mind for me to do--believing that he's sovereign and that he has a purpose for every life--if I have fulfilled that, then I'd be happy, I'd be pleased. Speaker 1: All right, thank you. Thank you, sir. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 223052 Speaker 1: Okay, this is a photograph of the groundbreaking for Urban Ministries [Inc. (UMI), Chicago, Illinois] back in 1992. On the extreme left is, well, on my left is "Jeff" Wright [C. Jeffrey Wright], who is the current CEO of UMI. Next to him is a local banker who we were talking with about the possibility of financing this. Next to him, the big guy with the hard hat, is the builder of the facility we're staying in. Next to him is a local politician, Giglio [ph.], I think his name is. Next to him would be myself, [HistoryMaker] Melvin [E. Banks]. And next, to my left is my wife, Olive [Perkins] Banks. Speaker 2: And the next one? Speaker 1: Here we have the board members of Urban Ministries. Starting at my extreme left is-- Speaker 2: Just say viewer's left to right. Speaker 1: Okay. Viewer's left to right would be James Lemon who serves on our board. He started a franchise of about a hundred bookstores. Speaker 2: Just the names. Speaker 1: Just the names, okay, James Lemon. [Dr.] Stanley [B.] Long, Dr. Stanley Long. Melvin Banks, and to my left is Jeff Wright, the president and CEO of UMI. Speaker 2: And Lemon is spelled? Speaker 1: L-E-M-O-N. Speaker 2: Okay. And the date this was taken? Speaker 1: Oh, boy, probably two years ago, I would say. Speaker 2: All right, next. Speaker 1: Oh, this must have been last year for my birthday, yeah, when I was given a little gift by the staff here at UMI. That would have been like in October of 2003, I would think. Speaker 2: Go ahead, next. Speaker 1: The staff, and I can't name all these people (laughter). We're gathered in the chapel area. Speaker 2: About what year is that? Is that 2003? Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be 2003, because we had that theme, "Transforming Lives One Day at a Time." Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is a gathering at one of our conferences, conventions, where we go out to display our material. That's my sister-in-law, Sarah Hennings [ph.]. Next to her is Kenneth Rowerson [ph.] who worked as the marketing director for UMI at that time. Next to him, myself. And standing is my oldest son, Melvin [Banks] II. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: I don't recognize these people, but that's me standing. And next to me is Phil Rodman [Philip Rodman], who served as the editor for a period of time. And next to him, the young lady would be, I can't think of her name, but she used to work for us in the media department. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my wife and me. And what is the event? I'm not sure what the event was. Oh, I think that was a newspaper--the lady has a newspaper called Spiritual Awakening [ph.], I think it is. And she had a dinner and we were guests there. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Okay. That's at one of the conferences that we sponsor. My wife, and next to me, in the middle is Clifton Davis, who is well-known for his TV programs. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: There is my wife and our youngest son, Reggie [Reginald Banks]. And I am on the right. That picture was taken in our home. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's a picture of one of our representatives from the Chicago [Illinois] area, Diane Jones [sic. Diana Jones], who did a bunch of workshops for us. And I'm standing next to her. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that's just me in my office at UMI. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: And this is a display of ours at one of the conferences, and I am waiting on a customer that I cannot identify. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Standing to the extreme left is LeRoy Yates, the senior pastor of Westlawn Gospel Chapel [Chicago, Illinois] and his wife next to him. Another of the elders, Harvey Rollerson, spelled R-O-L-L-E-R-S-O-N. Next to him is his wife, Doris. And next to her is my wife, Olive. And I'm on the right, Melvin Banks. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That is a picture of my son, my youngest son, Reggie; my daughter, Patrice [Banks Lee]; and I am on the right. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Here I am talking with my brother-in-law, Bill Cornell [ph.], my wife's brother, who is a professor out at Fuller Theological Seminary [Pasadena, California]. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Then here I am with my dear wife, Olive. It looks like we're being feted at something, but I'm not sure what (laughter)...