 Story_ID: 4713 Speaker 1: My name is Reuben Cannon. My date of birth is 2-11-46 [1946]; Chicago, Illinois. And today's date is June [sic, July] 25, 19--2001. Speaker 2: And spell Reuben for us. Speaker 1: Reuben is spelled, R-E-U-B-E-N, and my middle name is Ernest, E-R-N-E-S-T, Cannon, and I'm a junior. Speaker 2: And I'd like to have the location we're at, give the address and your profession. Speaker 1: We're in my headquarters, Reuben Cannon & Associates. The location is 5225 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 526, Los Angeles, California 90036. And this office is the main office of Reuben Cannon & Associates. Reuben Cannon & Associates is a casting--casting company and a production company of TV and film. Speaker 2: And what would you describe as your profession? Speaker 1: Producer, casting director. Story_ID: 4714 Speaker 1: And I ask five questions of everyone, they're sort of 'People' magazine-ish. And then we'll get to the interview, but--. Speaker 2: My favorite food. My favorite food (pauses). Beans and rice. I cook great beans. It's interesting, growing up in Chicago [Illinois], we ate beans a lot. And I--when I came to California as an adult, I swore I'd never eat beans again. I declared a moratorium on beans. And then I learned to cook beans. And now I'm--I cook the best beans that I--that I know of. So I enjoy beans: black eyes, pintos, red beans and so that's my favorite food. Speaker 1: That's cute. My mother cooks great beans. Speaker 2: The other--(car horn beeps) What was that? Speaker 1: Traffic outside. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite color is? Speaker 2: Gray. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Anything is possible." Speaker 1: Boy, people do well on those! Story_ID: 4715 Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna get started. And I want to talk to you about your mother first. And I'd like to know what you know of--I want her name and I want you to just talk about what you know of her background and what her maiden name was. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Mildred Thompson Cannon. Her maiden name was Mildred Thompson. She was one of eight children, the youngest, born in Chicago [Illinois]. She--I think she completed third grade education at Douglas Elementary [School], that I also attended on the South Side of Chicago, 31st [Street] and Giles [Avenue]. She just did a wonderful job of raising four children. And I thank her often just for loving me and raising me and encouraging me to do--well the great thing about, you know, my mother is that she didn't quite map out a career path for me. But she just made me feel I could do anything. And that's what--that's what, you know, that's what empowered me, you know. Speaker 1: Did she--did she share any of her growing up with you? Speaker 2: Not really. Just this--Chicago. And because there were eight children, her brothers and sisters, they kind of made up their own community. They created their own community. Speaker 1: Do you know where her family is originally from? Speaker 2: My grandmother [Ida Thompson] is originally from a reservation, an Indian reservation, in Louisiana. Speaker 1: And you could tell the--you know what--what Indian tribe? Speaker 2: I don't, I know she resembles Geronimo. A couple of years ago when I was casting the movie 'Geronimo,' I said, "Boy! Looks like my grandmother." She looked liked Geronimo. And growing up doing--when I was growing up, at times, she would act like Geronimo, she'd go on the warpath with my brothers [Ronald Cannon] and sisters [Saundra Cooper and Sheila Wigley] and cousins. Speaker 1: (Laughs) Okay. That's cute, okay. So did she--she didn't share any other stories about her growing up? Or anything--she wasn't a talker much then? Speaker 2: No. She just--she being the youngest in the family, I guess, she seemed to be the one that always--they would have to tag along. You know, she had the older brothers and sisters. Story_ID: 4716 Speaker 1: And what about your father [Reuben Cannon, Sr.]? You don't--you didn't know much about him, right? Speaker 2: We only had--I only had three years with my father. The first five years of my life my father was not home, he was in prison. And he came home when I was five from prison. And he died of a heart attack when I was eight, you know. And he--he wasn't a criminal. He went to jail for five years for armed robbery. I guess one would say that's criminal. But he didn't--he was a gambler and he stuck up the neighborhood grocer where he bought his groceries. I mean--so he just made a mistake. And he spent five years at Statesville [Prison, Joliet, Illinois] or Pontiac [Correctional Center, Pontiac, Illinois], one of those prisons. And he came in and came out and got a job at the stockyard and became a butcher. And--and was a good father. And was playing a pick-up game of basketball--he was a very good athlete--I was watching him. And he came and sit down next to me and fell over and had a heart attack. So at that point, you know, our family shifted. There were four of us, my mother [Mildred Cannon] and my three brothers and sisters [Sheila Wigley; Saundra Cooper; Ronald Cannon]. And the shift was toward me taking on the responsibility of--as provider. Which is why--I mean, that's where my work ethic came from. Speaker 1: Now you--what are some--I want to go back to that, but what are some of your earliest memories of growing up. Do you--I mean--were they before five years old? Speaker 2: I don't remember much before five. I remember--it seems--I remember from the time my father came home and from then on. Because, you know, some how maybe I had a premonition I wasn't gonna have much time with him, so I just took every moment I could with him, you know. Make up for the lost time when, or--and now, so the three years we had together basically is what I have to hold on to in terms of a relationship as a father. And as a father myself, now of four children [Tonya Gatlin; Reuben Cannon, Jr.; Christopher Cannon; Sidney Cannon] and two grandchildren, I basically--I work at being the father I believe my father would have been had he lived longer. Speaker 1: Do you--do you remember the day that he came home? You know, what you felt like and all of that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do remember. I was sitting out--some reason there was all this activity around the house. It was a stirring like something important was happening. I didn't know what. And I just remember hiding underneath the table, you know. I didn't know this man. Hiding underneath the table, you know, somewhere. And when he came in--and that was my memory. And all of a sudden there was a whole different authority in the house, you know, now, you know. Where before my brothers and sisters and I we used to stay up late and it was only--Ronnie [Ronald Cannon], my youngest brother, hadn't been born. But my oldest sister [Saundra Cooper] and my youngest sister [Sheila Wigley] and I we, you know, we found that there were some new rules we had to abide by and we had to adjust to, even some new foods. So that's my memory about that. And I remember what he--his first job that he received was at a olive--olive factory. And I went there. You know, when you see--you see something in such abundance. I mean--olives. It's one thing to see a jar of olives or a box of 'em. But to see just what appeared to be as a kid from, you know--miles of olives. And that's all I remember. He worked there and he took me with him. And to visit--all of a sudden now, I was introduced to another whole set of cousins, you know, his--my grandmother on his--you know, his mother, and his brothers and sisters. All of a sudden they now--we had--so there's another whole family opened up, seemed to be introduced to us. Story_ID: 4717 Speaker 1: I remember he--he [father, Reuben Cannon, Sr.] was a musician, he played guitar. He had a songbook and he could sing like Roy Hamilton. And his favorite songs were by Roy Hamilton. And songs like 'Ebb Tide' and 'You'll Never Walk Alone,' and his--his tools as a butcher. We had a dog--we had a dog, a cocker spaniel. And because my father worked at the stockyard, the dog ate filet mignon. My father would come home from, you know, from the bus stop. The dog waited on the bus stop with a--. He had a little bag of, you know, of fresh cut beef in his pocket. I don't think this dog, Skip, ever tasted anything (laughs) except, you know, prime rib and I mean, the scraps from the stockyard. Skip ate very well. And he wouldn't even--he wouldn't eat out of a garbage. He wouldn't, you know. He had this very special diet, which is, you know, fresh cut meats, or, you know, that my father would boil and give him from the stockyard. And when he first brought this dog home, he brought him home in his pocket. So the dog, you know, began his--his--I guess, his relationship with our family in my father's pocket. And would wait for him every day there at the bus stop and follow him home. And so, you know, I remember his singing. I remember his playing the guitar. He was twenty-eight years old. Or at least, you know, when he came home he was like twenty-five. So he was a young man. And he was very--very active. And because of--the neighborhood is where he grew up as well. This was around 30th [Street] and Vernon [Avenue]. Which is now-- right off of [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] King Drive. It's now South Park [Way]. It's right behind--right in front of Michael Reese Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] there. Speaker 2: Did you have a sense that you were a junior? I mean this whole thing--. You know, here's someone coming in, you know, who has your name. You know, your namesake. Was that--? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was always Junior. I mean, I didn't even know my name was Reuben, you know. I thought my name was 'Junior' until, you know--. And that's when I was aware of it. Now--and it made sense. Because you're Junior, who are--you know, you're--growing up you're Junior. But then you meet, you know, your father, Senior, and it ties in. But it was amazing that for maybe like the first five years, it's kind of absent in my mind is because my mother, I guess, and my aunts they didn't talk about it. And you know, it was--I didn't question it. Or maybe if I had had a conversation about it, you know, in terms of "Where is Daddy?" you know. Speaker 2: So it was--it was not even in your consciousness. Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: Now, you said you were with him when he--when he died? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So how was that? Because that--. Speaker 1: It was--you know, it didn't seem real. Because, you know, at first when I--when he sat next--I was sitting down watching him play ball, he was a very good athlete, in this pick-up game there, behind our house. And he came and sat next to me. And then he fell over and I immediately ran to the window and called my mother [Mildred Cannon]. And then the fire trucks came. And the--and then it--like in a time warp. It went from that moment, you know, and that evening it was, you know, decided that he had died. And the next thing there was this funeral service. And going to the funeral home and seeing his body there. I didn't go to the cemetery. And--so there was a--time seemed to collapse around from the time he sat next to me on the rock to the next thing I know, I'm looking at his body in, you know, in a funeral home. Speaker 2: Did you--so things change at this point. You know, because there's this period before you're five and then you have awareness and now you're eight. And so you said that you, you know, really felt like you had to take on the role. Or did you have a sense about that? Or--. Speaker 1: Well it was--my mother said it. She said, "Junior, you're now the man of the house." And when you say that, at least--. And I had matured in those three years. I had a sense of what a man was supposed to do or what men do. So if my father's the man of the house, I'm now gonna be my father. And I took that literally and figuratively to mean that I now had to be a provider and I had to go to work. You know, I'm eight years old. So I started shining shoes. I started delivering groceries. Started emptying trash. And I really thought I was supporting my family, you know, that was--that became important to me. And that--I tell people, I began work when I was eight years old, I haven't had a day off since, you know, you know. Story_ID: 4718 Speaker 1: What schools were you go--you went to elementary school to Douglas [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] .W Speaker 2: Douglas first. I started Douglas Elementary from first grade. Speaker 1: And then from there to? Speaker 2: Then we moved--from Douglas we moved to the Ickes Homes, The Harold Ickes Projects, and I went to [John C.] Haines Elementary [School] over in Chinatown [Chicago, Illinois]. Which was another unique experience, because, you know, all of a sudden now I'm in an--I'm in an integrated school. With, you know, with Chinese and Polish and--. Speaker 1: (Knock at the door) Speaker 2: There's someone at the door. Speaker 1: So anyway. It's a new product we're using, 'cause we do minimum makeup. Okay. So you were saying that when you--now you moved into Harold Ickes--was it--was it near the time or shortly after your father's [Reuben Cannon, Sr.] death? Speaker 2: Yeah. Maybe--we moved--first, we moved into another--we moved into like--we moved from the 31st [Street] and Vernon to like 33rd [Street] and South Park [Way, now Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], an apartment. And then we moved from that apartment to the Ickes. In the Ickes when they were practically brand new, I guess, they'd been up there a couple of years. And--and then I started attending Haines Elementary. And I had very little exposure to white people or to any other races except black people. And it was--it was quite a revelation, quite an experience. Speaker 1: So tell--talk about what kind of experience it was. Speaker 2: Well it's, you know. It's--it just was (pauses). It was just odd, you know. The thing that I enjoyed doing was playing the dozens. So playing the dozens with, you know, all of a sudden now here was new--I mean, it's one thing to play dozens with your--your little black friends. But all of a sudden now you got Polish, you got Italian, you got Chinese. And to talk about their mothers and their families. And you know, it just--you had to, you know, expand your repertoire, you know. And it was--so the projects--the Ickes for me was a great experience. I mean it just opened up a--you know, new friends and, you know--. So that was, you know--. That was, that was great. Speaker 1: So you played the dozens--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Played the dozens with, you know. You know, and played the dozens. And became friends with a very good--with a Chinese kid named Warren Dur. And, you know, and when you--if you have an experience with other cultures--. You know, we went to school in Chinatown. You went to school with--Haines was right there in the heart of Chinatown. After school you go back to your culture, but Warren became a friend. And I had a chance to look to see how other people lived. And I would go home some times with, you know, with Warren for lunch. And I would see his father. I spoke to his father--his father would tell--his father had a Chinese laundry. And his father spoke to the dog in Chinese and the dog obeyed. And, you know, so I'm saying--I go home, I tell my brothers and sisters, "I saw the smartest dog in the world today. Today I saw a dog--" by the time I got through finished telling the story, the dog spoke Chinese. And my grandmother [Ida Thompson], who had moved in with us--and that's another whole story--she said, "Did it ever occur to you that the dog understands Chinese because that's the language that's spoken in his home?" "No, no, no, no, no. This dog was bilingual. And you know, he spoke (laughs)." You know, it was just--you know, for a ten year old to process that, you know. That kind of says the world I was exposed to, you know, in terms of black. So it was--it just--those--instances like that is what made me say, "There's another world here that I'd like to know more about," you know. Speaker 1: And what do you think was special about your relationship with him? It was a true friendship, right? Speaker 2: It was--it was--well it was a classmate thing. It wasn't like--you know, we were friends. I mean it wasn't like--. And some how--and it's interesting how the friendship ended because it ended because, you know, I had to choose sides. It was--there was the end of the semester and some of the guys from the project decided they were gonna beat up some of the guys in Chinatown on the last day of school. And Warren Dur would be, you know--. So the viaduct divided--the viaduct was the dividing point. You know, you go underneath the viaduct, you're inside, you know, the Ickes territory. Underneath the viaduct, you're, you know--. So, you know. And Warren--so I told Warren, "Look, there's gonna be a fight. You know, some of the--you know, the guys names they're gonna beat up. You know, Jasper. Some of the boys are gonna beat up the guys. So, you know, you may not even want to come to school that day because I don't want to fight against you," you know. And also we thought that all the Chinese guys knew karate, you know. It was like, you know, all the clichés (laughs). We thought they knew karate and we--so therefore, we weren't gonna beat up them. We were just gonna try to beat up on the Puerto Ricans and the Polish guys (laughs), you know, and leave the--and the Italians, you know. Story_ID: 4719 Speaker 1: But that--and that's kind of the--that's kind of--also there--I finished that school and I moved over to Daniel Hale Williams [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. For some reason we transferred out of [John C.] Haines [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] over to Daniel Hale Williams, you know. But the teacher that most impacted my life, I met at Haines, and it's Mrs. Luckette. Because this was an invasion; these black kids from the projects--Haines was almost all, you know, it was--but not-- it was all of a sudden it was a group of us that was transferred into Haines and I was in that group. Even though we were new residents and Miss Luckette was a black teacher at that school, fifth grade. And so here we were playing the dozens. Here we were just coming in with, you know, with things that today would be called racially politically incorrect. But just, you know, they were race-based humor. And it was just, you know--. And I don't think the Polish kids or--they knew us. Or the Italians, but they had to deal with us, you know. And Miss Luckette was black and we had to--and we assumed that she would be taking our sides. But she was so smart and so brilliant. I mean--and she's--one day she says, "I want each of you to bring something to school that you believe represent--" She'd hear us playing the dozens. I was doing the rice and rice commercial, you know. Remember the rice and rice commercial? You know. And pulling my eyes back and pretending that I was Chinese. And then somebody was doing Amos 'n' Andy. You know, one of the white kids was doing Amos 'n' Andy. It was--they would--literally, using the TV--when you're talking about TV--and my early exposure to TV, why--when I talk about being responsible for the images you put on, I mean early in--ten years old in class we were using TV for ammunition to help make fun of other races. Based on what we had seen. And Miss Luckette said, "I want each of you to bring something to school that you feel represents your culture. Don't ask your parents. I want you to bring something to class that you think defines something about your history." And to show you the kids didn't ask--we didn't ask our parents. One guy came to school, Alex Traminski came to school with a Polish sausage. That's how naive he was (laughs). He came to school with a Polish sausage, right. Warren--I believe Warren brought an abacus to school. Some other guys I think brought--bought--I think bought some pasta. The Italian kids bought pasta. And Herbert, my friend Herbert and I, we didn't know, you know, anything about our history, so we decided to bring to school a sketch from Amos 'n' Andy. So Miss Luckette, what she did, she went around the classroom, she had everybody present their, you know, what they did. And she took the--she took the pasta off the desk of the Italian kid and put it on the Chinese kid's desk. And said, "No. This was--Marco Polo discovered this and brought it, you know, to Italy. That it--you know, that pasta originated in China as opposed to in Italy." Alright. And--do I have that right? Yeah. It was right. Right. And she took the abacus away from the Chinese and put it on my desk. And she said, "The abacus was derived from a musical instrument in Africa." And she said, "Reuben, don't you ever think that all you've ever contributed--," at that time that--wasn't black we were saying--"that colored people have only contributed humor to this country." And that, you know. And with that, you know, she became my favorite person in the world. And she said something to me that, you know, that to this day resonates. When she says, "You know, there is--." 'Cause I was singing a little doo-wop. And I'd always get up and sing it--and she says, "You know, there's greatness in you." And at that time I turned in a paper once. And I got an 'S' on the paper. You know, the grades--the way papers were graded in Chicago were 'E' for excellent, 'G' for good, 'F' for fair. There wasn't even anything on the report card for 'S'. And 'S' stood for superior. And I wrote a paper and she put an 'S' on the paper for superior. And that, you know--. So my fifth grade experience was the most important experience, you know, in my entire educational experience. Story_ID: 4720 Speaker 1: You were in--you were in Haines [John C. Haines Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] by fifth grade then. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And how did that--how did a group end up going there? You didn't explain that. Speaker 2: I don't know. Some how there was this massive--I guess there was some, you know, redistricting--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Restructuring? Speaker 2: Yeah, but--. You know what happened, they didn't build a--they built the [Harold] Ickes [housing project], but they didn't build a school. You know, there's no school if you look from 22nd Street down to 27th Street [Chicago, Illinois]. There's no school. So they had the kids, you know, had to, you know, go over to Chinatown, to Haines Elementary. Speaker 1: Now Ickes at the time, that was--it was--it was brand new. So, did it have--it wasn't the stigma that's associated with it now. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh no. Not now. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It was--you were going into better conditions. Speaker 2: Definitely. There were--there were lawns, there were, you know, baseball teams. I mean, but during my stay there, you know, in the time before I left, you saw the deterioration and all the problems, you know, show up that come with living in, you know, those type of conditions. Story_ID: 4721 Speaker 1: Now your grandmother [Ida Thompson] living with you--. You said that was a whole 'nother story. Speaker 2: Yeah, because you remember my mother [Mildred Cannon] had anointed me as the man of the house. She had appointed--okay. And that's--and I took that on literally, you know. And when they talk--when the--the old saying that "Nothing corrupts like power; power corrupts absolutely," well you give a nine year old power over--or domain over his sisters and brothers--. You know, I was delivering groceries at the A&P on 31st [Street] and, you know, and State Street [Chicago, Illinois]. I would take my wagon down and help people with their groceries to their, you know, home. So I would make two or three dollars, right. So I would take some and I would--so I was bringing home three dollars a week on a good Saturday. And I would give allowance to my brothers and sisters, but it was conditional allowance. I mean, I would stand them in front of me and tell them what they could do with the money. I'd tell my brother Ronnie [Ronald Cannon] once--I gave him a quarter. I think he got a quarter, I think Sheila [Wigley, youngest sister] got fifty cents and Saundra [Cooper], you know, my oldest sister might have gotten seventy-five or something like that, you know, but I was dispensing allowance. I was the man. And I would say to Ronnie, "You can't buy comic books with this. You can't buy candy." You know, you know. Actually he could buy candy, 'cause I had a box of candy I would sell them. I would, you know. I would give them allowance and I would sell them candy, you know. So but you couldn't, you know--and then Ronnie gave me the quarter back. He said, "I can't--you know, if I--what do I need it for then?" You know, (laughs) if I'm telling him what to do with it. So my grandmother moves in and she doesn't believe I'm the man of the house. So that set up a war between she and I. It was a war. And it was a war in the way because I had to be respectful. And when you talk about reading, the way I would get even is that I would challenge her on facts. She read magazines and she watched the news. And I would read magazines and challenge her. If she said, "Sputnik [satellite] was launched--" and this is a good example. She said, "Sputnik was launched on Wednesday at three o'clock." I would check the papers and everything. "No. It was launched at 3 AM" Okay. "3 AM. And the astronaut on board was so-and-so, so-and-so." And she would just--so I was just trying to get the last word in with her all the time. And that's the way there was a battle. But she was my grandmother and she believed kids should be seen and not heard. So she would, you know, haul off and, you know, smack me or whatever. And I, you know. But constantly, you know, challenging her on facts and data. And that went on for, you know, for about, I don't know. For about, I don't know. Let me see. I can't remember when she died. But I remember once again she had carried, you know, a secret around. Because she--she also said, you know, "Mildred [mother, Mildred Cannon] just tell Reuben--" I mean she was dying of a--she died of a kidney disease, kidney ailment. And I was singing doo-wop pretty well. And she asked if I would come sing at her bedside. If I would come sing, you know. And being, you know, Mr. Power, I said, "No. I'm not gonna sing." I mean this here is a chance to make, you know--. Because you were--you know, she was the enemy, you know. And I never felt her love, you know, you know. And then I went and sat with her. And at that point, you know, when she's in the hospital bed and she says, "You know, I love you more than I can describe. And I, you know, I just never wanted to tell you. I don't want you to have a big head. And you know, you're something special. And you--and I should have told you a long time ago." And I sang to her. And, you know. So but that--but it--somehow in the midst of that battle I--it was all research. You know, me finding something to challenge her on, you know. Speaker 1: So you were a little kid battling his grandmother (laughs). I mean-- Speaker 2: Let me tell you my vision. Let me tell you--. 'Cause she's from the old school, you know, where, you know, like if you see a kid acting up you can whip them. I mean she would go into--we'd be out in the market and she'd see a mother in the store and the baby has rubbered legs and just falling out and crying. She'd say, "Let me take 'em." I'd say, "Wait! You can't take somebody else's child and--" And she, you know, and she'd pick the baby up and, you know, "You cut that out. You cut that out." I mean she was, you know. Came--her mother was a school teacher I guess or something on the reservation. Some how--but, you know, she came from that environment. My friends would come to the door and knock on the door and say, "Can Reuben come out to play?" But they'd back away from the door, because she would have seen them stealing an ice cream bar or something the day before and she'd, you know, she'd try to whip 'em. Alright. So on my paper route was--there on 30th [Street] right behind Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Vocational High School] was--the 31st Street police station, was on my paper route. And she used to whip me. And I, you know, so being smart, I looked at the bulletin board once there, in the police station next to Officer Stone's desk and there was a picture of--of a kid who had been abused. Well he had welts on his back and had, you know--. And I--in my mind I said, "Hey, that's me." So I went in and said to Officer Stone, "Officer Stone if an adult whips a child to this point, what happens?" He said, "They'll be arrested and sent to jail." That's all I heard. I was out of there like a rocket. I ran home, called a press conference with my brothers and sisters. All of them, you know. And I said, "She's going to jail. She's going to jail (laughs)." Okay, that's all--. You know, "She's going to jail." I was--I was so happy, I can't tell you. I said, "She's going to jail." In my imagination, in my mind--I told all my friends. I went and told all my friends. They said, "What--?" I said, "She's going to jail (laughs)." You know, okay. So I went--I was thinking about, "What could I do to make her whip me, so I could get her arrested." You know, I was sitting up and planning, right. I'm just going--I'm so happy--I was just--I was tingling with glee over the idea of her--and here was my--here was my--the story--what I imagined would take place. That she would be arrested, marched out of the building, 2240 South State Street [Chicago, Illinois]. My friends and I would be lined up along the stairs like a corridor, right. Lined up and saying, "You won't ever mess with us again. You won't ever mess with us again (laughs)." Right, okay. And that would be--that's the way we should be, literally drummed out while we scream at her--she'd be in handcuffs and she'd be placed in a paddy wagon and taken to jail. I don't know how (unclear), but that was my dream. So I'm lying in bed that night, and I shared the bed with my brother, Ronnie, my younger brother. It wasn't a bed, it was a mattress on the floor. And Ronnie had--I think had the inside, I had the outside. And I'm lying there just fantasizing about "What the hell can I do to make her whip me, so I can go show my--my welts to Officer Stone, so she can get arrested?" So, the light comes on. I'm in bed and the light comes on. And I didn't realize at this point, I mean, I know who told later on, but she says, "I hear you're gonna have me arrested," that's my grandmother. My grandmother said, "I hear you're going to have me arrested." Story_ID: 4722 Speaker 1: My grandmother [Ida Thompson] is standing over me with an ironing cord, or with a belt and saying, "I understand you're going to have me arrested." Now Ronnie [Ronald Cannon], my brother, hops over me and runs out of the room. So, you know, God forbid he goes--once the belt starts flying, once the whipping begins, you know, he wants to be out of--out of whipping range, right. So I said--you know, I'm stuttering, I can't go get a word out, you know (imitates stuttering). She says, "Well, I'm going to give you something to arrest me for." And she whips my butt with this belt. You know, and I'm--you know--you know, and I don't--you don't sleep with a lot on, you know. So, it's really--and I'm taking it 'cause I'm saying now, "Evidence, evidence, evidence," right (laughs). Okay. So I--so: "Evidence." So I'm taking it. I said, "Go ahead. You can beat me, but, you know, you're going to jail." And so I'm not saying anything, I'm just crying, you know. So the next day I go to my paper route, you know, I can't wait to get to the police station to see Officer Stone. He's on vacation (laughs). He's on vacation. I'm mad. There's nobody else there--around there I can talk to, to show my welts. And you know, welts don't last long, right. "You gotta see these welts on my back from, you know. They are--they're not quite as bad as the one in the poster, but, you know, but I'm an abused--I've been abused, you know. I've been beaten." He's not there. So he's on vacation for a week, or a couple weeks, something. So I never had her arrested. But that was--that kind of gives you--so it didn't--nothing happened. Nothing happened. Speaker 2: Nothing happened (laughs). Speaker 1: Nothing happened? And all my friends wanted to know, "Reuben what happened? With the--you know, I mean, you know, you got the whipping but what--you know, what happened? Why didn't she?" you know. It was like every--the word had spread over the project [Harold Ickes housing project, Chicago, Illinois] by then. The projects between 2240 and 2250 [State Street] were joined. You know, 'cause everybody knew, you know, "Reuben's grandmother--Reuben is gonna have his grandmother arrested," you know. "Really! Really, she's going to jail. Reuben is going to have her arrested. He already set it up." You know, and so--you know (laughs). Speaker 2: So what did your mother think of this whole--. Speaker 1: She didn't--she--she. Now, later on--how did my grandmother find out? My oldest sister [Saundra Cooper] was like, you know, started calling her Alger Hiss [U.S. official accused of spying for the Soviet Union], you know. She--she was the snitch. She went and told. I didn't realize everything that I told her, she went and go tell my grandmother. Everything. And I--so it was like she was total--a total spy, you know. And she never got any whippings. The whippings were--I got a whipping, Ronnie, but my older sister--. I didn't put it together, why she never got any whippings. You know--you just, you know. She was--she was--so she was the one that told. Speaker 2: So how did--but what I was asking is how did your mother [Mildred Cannon] handle the conflict between--did she try to play peacemaker? Or did she say--? Speaker 1: No. 'Mama' as we called her--'cause my mother was called 'Mimi' and Mama was my grandmother--you know, she ruled the house. I mean she was my mother's mother and she exercised her power over my mother. If there was a dispute--you know, 'cause some time my mother would try to, you know, be diplomatic about it. You know she says--you know, she says, "Junior keeps talking back because--" I, you know, in the middle of a conversation--. Now grown--my mother and she would be talking, and I'd hear some inaccurate information, I'd step in and correct it. And she'd be looking around for something to throw. And then she says, "No. Mildred he should know he just can't, you know--." I said--but I said, "But what you just said I'm gonna--." I said, "That's not what happened," you know. Here, I mean, 'cause I would record information accurately in my mind or whatever. And she said--and my mother would try to say, "Well Mama maybe--maybe Junior did hear it that way." And my grandmother would just look at her. Like, you know--. And that look, I'm sure, you know, and that would be it. And I knew I didn't have a--I didn't have an advocate at that point. I didn't have anybody, any defense, you know. So I had to just get out of the house. I'd just have to leave and go some place else and play. Speaker 2: Now what kind of child would you say you were in many ways? I mean, you know, we hear about the--you playing the dozens, you know, but--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah. I was a child with a rich imagination and a great sense of adventure. And looking back, thank God for my grandmother. And her--and her guidelines and her--in her own way, her parenting style. You know, otherwise I would have gone the way of many of my friends. I mean, when--it was her. When she--I know if she said, "Be home before the lights get--get dark." If I didn't want a whipping, I gotta be home before, you know, before it gets dark. I mean, she didn't play. She didn't play. Okay, so (laughs). There's no negotiation, you know. And it wasn't just me, my cousins--. I mean my cousins would come over to the house and, you know--. I mean, I have cousins I didn't meet until after she passed away, 'cause they didn't want to come to the house (laughs). I said wait a minute--I said, you know, "I'm your cousin. Why didn't you ever--" Well, "Are you kidding?" You know. You know, so she just didn't play. She--it was that--she was a ruler like that. So, you know, and I guess, you know, I used my imagination and used other talents that I discovered, you know, to--. You know, so--it got--it kept me out of the house a lot, you know. Story_ID: 4723 Speaker 1: Now, were you a person--you think you lived inside your head a lot? Or did you--I mean, where did the reading come in? And what--at what point in time do you think you became a reader? And--. Speaker 2: I think the reading, once I got that 'S' [report card notation for 'superior']--once Mrs., you know, Mrs. Luckette gave me an 'S.' It was a story I'd written about my sister called 'My Remarkable Sister.' And that gave me a sense of reading and writing, you know. A love of words and telling stories and appreciating stories. Speaker 1: Now how did you--'cause that's still pretty young, you know. You were in--you were ten years old, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's still sort of young. So how did you sort of juxtapose that with, you know, as you get older and puberty and the streets and--. Speaker 2: Well the streets were--well there was a tug of war. It was a tug of war between the streets and, you know--. Because it was my mother and my grandmother, you know. After my grandmother passed, it was just my mother, so--. But the thing--but once again, where the sense of my--the three years with my father and getting a sense of what, you know--what I got from my father, at least in terms of part of what men do is that we provide and protect. So those--those two roles never left me. I mean, I literally went to work when I was eight and worked through high school as a paperboy and as a bus boy at McCormick's Place [Chicago, Illinois]. And always provided for my family. We received a monthly check--my father was a military veteran--so we lived off social security. My mother worked some time, but we lived off social security. And I would supplement that with what I made as a bus boy and try to keep some for myself, so I can, you know, I wouldn't be a total geek, I could dress somewhat in style. I called myself a gowster, you know, and that was the--. And so--but what really saved me was--besides--as we--my friends and I we--you know, we would at one point, we were breaking into parking meters. I hope the statutes up on it by now, you know. On--. We would go down the street, three of us, and we would rob parking meters. The old type, not the new ones. The old models were easy to break into with a brick and a screwdriver. But I was down visiting a friend in the--once I transferred to Daniel Hale Williams [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I was visiting a friend of mine, Alan Montgomery. And there was a talent show at the school. And I auditioned and I got in, you know. I would sing around the house, you know. 'Cause I got to sing a lot of Frankie Lymon songs, and like that. So I got in this contest. And I entered and I won, singing 'I Believe.' 'Cause I had this great first tenor voice. I won. And hearing applause was the--probably the most addictive thing that has ever happened to me in my life. That someone appreciating you for doing something that comes so easy, you know. I mean my dream was to be able, you know, to play great basketball, but I didn't play ball as well as most of my friends. But I could out-sing them. And I--you know, I would even at times playing dozens, I would go in the dozens--in the middle of a dozen I would sing an aria about somebody's mother. I would just go into--I would make up a song about a guy's mother. He couldn't--so no matter how well someone could play the dozens, they couldn't deal with that, 'cause I would create this song about your mother that would just, you know. This is before rap. This was now--this was, you know--. I'd take a basic song, you know, and introduce someone's mother into it and that would just crack everybody up. So it would be--that would end the dozen contest right there. So--now using the voice to sing these other songs--. So when I won this contest that entered me--that contest got me a scholarship to Hull House [Chicago, Illinois] and also got me to study voice. It also got me a scholarship to--it also got me a chance to ride in the Bud Billiken Day Parade. So here I was in my community, in the projects now. A kid from the projects riding in the back of a limousine in the Bud Billiken Day Parade as one of the bright new stars. And that kind of changed direction of where I was gonna go with my life. Before that I thought, "Yeah, you know, breaking in parking meters and going downtown, and, you know, and hanging with my boys who were devoted to stealing," you know. But after that, you know, I just cut myself away from them. Speaker 1: On your own? Speaker 2: On my own. I mean that was--I knew--I mean, cause I was introduced to another world once again. A world of artists. A world of artists at the Hull House, you know. People singing and taking singing lessons. And that was the, you know, the ability to--self-expression. I do believe that you get--if you can find a way, if a person can find--be encouraged to express--to express themselves and then have that expression appreciated, it can alter their life. It altered mine. Speaker 1: That is absolutely true, but it's so interesting to hear, you know. Let me ask you, what year was--what--how old were you when that happened? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was maybe twelve or--I was twelve. Yeah, I was--'cause I was--I hadn't even graduated from, you know. I was maybe eleven or twelve. Yeah. 'Cause I hadn't graduated yet from elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh so elementary went to eighth grade. Speaker 2: Yeah. Daniel Hale Williams, yeah. I think [John C.] Haines [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] maybe--maybe Haines maybe gone to sixth. Maybe somehow then we went--then we transferred to Daniel Hale Williams. Something like that. Story_ID: 4724 Speaker 1: You know, I'd like to ask one other question about your childhood. When you think back on your childhood, what sounds and smells, you know, do you associate with it? Speaker 2: (Pauses) Smells, it's a variety of smells. Neckbones, you know. Because in the project, you know, because of the way--it's the building--. You enter the building and everyone in the building is cooking. So you're getting smells and it's almost like, you know--. In fact, as we go on I'll tell how food played a role in my--on the paper route. I would--you know, I would smell. 'Cause I had different buildings I would go into. So the foods I would smell in Prairie Shores [Chicago, Illinois] delivering papers and the food I would smell in the [Harold] Ickes [housing project] when I was there. And the difference. And you really--I mean how do you know people live differently besides the exterior of the building. The smells, the aromas coming from the apartments tell you. You know, from the fried--you know, I don't think I ever smelled fried food in Prairie Shores. But you smelled the fried pork chops. A lot of fried foods in, you know, in the projects, you know. Sounds (pauses)--sounds are sounds of the community. With mothers calling children, children calling mamas, you know. You know, mothers calling out windows to their kids. Kids calling up to the windows to mama, you know. And it was like eight--we lived on the eighth floor. So I would call up to the eighth floor and ask my mother permission to go somewhere, 'cause they were all--she was in the window watching us. You know, and vice versa. So it's the--it's the--those are the sounds that, you know--. The sounds of the community. Story_ID: 4725 Speaker 1: When I saw my father [Reuben Cannon, Sr.] sing, I somehow, you know, after he passed, I said, "Maybe I can sing." And as it turns out, I did inherit his, you know, his talent. And it came so easy for me. It came very easy for me. And until I--because I hadn't planned--I went down to the different homes to play basketball. And I would--and I would sing. I would see these shows on TV. The fact that I even knew the words to the song 'I Believe' [Roy Hamilton version]--. But I liked it and--I mean, I liked the song and I sang the song in a contest and won. Speaker 2: Can you sing a--can you sing a refrain now? Speaker 1: Let's see. (Singing song), "I believe for every drop of rain that falls, a flowers grows. I believe that somewhere in the great somewhere, hears every word" and this is the part where I win the contest. It would be the--I would say (heightens voice), "Every time I" It would be in that first tenor. But, you know--. "Every time I hear a new born baby cry, or touch a leaf, or see the sky, then I know why, I believe." Obviously singing is not my profession now, as you can tell, but there's still some resonance with me--of a voice. Speaker 2: That's wonderful. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So music became a very important--that and--(pauses). Speaker 1: Well just--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That and reading then. Speaker 1: Yeah, well just the idea of--you know, for the first time there's a--another way to be. There's another--there's other ways to be appreciated and respected. Story_ID: 4726 Speaker 1: That's, you know, that's, you know, you--. I mean and the thing is also, you know, it's interesting--I mean, my childhood was so rich. I mean so rich, the experiences. You know, the--when I--later on when I went to high school, we went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And I would walk from--I lived in the projects--we'd walk from the projects, from the [Harold] Ickes [housing project] to Dunbar. And two of my closest friends, you know, that I would share--that we would walk to school with--. Underneath the El [elevated railway, Chicago, Illinois] there was an old wino named Hawk. And it was interesting, none of my friends--most of us didn't have fathers either. So it was--but it wasn't like we didn't--it wasn't an oddity. It didn't seem like--it was a natural way of being. Most of us, you know, we lived--we lived home with our families and there wasn't a father in most of our homes either due to death or--. But there was a guy underneath the El named Hawk. And, you know, looking back now Hawk was brilliant. Hawk was I think might have been a college graduate or something. Who had--we knew he had worked as--on a dining car. Which meant he probably was an--you know. But he was now--he lived underneath the el and he was a wino. He maybe didn't live under--he lived somewhere, but he--. And he would ask to see our report cards. And some how--and report cards, you know, was always like, you know, you had that fear of showing it to your parents 'cause if you got any checks in the box where--on the behavior side--first the grades, you know, but the behavior side, you're gonna be put on punishment, you know. My grandmother [Ida Thompson]. So I had a fear of what my grandmother would say about my report card, but also what would Hawk think? It wasn't fear of Hawk, but what would Hawk think? Though Hawk would--we'd see Hawk in the morning going to school. He'd say, "Boys you study, you know. You be smart today." And coming--then and so his words of encouragement. "Let's see if there's any payoff." So coming back that route there was Hawk and he wanted to look at our report cards and he would just encourage us to do better. So--so I mean that experience in the community, you can--enough people believe in you, you could become something. I mean there was a--after I rode in the Bud Billiken Day Parade, a woman walked up to me and said, "Reuben, I want my children--I want my son to grow up to be like you." Someone puts that on you and you take that on, you behave differently. You don't--you know, you don't go downtown trying to steal anything. You just become different. And so it's those--that's the community. So even without my father [Reuben Cannon, Sr.] there, with the community believing in me, if I--somehow I believed that I was gonna be--I was, you know. I had to be better than I thought I could be. Because if not, I'm gonna disappoint Hawk--you know. I'm gonna bring on the wrath of my grandmother and I'm gonna, you know. And these--this woman who says she wants her son to be like me. Speaker 2: That's amazing. So that day at the Bud Billiken Parade you really felt good. I mean it was--. Speaker 1: Oh! I was king. I was a king. I was a king. And my paper was--my picture was in the 'Chicago Defender.' That's one of the pictures I'll show you. It's in the 'Chicago Defender.' And I mean (unclear), you know--in the projects there was no--no celebrities. I mean you were all--we were just project kids. So all of a sudden now someone that people knew--and you know, and it bleeds over to your family. All of a sudden my mother is a celebrity. "We just saw Reuben in the parade. We see his picture in the 'Chicago Defender' [newspaper]." You know, and because--and there were people, by the way--there were people that made the paper for different reasons. There were people that would get arrested, you know. And we had people that made the news. But all of a sudden someone was making the news for doing something good. Speaker 2: Now at Dunbar, what is forming you at that time? I mean are you attracted to, you know--are you attracted now? Is there theater department? Speaker 1: (Shakes head no) Speaker 2: There's nothing like that. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No, no, no. It's still a hobby. It's not--it's still a hobby. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) A hobby. Speaker 1: And I'm just basically at that time now I'm more interested in girls and more interested in, you know, in style and popularity, you know, those are my occupations. I--but once again, I was fortunate enough to be enrolled in the print shop, as a linotype operator. And a gentleman named Glendus Hambrick, Mr. Hambrick, who ran the print shop was, you know, once again one of these just salt of the earth old black men. Wasn't too old. And he'd, you know, had been around black boys. And he, you know, he looked at you as possibilities as--versus failures. And so the conversation wouldn't just be about setting linotypes and setting type. But about, you know, staying out of trouble with girls and staying out of trouble, period. I mean, so it would be, you know. He--teachers at least--the teachers I had, you know, they just didn't--you weren't just taught a class or a course. You were given information about how to make it in life. Knowing--'cause they knew where you lived; they knew that the--you know, the challenges you were faced with and the obstacles that were in front of you. And you may not hear, you know, a point of view from a black man, a successful black man. I mean teachers were at that time, teachers were highly respected. And to hear it from, you know. And so Mr. Hambrick was a wonderful for me and all my friends. I mean we--I had my little group. And I was leader of this little popular group. And he would talk to us individually as well as en masse. And he--you know, a lot of it was about, you know, you know, "Watch out for these girls. Don't get yourself in trouble. Don't get yourself in trouble fellows, you know." And you know. Speaker 2: But were you listening? Speaker 1: Well--. Speaker 2: A little bit. Speaker 1: Well a little bit. To the point--I listened so well that my daughter [Tonya Gatlin] was able to attend my high school graduation. I was a father at seventeen. Story_ID: 4727 Speaker 1: I became a father at seventeen. Speaker 2: So you got married then. Did you get--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No, I was seventeen. I couldn't. I was-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You were still only--right, right. Speaker 1: Exactly. Yeah. I ultimately married the--my daughter's [Tonya Gatlin] mother, because she was pregnant for a second time. You know, that child was stillborn, but, but yeah. I mean it's one thing, I mean--I, you know, say jokingly that, you know--and once again, you know, the blessings they show up in ways and you don't know where it's gonna take you. So by becoming a father at seventeen, it kept me out of the Vietnam War, in which many of my friends went off to and never came back, you know. So it was--so it was just--. Speaker 2: It kept you out. Now why would it keep you out? Speaker 1: Because I was a--. Fathers. Parents. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Parents, okay. Speaker 1: I was a father. I was a--I wasn't--I got a different status. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh! Okay. Speaker 1: My draft status was changed because I was a father. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay, okay. You know, you know. Because it's unusual for a seventeen year old. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Seventeen year old. Speaker 2: But when I graduated from high school at eighteen, I, you know, I had a different--whatever my status was, it wasn't draftable. Speaker 1: Now when you--when you became a father, you know, or got your future wife pregnant, did--what did your grandmother say [Ida Thompson]? Was that--was that--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) She had already passed on. Speaker 1: Oh, she had passed. She had passed on. Speaker 2: How old was she when (unclear)? Speaker 1: I was--well when she was passed on--I think she passed when she was about fifty-eight, I think. Speaker 2: Okay and how old were you then? You were? Speaker 1: At--when she passed? Maybe fourteen. Maybe fourteen. Yeah. Thirteen, fourteen Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Thirteen or fourteen. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: I'm not sure. I'm not even sure I was--maybe just my freshman year in high school (Simultaneously) Okay. somewhere in there. Speaker 2: Do you think you would have--would have (laughs). If she had still been around? You think--what do you--? Speaker 1: I don't know. I mean it was so hard, even on my mother [Mildred Cannon] though. So once again because being the man of the house, I mean the hardest thing I ever had to do was to tell my mother I had a girl pregnant. Speaker 2: And so what'd she say? Speaker 1: Oh! She was just so--she just--she sat stunned, in stunned silence. Because it was so--this was Reuben Cannon, the model of the community. And now if we can't protect Reuben, then my God! She just sat--she was--she was--she just sat in silence. And it was the silence that was so painful, 'cause I knew I had broken her heart. I mean I was working as a bus boy at McCormick's Place [Chicago, Illinois]. You know, I was going to school getting good grades. I was doing--I was doing it all right. I mean it was like, you know. And the girl I met was on my paper route. And what--and what happened, you know, when you talk about the smells--. Each night I would smell a different meal being prepared in that home. Speaker 2: (Phone ringing) Speaker 1: What's that? That's--that's my--oh, she didn't take my cell phone. Speaker 2: Oh, I--oh, she didn't take it. Speaker 1: Oh no, she did. Speaker 2: So go on--so. Speaker 1: So--what were we talking about? Speaker 2: Smells. Speaker 1: On the paper route--you said--. Speaker 2: Oh right. Every night I would go there, I would smell a different meal. Now in my home, you know, you know, because we had to pace how the--our spending. We had to, you know, regulate our spending 'cause a check came in once a month and we'd buy groceries. So you might have eaten well for the first week, but you were on a beans and rice or beans and greens diet for maybe the last two weeks of that month until the next check came in, you know. Or unless I brought in some money. So here was a home that I was delivering papers to and had a--you know. In which every night there was--I was smelling a different meal. You know, pork chops one night. And I mean fish in the middle of the week, you know (laughs). You know, and one night I was asked to come in. And, you know, and have dinner. And this very attractive young--very pretty young lady there. And--and--and I--you know, we just started dating. And, you know, she was in--she went to a different high school. And I lived in 22nd Street [Chicago, Illinois]. She lived on--she lived two blocks away. And I don't think anyone had spoke to--talked to either one of us about--about sex, you know. I think the sex ed. [education] classes at the school at the time might have been optional. I don't think they were mandatory. They might have been optional, you know. Speaker 1: So this happens. This changes things. Your mother you--your--she's disappointed. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: What about her? It causes trauma with the family too? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean there's the--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) A little bit? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, you know, the options--all of a sudden now there's talk about me going into the military. I mean (unclear) "What'd Junior do now? 'Cause Junior had--all these plans Junior had about what he's gonna do in terms of college and all this other stuff. You know, this changes everything," you know. And because once again, what's my--as a father what do I do? I'm gonna provide and protect. And I literally would buy cases of Pet milk with my paper route money. I would deliver Pet milk to my--you know. You know, 'cause she stayed home, you know, with her mother. And I stayed home. I mean I was in school. I was in--I mean I was in school--I graduated from high school at seventeen and my daughter [Tonya Gatlin] was in the audience. So, so that's--she was in the audience--I mean I could hear her crying out there, you know. And by the way, I wasn't the only one. There were quite a few of my friends also were fathers. As we walked across the stage getting our high school diplomas and had children in the audience. So it changes things because I'm gonna accept--I'm going to take care my--you know. It wasn't even an option. I'm gonna take care of my daughter. Speaker 1: But see that's--that's--that's--that's the positive story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, not--there are not enough of those. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: There was never any question about it. It wasn't, you know. The idea of abortion wasn't discussed. It was that, you know. I think it's almost like, you know, you--room for one more. You just, you know. You know. Speaker 1: See--. Go on. Speaker 2: So then what happens because we're so young--so--and then she became pregnant a second time. And she--so we got married. Story_ID: 4728 Speaker 1: I got married at nineteen and I think she must have been seventeen or eighteen. We went down to City Hall [Chicago, Illinois] and got married. And I came home that afternoon and played basketball outside in the [Harold] Ickes [housing project] basketball court. It was like, I mean--it wasn't like a real marriage, you know. It wasn't like, you know. We were getting married. My mother [Mildred Cannon] said, "Junior, if you're gonna, you know, make babies you're gonna have to be, you know--take care of 'em." So we got married. And then we got married and I went to work at the steel mill--U.S. Steel. And let's see--and started working sixteen hours a day at the steel mill. Set a new--almost set a record for hours worked. I worked seven days a week, sixteen hours a day. And was making, you know, at that time a lot of money. And once again an old man there at the mill who had been there for thirty years said, "Son, don't get stuck here. Don't get stuck here. I know the money's good, you know." Open heart, you know. He says, "Don't get stuck. You'll never get out. And--as good as the money is," so--. We were living on 76th [Street] and Crandon [Avenue], you know, right there in the South Shore. So we moved out of the project into South Shore, you know. And--. Speaker 2: So you're doing well. Speaker 1: Oh yeah! I'm doing well. Yeah, exactly. I'm very--by all means I'm very successful. I mean, in terms of, you know. I'm nineteen--what seven--eighteen years old. I'm eighteen years old, nineteen years old working at the steel mill, you know. I don't see much of my wife. I don't see much of my daughter, Tonya [Gatlin]. My wife goes back to night school. She enrolls in night school to complete her high school education. And she tells me one day that there's a boy in her class that she likes. I mean, now she's eighteen. So it stands to reason, right. When you're eighteen--and I'm, you know, saying, "Oh really?" She said, "I like him and we want to go play volleyball." I mean, you know. Doing the things that, you know, teenagers do, right? "We're gonna go play volleyball with, you know, with some other kids from school." Well I'm at the steel mill, you know. And--and apparently--so that relationship grew and I come home from--one day from the steel mill and the apartment is empty (pauses). She cleaned it out and moved in with her mother. You know, put all the stuff in storage and moved back to the projects. So obviously when she told me that, that started a lot of friction in the marriage. You know, it started a lot of--you know. And, you know, we realized we got married for the reasons that, you know--. We got married 'cause she's pregnant, but now we just had our daughter and we were just playing house. But the, you know, the idea of husband and wife, that was, you know. We had no idea what that was supposed to be. So she moved--put the--all the furniture--all this new furniture I had bought with my, you know, with all my long money, my steel mill money and put it in storage and moved in with her mother. Moved back in with her mother and with my daughter. And she and this young man started dating. So--and that was one of the most devastating moments of my life. I mean, I came home and I didn't--'cause I didn't think it would bother me. I kind of knew it was happening, but I didn't think it would bother me. I'm sitting in this apartment in a corner. I didn't even drink, you know. I mean, I've never smoked a cigarette in my life. So, I mean, it's, you know. This is all part of that model kid project thing, you know. And I'm just sitting in the corner just crying. And there was an old woman next door who came to see me who knew what had happened, she says, "Reuben, you'll look back on this one day and laugh." And I thought she was crazy. I said, "You're out of your mind. You're out of your mind. You're out of your--please! I mean I'll never recover from this. It's--you know." And my cousin, Jimmy Spinks, who lived in the neighborhood also came by and helped pick me up and clean me up. And I went back to--and I enrolled at Southeast City College [sic, Southeast College; now, Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois]. And Spinks started taking me around to theaters. That's when I went back to what's now X-Bag [Experimental Black Actors Guild]; it was Hull House right there on 76th [Street] off Cottage Grove [Avenue] [Chicago, Illinois]. And I said--and I saw--and there was a guy I met at U.S. Steel named Poor Bill. And so I was going--I was just still floundering, drifting, not quite knew what I wanted to do, you know. I eventually met some other women, some other young women at school and started dating again. And I think my wife and I may have even tried--. We got back together for about six months, but it was over then. We separated permanently and I got a job at--reading gas meters, you know. Story_ID: 4729 Speaker 1: So what I'm just saying is about the importance of the community that I grew up in, in terms that it helped shape me. So, you know, it really was when they say a village, you know--. I don't know about a village raising. I guess a village and a community would be the same. But in my case, it really did--the community raised me. Whether it was, you know, between the old homeless person underneath--underneath the El [elevated railway, Chicago, Illinois] or the three black men I would see every day on my paper route when I delivered newspapers to John Sengstacke at the 'Chicago Defender' [newspaper] to John Johnson and Jesse Owens. Also there was a place called Owens West which was right behind there. So I would see Black men running businesses. The first time I saw John Johnson get into a limo and he wasn't going to a funeral, I was--you know, it's like usually when limousines showed up in our community, someone was dead. And someone was going--so here was a black man getting into a limousine because his workday was over and it was--it was a revelation and an image that I could hold on to, you know. So those, you know, in my community there were so many role models that I chose to imitate. And there were also the pimps and the drug dealers there, but, you know, but there were options, there were choices. Speaker 2: So now you--you enroll in college--you enroll in college [Southeast College, Chicago, Illinois; now, Olive-Harvey College]. You're starting to go to Hull House [Chicago, Illinois]. You're hanging out with your cousin. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 2: And then what--what does this, you know. Just describe from there. What--what happened? Speaker 1: Well I just--I saw, you know, I saw plays. I would see actors on stage. And--and it just--I was just--all of a sudden--I saw Mary Alice do a play. And Mary Alice then as great as she is now, I mean she was great then. To see a person on stage engage in a scene simply by listening. So that--that whole process, and watching the audience. And, you know, how I felt when I left there. And knowing how the audience felt. And the idea in my mind that, you know, I wanna be part of something that entertains, enlightens, inspires, but definitely moves people. So--but meanwhile I'm, you know, I'm stuck in Chicago and, you know, I gotta make a living. So I'm, you know, reading-- I'm working now for the gas company and reading gas meters in the wintertime. And so this idea of working in entertainment, to make a living. How could I do something I love and make a living? And going into these cold basements with rats jumping over my shoulder as I'm trying to read these gas meters and walking these, you know, in the wintertime. That kind of motivated me to think that maybe there's a different way to live. And a friend that I met at the steel mill, his nickname is Poor Bill. I think Bill Collins, or something like that, who had moved out to California and called and said, "Reuben, you should come out here. You're always talking about, you know, theater. You're always talking about, you know--you should come out to California." I said, "I can't do anything out there. I've never been out of Chicago. I've never been on an airplane." And--but I saved my money, five hundred dollars, and I bought a one-way ticket. Story_ID: 4730 Speaker 1: And I came out to California. 'Cause I had, you know--and stayed with Bill [Poor Bill, former steel worker co-worker] and his girlfriend for a while. And I had a theory that my uncle always had--never failed me in Chicago [Illinois] in terms of how to get a job. And I--the theory was that if you want a job, go to the place you want to work the day after payday. Because someone's gonna go out and party the night after they get paid and they're not gonna show up the next day, that place will be short and you'll get hired. It worked at McCormick's Place [Chicago, Illinois]. It worked at U.S. Steel [Chicago, Illinois]. It never failed me. I've always gotten a job that way by going to the place--. So--and I also had been received great assistance in Chicago from the Chicago Urban League right there on 24th [Avenue] and Michigan [Avenue]. So when I came here, I was staying at an apartment on Adams and Crenshaw [Boulevard, Los Angeles, California]. And the Urban League office was on--on Adams Boulevard maybe four blocks up. So I went there to the Urban League. And I said, "I wanna work in the entertainment industry. I'd like to work at a studio." And filled out an application. And the gentleman there said, "Oh, there's a job in the print department at Universal Studios." I said, "Okay." So I took the application. He made a call and I went to Universal and I got there and the job had been taken. But a gentleman there said, "He would hold my application. And if anything came up he would call me." And I said to him before I left, "By the way, which day here is pay day?" He said, "What?" I said, "When do people here at the studio get paid?" He says, "We have different unions, different productions, you know. We're a studio. Every day someone--we get is paid." So I said, "Great the opportunities are unlimited. I'll be here every day." Using my Chicago theory, right. So I rode the bus every day from Adams and Crenshaw to Universal and sat out in the lobby and waited for some department to be short. Now, I left Chicago November 17, 1970 with $500 and a one-way ticket. So December 17, I'm still making my daily bus ride out to Universal. I decided to increase my chances by going to Universal and Warner Bros., thinking, "Let's see, maybe, you know--." But I'm thinking, "Maybe this is a Chicago thing. These white folks coming to work every day. Maybe this is a black thing. These--so far, not once has anyone failed to show up for work." So December 17, I'm down now to maybe $100, you know. A hundred bucks. And how long can I afford to hold on to this working in a studio. I better go get me a regular job, a real job. But I decided to give it 'til New Years. New Years Eve, I'm sitting in the reception area of Universal Studios Personnel Department and Jim Harris, the gentleman who interviewed me a month earlier, came out and said, "Reuben are you available?" I said, "Yes I am." Two guys wanted to go skiing for the weekend as opposed to bag the mail. And I went through the door for the first time and became an employee of the mailroom. A temporary employee of the mailroom. Now I was at $28 bucks left, you know. And it paid--I think at that time they were paying $105 a week. The mailroom was referred to as the executive training program. You needed a college degree to work in the mailroom. I didn't have a college degree. But, you know, I'm from Chicago: "Let me in. I'll make my way." So I became a mail boy. Temporary employee while they looked for, you know, someone--. 'Cause these guys--the guys who had decided to come back, they were let go. And so while--I stayed there bagging mail. And thing is, you know, I realized these boys had been phoning this stuff in. I mean, now no there's a way to do this work. I mean, you know, I--I knew how to--you may have more credentials than me, but you can't out work me. Remember, I'm the sixteen hour kid from the steel mill. So I would bag this mail. I would, you know, tag it. I would double-check it. You know, and then I'd go run my-- run an errand at the same time. I mean, I was just like, you know, I was doing the work of two people. And the mailroom was where people that--in the mailroom there was two Rhodes scholars in the mailroom and a Ph.D. Everybody in there had a degree except me. And they all knew what they wanted to do. They wanted to--there was Jay Heifetz, whose father Jascha Heifetz's son was in the mailroom. John David, whose father was Hal David, of Bacharach and David. Bob Gersh, father was Phil Gersh--we're all in the mailroom, you know. All trying to find our way in the business. Because I worked so--I was just so--and the way you delivered mail, by the way, you delivered mail in the entire studio lot. And you had to wear a shirt and tie, a suit and tie. You delivered mail because you were an executive-in-training. You know, you had to wear a suit to deliver mail. And you'd deliver mail one day in the tower. One day you'd deliver mail to the prop department. One day you'd deliver mail to the bungalow. So on my paper--on my mail route there was Alfred Hitchcock, there was Paul Newman. And then I would go to the sound stage and there was Quincy Jones scoring 'Ironside.' I mean there was Edith Head in the back in the wardrobe department. So it was--I mean, I was in heaven. I was in absolute heaven, you know. So after six months, of being a temporary person now, I'm offered a job to be head of personnel in the tour division. Offered a job, right. And everyone in the mailroom is saying, "Reuben, congratulations blah blah blah," you know. So I've made an impression on somebody, right. To be director of personnel for tours. I don't know (unclear) about personnel. And I inquired about how many people had ever come out of the tour division to go on to make movies. The answer was zero. None. You go up there, it's a different division of the studios. You never get heard from again. So I passed on that offer. When, you know--. "No, I'll stay in the mailroom." Story_ID: 4731 Speaker 1: A position became available in the casting department [of Universal Studios, Los Angeles, California], to be a trainee in the casting--to be a casting director--to become a trainee. I was interviewed by a man named Ralph Winters. And whenever you interview for a position at the studio, three mail boys go up, you know. They interview three of you. And you're supposed to bring in three references. People who can speak to--speak to your character. The competition was Jay Heifetz. His father was a legend. So he had lots of letters of reference. John David, you know, his father was, you know, married to Angie Dickinson, and just, and you know--. Burt Bacharach was married to Angie Dickinson. So he had letters from Angie Dickinson. And I decided to go in on the strength of my character. 'Cause who am I gonna take? Hawk [homeless man/mentor from Chicago, Illinois]. To have a letter from Hawk, you know? A letter from Robert Lee and, you know, and people I grew--you know. Rather than--I didn't know anyone here. I'd been here, at that point, not even six months, seven months. Po' Bill [former steel mill co-worker, Chicago, Illinois] could speak about my character. But I had--if it was about casting, if it was about actors--. I'd been around actors. I knew more about theater than these guys and I decided to go on the strength of that. So I sat in front of Ralph Winters who was the head of casting for Universal Studios. And he said, "I've seen you deliver mail here 'cause you're in this department. And, you know, everyone in this department likes you. And you're a very impressive young man." He said, "Do you know your date of birth." I said, "Yes." He said, "Do you know what time you were born?" And it so happened I had my--'cause I didn't have a California driver's license. I had my birth certificate shipped out and I had it miniaturized. So I said, "No, but I have my, you know--" And I took out my date of birth, he started drawing these circles. He was into astrology. And he said, "Oh, you're an Aquarian." I said, "Yeah." And he says--then he looked and says, "Why aren't you in a monastery?" And I said, "'Cause I have--you know, I believe my ministry will be here in entertainment." He says, "You know, if I had career ambitions, I would have to hire one of the other two boys. But for the first time in my career, I'm gonna do what's fair and what's right. I'm gonna retire in three years so I can afford to do what's fair and what's right. I'm gonna hire you." And he hired me. I became the first black casting director trainee in the history of Hollywood [motion picture industry] and went from being an assistant to then his secretary, then ultimately became--I became a casting director. And stayed at Universal for seven years. And was offered to be head of casting for Warner Brothers. I went over to Warner Bros. [Studios] I did 'Roots II' ('The Next Generation'). And being--but once again, I'm from Chicago [Illinois], so after nine years of working two different studios and having a reputation in town as being a very good casting director--. By the way, also--the, you know--. So being the first, I got tired of being referred to the first, so I brought in the second, my secretary. When I went to Warner Brothers I brought in Eileen Knight who became the second black casting director. And there is now maybe eight. And seven have come through my office. Story_ID: 4732 Speaker 1: But after nine years of working for two different studios [Universal Studios and Warner Bros.], I decided it was time to become--I've always been, you know--in every job I've ever had, I've always had my own thing as well. So I decided to hang out my shingle and form Reuben Cannon & Associates. Knowing that I knew--you know, I had confidence in my abilities and my skills. And that company became the largest independent casting organization in, you know, in the business. At one point we were doing--we were hiring over a hundred actors per week. We were doing 'A-Team,' 'Hardcastle and McCormick.' All Steve Cannell [Stephen J. Cannell] shows. Including 'Moonlighting' and on the side we were doing 'Color Purple.' So we were just--and I decided I wanted to produce. So I decided to cut back on the TV series work and focus on learning how to produce. And I received a call to produce a show called 'Amen.' And that's why the character--the lead character is called Reverend Reuben, you know. And I produced that show with Ed. Weinberger. Speaker 2: Now let me ask you. Someone said that show was based on Amos 'n' Andy. Speaker 1: Amen? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: That's what someone told me. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No. Speaker 2: They said that if you look at the characters (laughs). 'Cause then I--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No. Speaker 2: (Laughs) I didn't think it was that. But they said that the--they said--they did. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I mean--that's the first I ever heard that reference in comparison. That was not--Ed. Weinberger, the creator, that was not his intent at all as far as I know. He just wanted to show--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 1: I mean, you can only--in a sitcom you can only--the dynamics of the characters will lead you--you're gonna either bump into Lucille Ball. You're gonna bump into, you know, characters you've seen before. It's just the nature of a three-camera sitcom. Speaker 2: But you know, your whole story reads like a Hollywood movie. Speaker 1: No. No. Speaker 2: But no, I mean Reuben, come on. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No, no, no. Speaker 2: (Laughs) Look no, but let's go back. But it does. I mean, even the youth--you know, everything reads like a Hollywood movie--almost (laughs). Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Or a Hollywood tragedy, you know. Speaker 2: No, no! A Hollywood tragedy, no. Speaker 1: I mean not my story. But there--you know. Speaker 2: But the thing--I--just real quickly about the experience with you. You have a angel. That's what you meant, you have a angel. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: But this--what did you learn in the whole experience, you know, when you, you know, were at Warner Brothers and Universal? What did you learn about the casting business? And what, you know, you say, you know, "I became the best." But what--what makes someone good? Speaker 1: You do your homework. I--for seven years, I imposed on myself a diet. Twenty hours of television a week, two films a week, and two plays a week for seven years. That was my life. There was--you know, there wasn't an actor alive that I couldn't tell you, you know, who he was, his credits. Kim, my--who's an intern in my casting--a wonderful casting director said that she once saw me stand, without any notes, and cast an entire show just on names. You know, I stood there and rattled off names. And she said--and she was a student at UCLA [The University of California, Los Angeles] and was an intern. She said to herself, "One day I'll be able to do that." I mean, I wasn't aware, but that's how my--the knowledge that I, you know--an encyclopedic memory of names of actors, their credits. So I would watch twenty hours of TV, you know. When my daughter [Tonya Gatlin] came to live with me we would see every Friday night--after my first wife passed away and I became a single father of my daughter, every Friday we would go see a play. And I always promised her, "You're gonna see a great play." Or, "You're gonna have a great meal or in some cases, you may get lucky and you may get both." But that's how, by doing my homework. You know, foregoing a lot of the social activities to make sure that I was current. That when I sat in a room with a producer and director that no one in that room knew more about actors than I did. Speaker 2: But isn't there another talent also in terms of instincts or knowing the match? You know what I mean. It's one thing--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. It's instincts and having the courage of your convictions. I mean, when I was casting the 'Moonlighting' pilot and Bruce Willis came in to meet with me, and I took him to network after an exhaustive search. And I said, "He's the guy." The president of the network at the TV at the time fired me off the show. I said, "Look--there's no one better. He's a star." He didn't fit the profile of a network star. 'Cause he, you know--he was at that time looked like a character actor. And he hired Lynn Stallmaster who was another top casting director to come in and do a search to find David in the 'Moonlighting' pilot. And I knew Lynn. I called Lynn and said, "Lynn look. I've seen the world. I've got the guy who's right for the role. But take their money, and you know, do what you can do." Two weeks later I was hired back. And at that time, then Lynn stepped aside. And the producer, you know, they apologized: "Reuben, it's the network's call. They think there's someone else out there." Cybill Shepherd agreed to do a screen test with Bruce. Before she had resisted. She agreed to do a screen test with Bruce Willis. And when she made the screen test, the network was still so insecure they went and did an audience test with the screen test. So having the courage of your conviction is a big part of it. You know, being able to see something. Here's what I call--I still use--I call the Ray Charles rule. Ray Charles will sing 'America The Beautiful,' which is a song we never even thought had any musical appeal at all. Ray Charles sings it and you wanna go out and start buying war bonds. You start--you're humming the song. The same song interpreted by someone else with a musical genius. Or in this case, Bruce had came in and gave that material something special. That's what casting--that's the excitement of casting where you-- you know, it comes alive in a way you--you never imagined. And that's why I love actors and that's why I love the casting process. Even though we're producing, we still have an active--we're still active as a casting organization because actors are just so remarkable. Story_ID: 4733 Speaker 1: Now tell--you know, for those who--this is, you know, for posterity. But for those, you know, young people or people who would like, you know, like to be in the business. What is the process? I mean people don't even understand what the casting director, what role they play basically. Speaker 2: Well eighty percent of filmmaking is in essence comes down to writing and casting, you know. When you go see a movie you're enrolled or you're impelled because of the story. But the people who interpret the story are the actors. And how those actors come to be chosen for that role. I mean there's thousands of actors. But why those? In some cases it's because of commerce, because you're--there is a--you're spending one hundred million dollars, you're gonna put a big name star in it. It doesn't always work, as we know. I mean, we--but some times it does work. But more importantly, who is most appropriate? Who can enhance the material is what I look for. The guy who hired me--let me go back, Ralph Winters gave me the mantra that I swear by for casting. And once he gave me that it was easy for me to--not easy, but, you know, it became--as long as I followed that rule, this mantra for casting, I never had a problem. He said, "Reuben, cast actors that are superior to the role they have to play." Every role should be cast by an actor that is superior to the role. Not adequate, superior to it. And I've built my career on that. I've carried it over from casting into other areas. But hire people that are superior to what they have to do. Now they may not even know they're superior. Their potential is there. I mean, you know. The talent's there. So being able to--your ability as casting director is to recognize the potential for superiority. So the process is that I read the script. The script is sent to me by a network or a studio or a script I might have an option if I'm producing it. And as I read it, much like when you read a novel, you imagine people. But when I'm reading, I'm imagining actors. And the catalog in my head of actors is pretty extensive. And I'll--at times I'll write names next--on the page as I'm reading of who would be good saying these words. Who would be good playing this part. And the name I write on page five may change by page twenty because the character changes and the actor I wrote down on page five may not have the skills to make the transition, to become what is evident on page fifteen. So by the end of the script, you--. Then you put the script down and, you know, and you digest and go through all your notes. The staff--I'll have other people in the office here read the script and so we'll all give input. Very often we'll all come up with the same name or names of people that have would be great in this role. So you've now read the script. You've now done your creative research. Then comes the concept, the process of availability and affordability. And also your ideas may not match with the producer or director of the studios. In the end, they will have the final say. As a casting director, you're like a stockbroker. You're advising and guiding. And based on your credibility, they'll listen to you. I've been right more times than I've been wrong. So if I'm sitting in a room discussing casting people tend to listen because I'm there with a great deal of experience and knowledge, you know. Not just recommending actors that we all know, you don't need a casting director for that. You may need them to make the deal. But where are the stars of tomorrow? You know. Where are the people that we don't know? That's where casting gets to prove truly--a casting director gets to prove what he or she can do. Speaker 1: And what about--how do you work vis-a-vis the agent? You know the--the agent. The talent agent? Speaker 2: We're the buyer. There's two sides. We're the buying side. As a casting director, you're negotiating for the talent that the agent represents. The agent is negotiating for his actors. The casting director is negotiating on behalf of the studio or the network. Speaker 1: And you had to hone a lot of skills that you got--you got class 'A' training. It's not like--. You got training with the best. Speaker 2: Yeah. At Universal. Universal is--you know, the seven years there I was casting--always casting two shows. I was casting 'Rockford Files' and 'Baretta.' Or I was casting, you know, always two shows. And episodic, every week. So you're hiring--every seven days you're doing another show. So you got a chance to audition a lot of actors. And if you're hiring twenty actors per show, every week, and if the ratio is five to one, so for every one you hire you audition five. So you're going through almost a hundred actors a week at times. Story_ID: 4734 Speaker 1: So Reuben did race ever come--become a factor, I mean, at all in this whole thing? It's like it was--you've dealt with Hollywood, I mean on that--almost as a colorblind place. Speaker 2: Well it was interesting, you know. I--after my first seven years at Universal [Studios], I never cast--I didn't cast a black project 'til 'The River Niger.' After--after six years 'River Niger' was the first black project that I cast. When 'Roots'--the first 'Roots' was--when the first 'Roots' was done, I was at Universal under contract. I mean Universal put me under contract as a casting director. So, you know. Now, here's my Chicago [Illinois] upbringing again coming in. While I was at Universal under contract, you know, which meant that I had to only work--cast for universal. I was moonlighting and casting 'Sanford and Son' on the side unbeknownst to Universal. Making more money outside of Universal. I was being paid $350 a week at Universal to cast 'Rockford Files' and--and I was like twenty-eight years old I think at the time--casting 'Rockford Files' and 'Baretta.' I was making $500 a week for casting 'Sanford and Son.' And the reason being Redd Foxx [John Elroy Sanford], you know, wanted a black casting director. He didn't have a lot of choices. So we worked out an arrangement where I would cast the show, wouldn't take credit and would receive a check from the company every week. Speaker 1: Why--so Redd Foxx didn't self-produce--did he--'Sanford and Son'--. Speaker 2: No--he was the star. Speaker 1: He was the star, but he could choose who to cast? Speaker 2: Oh please. I mean he chose--when you're a star--that show was such a hit--when you're a star of that magnitude. He was as popular--he was as important to 'Sanford' as Carroll O'Connor was to 'All in The Family.' So if Redd Foxx wanted something, he got it. He wanted a studio with windows for rehearsal. They found it--they got it for him. I mean he did whatever he wanted to do. I mean he--. Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite Redd Foxx stories? Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) 'Cause he's an old Chicago guy. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Exactly. Well he--he would call and say, "Reuben, I wanna hire Sweet Lady Javo," was that the--some Chicago transvestite that I would know that I knew, you know. "I wanna hire, you know, 'Scatman' [Crothers]." I mean all these Chicago--the Chitlin Circuit, you know. Butterbeans and Susie. He would, you know. And fortunately I knew who he was talking about. And the code word--his code word was 'Curly.' 'Cause he couldn't call up and say--'cause if Universal found out I was moonlighting, 'cause I mean I was casting a show that was literally sometimes opposite one of their shows. So he'd call up and says, "Curly calling," you know. He'd call up and says, (speaking in a deep voice) you know, "Get so and so out of Chicago," you know. And I, you know, and that would be it. And I would have auditions. I would go over and work out my time and auditions. So it's-- that's--it was always the entrepreneurial in me. No matter what I've ever done in life has always been, you know. It started with my wagon in Chicago, you know, "How can I, you know, make something out of this?" Story_ID: 4735 Speaker 1: Now 'Roots.' Talk about 'Roots,' because 'Roots'--I mean of all movies, I mean, that have been done. There hasn't been--it had so much attention and so much--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Now I did 'Roots II: The Next Generation.' Speaker 1: Oh, you did 'Roots II.' Speaker 2: Yeah. The first--I was at Universal [Studios] during the first 'Roots.' Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: The second 'Roots'--and that's what attracted me to take the job in Warner Bros. as head of casting. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: They said, "If you come over here you'll be--you can cast 'Roots II: The Next Generation.'" Which I jumped at and had a great time. I mean it's--it was, you know, we could have done--were there--the thing that really came out of there for me was a relationship with Alex Haley. I mean, imagine getting to know and becoming friends with Alex Haley. And after that I did 'Palmerstown' with Alex Haley, which was kind of the story of his childhood. And it was just--those are some of the highlights and the benefits of, you know, that came out of business, you know, where--they're legends, but they're friends. And the relationship was based on a friendship as opposed to their status. I mean--. Speaker 1: So what--did you have a famous Alex Haley story too? Speaker 2: Alex. Alex, you know, was the probably the master storyteller. The greatest story teller of all time. I took Alex Haley to the [Harold] Ickes [housing] projects with me. And to show him--. We were in Chicago [Illinois]--I was in Chicago producing '[The Women of] Brewster Place' with Oprah [Winfrey] and I wanted--I said, "Alex, I'm gonna show you where I grew up." I knew where he grew up, 'cause I'd been down to his farm in Henning, Tennessee. And I said, "I'm gonna show you where I grew up." And we drove down. And I stood in front of the building where I just showed him. And the Ickes at that point was pretty rough. I mean, we could have been shot by snipers or anything, you know. And we just--we took a walk maybe from like 22nd [Street] down to 24th [Street] just walking. And I just shared some of the stories. I showed him the swing set where I played. I showed him where I played basketball. And he told me after that--he came back--and I told him one of the--one of the sad--in spite of my success, one of the sad--I get sad when I think of the fact that I have very few friends to share it with that I grew up in the projects, because they're either all dead or in jail. He told me after I told him that that he went home and called all his friends. That he--'cause he realized how blessed he was to have--like George, his childhood friend he could still talk to. And he said, I, you know--. And he wrote me a letter. I mean, you know, his stationery at the bottom of his stationery it said, "Find the good and praise it." On his stationery, that's what it says at the bottom. "Find the good and praise it." And he lived his life that way. I mean he was just a remarkable man and so positive. And when he passed away we were, you know--. Speaker 1: (Phone rings) Speaker 2: I thought we turned it off already. Speaker 1: In fact, we should--turn it--hit off. Speaker 2: The work is rewarding and I--but the--some of the benefits is meeting people that truly are great and have challenged themselves to a level that's inspiring. Story_ID: 4736 Speaker 1: Oh, it was just, you know, just, you know--my Redd Foxx anecdote. That Redd Foxx somehow--at the height of his popularity at 'Sanford and Son,' his birthday came up. So the network or someone decided to give him a birthday party. And it was a black tie affair at the Shubert Theatre [Chicago, Illinois]. You know, the Shubert and people--everybody turned out. The network turned out and, you know, proclamations from the governor. And the mayor was there. And Richard Pryor came out and made the introductions. Jesse Jackson made--did like the invocation. And then Redd Foxx came out. It was a birthday cake and everybody sang 'Happy Birthday.' Redd Foxx came out and he said, "I--I'm really touched." He said, "I can't tell you how I'm touched. But before you start, I just wanted to ask you something. Did you wash your ass? Did you wash your ass?" I mean that--so he went from this--you know. And then he proceeded to curse about Kate Smith, of all people. It was a non sequitur. He was cursing Kate Smith. I mean to take an American icon and just curse about her (laughs). So whatever, you know--. It was like, you know--. It was like--it was--Redd Foxx, it doesn't matter whether it's the Shubert or Roberts Motel. Redd Foxx is gonna show up. You know, so--. Story_ID: 4737 Speaker 1: Now, when you--what--let me ask you--was there anything disappointing about the Warner Bros. experience at all? You know, I mean you had had such a meteoric rise at Universal [Studios]. Speaker 2: I left early. I left after a year and a half of my contract. You know, I had like a two and a half year agreement with Warner Bros.. The title is important and it allowed me to hire more cast, you know, black casting directors and more actors. But I kind of at that point had done it all. And I wanted to see what could I do on my own. I also was getting married. I met my wife and I wanted to, you know--. So I just felt, "Let me see what I can build on my own. I could always get a job." In fact, here's what happened: I left Warner Bros. after I finished--I did a show called--no. I finished Warner Bros., did 'Roots [II: The Next Generation],' did another show at Warner Bros. They wanted me to do sitcoms. I never cast a sitcom before. And it occurred to me that when you're under contract with someone, you have to do what they tell you to do. I mean, you know, versus--I'd only done drama and I didn't want to do that, so I left. Also I saw that the independent contractors that I hired outside made as much as I made in a year. So I said, "Oh. I know I can make a living." My wife had graduated from Howard [University] Law School [Washingston D.C.] and she decided to take the California bar. So--and my daughter [Tonya Gatlin]--at that time, when my first wife passed, I was a single parent. So here I was now, I was married. It was a family of us three and I was unemployed. I left because--there's a thing called hiatus, where the town gets very slow. Things get very slow. I had never experienced hiatus because I was this annual--I was a salaried employee. It was the first time in my life I have ever applied for unemployment. So I went and applied for unemployment, but-- and before the first check arrived, 'Palmerstown [U.S.A.]' was picked up as a series. And I got that and another show called '[The] Lazarus Syndrome' with Lou [Louis] Gossett, [Junior]. So those two series--with those two series, I was in business. And it just grew from there. Speaker 1: Wow! Speaker 2: And I've been Reuben Cannon & Associates as an independent I guess since 1979. Speaker 1: Now you--the beginning part of it. What--the beginning--the beginning part you were still doing casting right? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, right, right, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You weren't producing at this point. Speaker 2: Right. I was just--I just--right. I just wanted to be--I wanted to, you know--. Just was making a nice living, doing very well as a casting organization. Speaker 1: And you were also--it didn't matter, still casting general market, you--. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Most of our--if we, you know--. There isn't enough at the time and there wasn't then and it isn't enough now, enough product, black product, to make a living. So you have to do--I mean I cast the '[The] Winds of War,' which was a major, you know, epic. I mean, the reputation that I earned was the ability was just--good taste in actors and a great instinct about future stars, you know. Bruce Willis or Oprah Winfrey or [John] Travolta and people like that. There--you know, and the way you keep score is by who hired them first. And you look at Reuben Cannon's track record of who got their first jobs through Reuben Cannon, and it's a pretty impressive list. Stars before they became stars. I mean, you know--. Story_ID: 4738 Speaker 1: Now talk about '[The] Color Purple.' When did that--that happened under what? Speaker 2: It happened as--you know, I was an independent casting director. I was casting at the same time as when I was casting a lot of Steve Cannell [Stephen J. Cannell] shows and casting 'Moonlighting.' I mean, I had an enormous staff. But this was a--I read the book and I wrote a letter to Quincy Jones asking to be, you know--. And the first time--I had never before--the reputation. I ran my business, you know, on the basis that if you wanna buy a Rolls-Royce, you'll know where to go. And I'd never made a phone call for a job. It was all based on reputation and referrals. But here was a book that I really wanted to work on. And so I wrote a letter. I never mailed it. And I get a call--I received a call one day from Quincy Jones [Jr.] wanting to meet with me. I didn't know Quincy. I'd seen him, you know, as a fan. And he met with me. And you know, Quincy is very hip, very loose and, you know--. And so you--he's just very, very easy to be with. And he said, you know--and I had just finished casting 'JoJo Dancer.' And he says, "I'm doing 'The Color Purple.' I'm gonna do this movie, blah blah blah." And I said, "Well I read the book. I loved the book and I'd love to work on it." He said, "Spielberg is thinking about directing it," you know. So then I met with Steven Spielberg. And I'd seen him on a lot of Universal [Studios] when I was there, you know. And we kind of recognized each other from, you know--. And I was hired to do the casting. And it was--you know, I'd done features--I had done--I did 'A Soldier's Story.' But this--'[The] Color Purple' was, you know, you just felt it was gonna be something special. And the great thing about working with Spielberg and some of the others, they're so--when they hire you, they hire you because you're the best, and they let you do your job. They let you do your job. It was one of the--I wouldn't say easy. Well it was easy in as much as it was--there was no stress. Even though we, you know, the role of Shug Avery was an enormous challenge. And the role of--that Oprah [Winfrey] played was enormous. Story_ID: 4739 Speaker 1: And meeting Oprah [Winfrey]. And, I mean, the way that came about I was casting 'JoJo Dancer [JoJo Dancer, Your Life is Calling].' I was looking for a little boy to play Richard Pryor as a little boy. And Richard Pryor, you know, grew up in a house of prostitution run by his--by his grandmother. And his father and he would have these cursing battles. They would try to, you know--. So I needed--and the script called for a little boy to be able to curse with such skill and just such volume, that it was, you know--. A lot of mothers didn't want their kids to play the role. And a lot of California kids were just too soft. So I said, "I'm gonna go to New York and Chicago [Illinois] to find this kid." I know, you know, Chicago, I know, there's a kid in the projects who can curse like this. So I was in New York and I'd been hired to cast '[The] Color Purple.' And I get a call from Quincy, he said, "Look, I'm in Chicago. I'm here because some woman had sued Michael Jackson for being the father of her baby--of her baby, named Billie Jean. She said she had a child named Billie Jean and Michael Jackson was the father." And Quincy had to go in to Chicago and give a deposition saying Billie Jean was created in a studio; it was a character. Michael couldn't have, you know, named his baby after this child that this woman claimed, so--. But you could sue anybody for anything. So he had--but while in Chicago, to show you how God guides your life, he turned on the TV set and there he saw a local talk show host named Oprah Winfrey. So he calls me: "Reuben, I'm in Chicago. I just looked at the woman on TV that could be right for Sophie named Oprah Winfrey." I said, "Well I'm going to Chicago from New York to look for kids for 'JoJo Dancer.'" And Quincy was doing some music on 'JoJo Dancer,' so he--. So I said, "I'll look her up." So I called Oprah's show and told them to send me a tape. That Quincy had seen her and, you know, and send me her tape. So they sent me her audition tape, not of her episode, but a tape of her acting, because she used to tour a one-woman show around the South doing obscure black heroes. Fannie Lou Hamer, Ida B. Wells, and it was a very crude tape of her someone had made--that she had made of herself performing these roles. So my introduction to her was as an actress on tape. So my--I had already scheduled a stop in Chicago. I told her I was coming to Chicago. And I was using another casting director's office on North Michigan Avenue. It was on a Sunday. I was already coming to Chicago to meet some kids--to audition some boys for--to play Richard Pryor and I would block out three hours to meet with her before I went back to L.A.. So I interviewed, you know, the kids in Chicago. Found some kids that could curse well, but couldn't really act that well. And at three o'clock, I was there by myself, 'cause, you know--. And Oprah came to the door. She says, "I'm here to meet Reuben Cannon." And I said, "I'm Reuben Cannon." And she says, "Look mister, I have a hundred something temperature. I got out of my sickbed to come here. I don't have time for games. I wanna meet Reuben Cannon." I said, "I'm Reuben Cannon." And she just (sighs) "Now this is ridiculous." I said, "You wanna see my driver's license?" And we both laughed. It never occurred to her that Reuben Cannon might be black. And that's--so she came in and she said, "I was destined to play Sophie in '[The] Color Purple.'" I said "Really?" She said, "Yes." I said, "Now how do you figure that?" She said, "Because Harpo, who is Sophie's husband, spelled backwards is Oprah." I said, "Well, it's interesting you feel that way, because Alfre Woodard feels the same way and her name is spelled--you know, doesn't have any unique spelling." She said, "No it's mine." I said, "Well, look I saw your tape." And I--you know, I said, "You were very good. I don't know yet. I haven't seen your talk show. I've only seen your acting tape." And we started talking. And, you know, and we talked for a couple of hours, about three hours. And we started talking about life and metaphysics and spirituality. And that began a conversation then about spirituality that continues to this day. I'm not surprised why her show has evolved to where it is, 'cause that's who she was then in terms of a spiritual path and why she's so centered. And it began a long friendship. And what happened--so I said, "Look, I'm going to send you some materials, some audition material. And I'll schedule your audition. But you're a little rusty, so why don't I get you somebody to work with." So it was a guy I happened to meet name Poindexter. I can't think of his name. It was a Chicago actor who was in Chicago. I said, "Why don't you run lines with him, so when you come out to audition--" So she came out and auditioned and--along with Alfre Woodard. Steven [Spielberg] directed the screen test. And then she--when it was gonna go to a--no, no. Before she got to audition she was gonna go to a weight reducing farm, a fat farm. And I called her and I said, "If you want this job, you better not lose any weight. You better get--" you know (laughs). So she left the farm and came and auditioned and got the role. And it was remarkable. I escorted her to the Oscars that year when she got the nomination. Speaker 2: That's an amazing story. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's an amazing story. And you didn't know her--you didn't know her really as a talk show host. Speaker 1: No. My introduction was-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You didn't. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Was a tape with her composite, very crude videotape of her traveling around the South doing these one-woman shows as a--you know. You know, and it's a wonderful collection, you know, of characters. Speaker 2: And '[The] Color Purple' also broke--. I mean, that was another very-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 2: You know, 'cause we don't have that many. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, you know. It was a, you know, a pop, you know--well, it looked pretty. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughs) You know. It was--and the characters were--you know, nice--. I mean all of the--you know, everything--. Speaker 1: Everything. I mean Danny, you know, Danny Glover and I have been friends for years. And that was Danny's breakthrough. I just saw Danny, you know, Monday. And Whoopi [Goldberg]. I mean, Whoopi's first role in front of a camera. Remarkable. You know, the whole cast. And I've rediscovered the film, I looked at it recently. And I--and the DVD is coming out pretty soon. They're doing interviews now, behind the scene DVDs. And if you look at the poster, I'll never forget--you know, Oprah's--Jeff Jacobs, who represents Oprah is a wonderful attorney. He--at that time he said, "Reuben--." Because, you know, the pay scale for that was fifty thousand dollars. It was called schedule 'F.' You paid fifty thousand dollars under the SAG [Screen Actors Guild] agreement and you're allowed to hire the person for like ten to twelve weeks. And Jeff said, "Well if Oprah gets an Oscar nomination I want her to get a bonus." And I, you know. He didn't get that. I said--he said, "Can she have her name on the poster?" I said, "No, she can't have that 'cause no one knows who she is." So when you look at the poster and look at the video--maybe the--you know. Her name's not on the poster or the box. But when I saw--the other day I saw the person who's working on putting the DVD out. I said, "I think you're gonna put Oprah's name on the box this time, aren't you?" He said, "You can believe--(laughs) you believe it will be there," you know. It's like fifteen years or so or maybe more. Maybe more. Speaker 2: Now did you participate in that film any more? Because it was a black--you know, there were more black characters? Did you ever--I mean--'cause casting a lot of times you can sort of just be--you know, your role ends at a certain point. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh no, no, no. Casting--when you're a caster, you cast every role. Speaker 2: Okay. No, no. I know it means you cast every role. I'm saying that you're not--you weren't on the set--were you on the set? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah. I went to the set. I went--we hired local actors as well. There was some location casting then in North Carolina. In fact, that's when I--from there I went and spent time with Maya [Angelou] there. You know, 'cause I had worked for her on a movie--for our mini-series called 'Sister Sister' that she wrote. And I took a chance to visit her while I was there. No. So I was on the set a lot. I was there with my wife and my son at the time. Story_ID: 4740 Speaker 1: Now what was the next--has your wife [Linda Cannon] played a role in--on the legal side? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, originally--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Because, this--another part of your business is the legal--I mean, understanding--or having impact--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, well negotiating--negotiating my deals, I mean, when I--in the beginning, my casting contracts, Linda would handle all that. I've only had two attorneys in my life, with Linda, who dropped me as a client 'cause she said I was too much of a pain. And now Nina Shaw who represents me. But, you know, it's--because you know, you--it's hard to--sometimes when you're having a disagreement. Are you disagreeing about a deal point in a contract that your wife negotiated, or you're really arguing about something meaningful to the relationship? So, you know, in the beginning she negotiated all my deals and made very good, you know, very good terms. Speaker 1: That's fabulous, okay. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And you--was she learning on the job though? 'Cause she was-- Speaker 2: Well she practiced--she spent a year practicing law with a firm, with a entertainment law firm here [Los Angeles, California] after she, you know, when she took the bar here. And then worked with Rudin Pearlstein. So she learned from--Mickey Rudin represented Frank Sinatra. So she learned from a very good entertainment lawyer. Story_ID: 4741 Speaker 1: Now what other project beside--I know '[The Women of] Brewster Place' you've talked--you know, you've mentioned. That was--that you liked. You enjoyed it. Or was it because it was another chance to work with Oprah [Winfrey]? Is it--. Speaker 2: Well both. A chance to work with Oprah and also to--my dream had always been to return home, Chicago [Illinois]. To be able to work in Chicago. To do, you know, this dream that I had of--it started in Chicago. So to bring--to be able to come home and do it. Because my family still is not sure what it is I do. And for them to come down and see it, you know, to see me on the set. And it was heaven. Here we were, you know, we were in a black-owned studio with a black executive producer; I was producing. Able to hire top directors like Bill Duke and Ivan Dixon. We had a wonderfully talented--Dianne Houston, black, you know, story editor. So, in our production meetings it was like, you know, we were like doing wonderful theater. Like the National Black Theatre Company. And able to--and in the areas in which there weren't department heads, we would tell the department head to hire a black person to train them, so--. It was wonderful. It was a wonderful experience. Story_ID: 4742 Speaker 1: Now when--when were you starting to get restless, Reuben, then about, you know, doing producing? When was--when did that occur in this? Speaker 2: Well after I came back from ['The Women of] Brewster Place,' after 'Brewster Place' was cancelled as a series, because it was a drama. And, you know, black dramas on TV have always been difficult to last. I started my casting business again. But I wanted to produce. I wanted to be more responsible for what went on the screen and more responsible for what went on in front of the camera. And I thought I--you know, I never produced a feature film. I had cast a lot of feature films, but I wanted to produce a feature film. And that meant I had to go to a studio and develop this thing. But the development process at the studio was so long, you know, where you--. And one day, I--there's a movie called 'Desperado' that I did the casting for. And the producer of that movie called and offered me a chance to direct a movie. And I--he had an idea that he was going to raise money for and wanted me to direct. And the idea was what if we took a group of black men and put them on--and created a story around a group of black men who took a journey from L.A. to Washington D.C. And he wanted to do it. "Let's do it real cheap," you know. "We'll get a bus; we'll get some sixteen millimeter cameras and we'll shoot up to $700,000." I said, "I love the idea, because it's a chance to show diversity among black men, which is something we don't see often. But let me see if I could take the idea to another level." And I called Spike Lee. I said, "Spike a great idea has been given to me. The story of a journey of a group of black men from Los Angeles to Washington D.C. and they board as strangers and they emerge as friends." He said, "It's a good idea." He says, "If you raise the money, I'll do it." And he said, "But we should raise the money in the spirit of the march from black men." And he says, "What if I took on the--if I take on the athletes, you take on the actors. And let's see if we can raise a couple million dollars." Well, after that--that was like--so this is now November 1. November 1 is when this conversation is taking place. And the idea was to raise funding for this film for an idea. We didn't have a screenplay. And have it released on the anniversary of the march a year later, October 16. So Spike, you know, being his--Mr. NBA [National Basketball Association] himself, he started contacting a lot of athletes. Then he would turn them over to me and I'd have to talk to their attorneys and their business managers. And they all would pass. Even if the athlete said, "Yes." And I was having better luck with the actors. Danny Glover said, "Yes." Robert Guillaume said, "Yes." Will Smith said, "Yes." And Wesley Snipes said, "Yes." So when you look at the picture right above you there, of all the investors. There's four actors and one athlete and the rest are black businessmen. Because the--while there are a lot of black--successful black people, very few of them--not very--in entertainment, control their purse--their checkbooks. Versus black men--a black man--businessman can look at a business synopsis in a contract and make his own decisions. And what made me so proud of the movie besides the content--I mean Reggie Bythewood, who wrote the script, also was an investor. I was an investor. Spike was an investor, so--. We made the movie for 2.5 million dollars and sold it for about $3.5. And the unique thing about that, we made a conscious decision to sell--the plan was to make the movie and then put it up for bid. But what we decided to do was to take an offer on the table from Columbia, which was made before we even started filming. Which allowed all the investors to get their money back plus interest and profit. And it was the first time. So--I made a big deal out of it, you know. A press conference in New York in the--where I invited CNN to show how black people can do business. And how we can be responsible. If we want Hollywood to change, we have to change how we do business with Hollywood. I've used that model now two other times then. Twice. Okay. Okay. So anyway, so, that's--. In answer to your question. But that's what I--that's what started my restlessness was just the frustration, the waiting for and being, you know--as you get older, you run out of patience of waiting for permission or approval to do--to tell your stories. Speaker 1: So now--that's exactly right. Story_ID: 4743 Speaker 1: Now you--what--talk about the two other times then. Speaker 2: The other situation was--so 'Down in'--'Get on the Bus' was the first film I produced. The second was 'Down in the Delta'. And that was a script that had been around for three years. A prize-winning script, it had been sitting on the shelf. But movies are made because they're very often talent-driven. You have to attach some element to--property to get the studios interested. And because of the way Hollywood is structured, there isn't a black actress today or wasn't at that time that could get this movie green lit. But there are other ways to generate heat around properties, I believe. So when the script was brought to me, I sent it to my friend Maya Angelou. And Maya read it, liked it, and said she would direct it. So now we had a world-class storyteller, you know. And if filmmaking is eighty percent writing and casting, I'm comfortable--we had a good script. I'm comfortable with the cast. It turns out Maya is a film student. I mean she's a graduate of the Swedish Film Academy and has directed documentaries. And we didn't know this 'til we all flew down. We met with her and she agreed to direct it. And with that, Wesley [Snipes] came on board with his company and Alfre [Woodard] . And the movie was financed by Showtime. And then we sold it to Miramax. So we had within a window. So it was a unique arrangement, whereby we had sixty days from the time we finished the movie to find a theatrical distributor. And Miramax came on board and took it out theatrically. And it didn't do great at the box office. But it's doing great in video. Speaker 1: Now the other incident. Speaker 2: The other film was a--Reggie Bythewood, who wrote 'Get on the Bus,' wrote a wonderful movie called 'Dancing in September.' And once again there Reggie came in with the initial funding, with the first $300,000 and a wonderful script. And when people come to me with--who are willing to bet on themselves. I mean, you have to--you know. And the script was so well written that I took on like an impossible task to produce the movie and raise the rest of the money. And we knew it would be about a million dollars to finish--to make this movie. And we--so that was like Labor Day I got the script. And we started shooting in October. And I just called on friends again. I called on Danny Glover and Robert--Donna and Robert Guillaume, Abe Thompson. Friends I didn't even know--people I knew, who had--you know, who knew of me. And we made a wonderful movie. And we sold that movie to HBO [Home Box Office] for double the price. And once again gave the investors back their initial investment plus twenty-three percent interest and profit within the first thirteen months. And I'm using that model over and over. Because what it does is, it empowers you. You don't have to wait. You know, you have a script, you know. And you have a creative team now. And I say to producers, I mean I say to writers and directors, "Look, I'm not a studio yet. But if you wanna come and make a movie and execute the vision that you originally conceived, this is the place. We may have creative differences. But we won't have any cultural differences." Which very often was at the heart of the studio process. And so the next film where--I'm doing is with Gary Hardwick who wrote and directed '[The] Brothers.' We'll do it--we're using the same model as 'Get on the Bus' and 'Dancing in September.' And I'll continue doing these one-offs. The ultimate dream is to not just do one-offs, but to create a film fund to be able to do multiple films and create a consistent flow of films, that's independently financed. And--that are made without compromise. Speaker 1: You know, that's really a fascinating sort of model there. Story_ID: 4744 Speaker 1: Are you seeing your partner now? The partner could--. I mean, your distribution outlet. Are you seeing it more with cable than you are--I mean, because when you have--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) For drama. Speaker 1: For drama. Speaker 2: For drama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For dramas definitely. I think--I think cable across the board are doing some of the best dramas. It's hard--dramas are a tough sell theatrically, white and black, but especially black dramas. I've produced three dramas and theatrically--because I'm--there's enough drama in our lives as a race of people. So when we think of entertainment that we pay for at the box office, it's--dramas don't come to mind right away. So, you know, comedies, romantic comedies. I think that one of the least underserved areas in black cinema is romance, you know. I mean, we rarely see intimacy on the screen. Relationships that are, you know--that are, you know, that are multi-dimensional. And we've got--you know, and we have the best actors in the world in Denzel [Washingston] and Morgan [Freeman] and Cicely [Tyson] and down the line. The list--there's no shortage of talent. What there is lacking in Hollywood, which is lacking across all the black communities, is unity, you know. Speaker 1: And are you finding that--that's picking up, Reuben? Do you find--I mean, because--I mean even the fact that you've come and you've been able to have these successes is historic. I mean it, you know. Speaker 2: No it's--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And you've had distribution. I mean, that's the other. Speaker 2: Yeah. They've been acquired and distributed and I think--and certain films are better off viewed on TV than they are on a big screen because they can reach a wider audience, you know, they can see--. The--you know, the legacy of slavery still haunts us. And whether it's Hollywood or whether it's, you know, the political race somewhere in the South or Chicago [Illinois], it's there. It is a challenge. So, you know. But I welcome the challenge, 'cause I think at this point it's part of my mission and it's something I'm focused on. I'll always do studio business. We'll do pictures with the studio as we are doing, but the stories that we wanna tell about compromise we have to finance ourselves. And that's when we--we can complain as a race about the lack of diversity and product, but we have to pay for that, you know, it is--and it's a business. It doesn't have to be a losing business, you know. There's--we know if we--you know, we see everyone's movies. We see more films than any other race in the United States. But we especially go when we are represented on screen. Speaker 1: And do you think that there will be this diversity that--I mean, we still have, you know. You know, we still (laughs)--we still have, I think, you know, these black--the modern day version of black exploitation--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, right. Speaker 1: I mean those are the ones that are still, you know, are front and center. Do you think that--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That we're gonna see more diversity? Speaker 1: That's what's missing. I mean I don't have a problem with the--what seems to be a preponderance of films that only show us dysfunctional. What I have a problem with--'cause I think that that artist or that director or that writer is evolving. It's still in its--film-making is such--is a process where we see, you know, someone who is a good film maker, you know, in ten years become a great film-maker. You know . I think Spike [Lee] is far better now than he was early on. He's always had a vision and talent. But, you know, it's evolving. John Singleton and so on. So the person who's making what he believes is a point of view of his life. But what's missing is films like 'Down in the Delta,' which is a story of families. A story of how people can be healed by love or stories of romance. So that's what's missing from the spectrum of black films. But, you know, fortunately you have 'Soul Food' on, you know. So there is, you know. I think once again back to cable there are great stories being told. But we have to take responsibility for the product with our checkbooks. If we ever expect to see really great diversity. Speaker 2: Are you finding that's changing? Do you feel that each one has been easier or each one has been a chore? Speaker 1: It gets easier for me because I have credibility and my investors are, you know. It's like any other--anything else. When they receive back their investment and profit they're happy and they're ready to roll to the next. So--. But I'm just one person and this model should be duplicated across the board by many. There's too many talented actors, writers, and directors for me just to be, you know, a one--you know, just one shop. Story_ID: 4745 Speaker 1: I think it's--it's a sense of--out of respect to ancestors or out of respect to our history and our culture that I can't afford to become disillusioned or even--or even tired. And as I said that compared to our ancestors, we're all on vacation. I mean, and each generation, I believe owes it to the future generation to, you know, to lift us up. And we do it in our work in ways that some will understand and others won't, you know. But the legacy I leave behind is not that I was part of the, you know, helping the careers of Bruce Willis or Oprah Winfrey or, you know, many others. But that I was the first. And they're many others behind me. And that I empowered many others that weren't even casting. I mean, you know, there's interns that we've turned--there's people that have come through this office, you know. I mean I see people that I barely recognize. They said, you know, "You don't know me. But, you know, you spoke once at a class. And you spoke about, you know. Daring to be great and things that help sustain you in terms of your spirituality. And I--now I'm a camera man blah blah blah," you know, those are things that you leave behind, you know. Talent will--. The frustration part--frustrating part of casting is that I'm exposed to more talent than I can personally utilize. So that's what really--and--but it's inspiring, but it's also frustrating. I mean, there's so much talent. And there's nothing like black talent. You know, there's nothing. I mean Cornel West said that if Hollywood was based on talent, it would look like the NBA [National Basketball Association]. And I can--I believe--I believe that. It's just--it's just--it's just bubbling over. Speaker 2: What--? You've talked a little bit about this. But what do you really want to--like, what would be your dream? You know, if you could sort of project? You're still very young. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So I mean but what would be your dream to accomplish before you leave this earth? Speaker 1: To--I used to see my life in thirds. Believe it or not. Even as a young--I always saw my life as one-third earning, one-third--one-third learning, one-third earning and one-third serving. I've had to blend that together, because it didn't work out that way, but the service is very important. And to find a way to build--have a creative studio in partnership with a black creative arts academy. So we are--we're nurturing and developing young talent and we have an outlet in which it could be used. And somehow to instill in that talent to give back some of their success to that. So, you know, a call it a African American Creative Arts Recycling Center. Where we--talent is constantly being generated and then brought back to the community. Because what we do is, is, you know, we--it's nurtured in the community. It's then brought to Hollywood. And the community that from which it was honed and shaped and, you know, rarely gets any of the proceeds. So that would be, you know, I mean, there are a few--and there are a few instances. My daughter right now is very fortunate 'cause she's attending Debbie Allen's Dance Academy. And Debbie has this vision. And is acting on this vision. And it's wonderful. They're doing a great thing. And there are few schools around the country that do it. So that's somehow is the, you know, an inner city entertainment arts complex in partnership with Reuben Cannon Studios. Speaker 2: And what do you think is unique about the African American experience? You know, when all is sort of said and done? You know, now there--it--you hear more rumblings about, you know, African Americans are not gonna be relevant. You know, there--you know, Hispanics are the thing, you know. There's--people won't even consider race. But what do you think, you know, is unique about our experience? Sort of shared with the world, people would experience a little bit more? What--? Black people know it, Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: Well what's always amazed me about black people is our depth--is the depth in which we exist on all levels. Especially the depth of forgiveness; which ties to the depth of love. If forgiveness--. If one of the cornerstones of Christianity is forgiveness, then black people are all saints. I mean, the ability to--to which we are able to forgive. And we--we're so loving. I mean the power of our love. And it carries over into our work. That's why when, you know--when you see a black artist creating from a place that--a depth of his soul, a place in his soul. That very few of us even dare to access. We feel connected. We feel related, and it's not--and while the world may appreciate an artist like Aretha [Franklin], you know, we know where, you know, where that comes from. We know where that comes from. You can't create it with a synthesizer--you can't--it comes from a place where all black people live or spend time at some point. So it's our depth as a human being. I mean, I think we know we're spiritual beings having a human experience. I think we know that. Story_ID: 4746 Speaker 1: And, you know, I know you can't say favorites, but do you have any favorite artists--? I mean, I know that's not the role you're-- (laughs). But you have to have some favorite artists and I wonder if you can name a few and why, you know, what you find unique about, you know, some of --. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well naw, naw--it's like--it's like--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh, you can't do that. I know--. You can't do that? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It--well, I'll tell you--I'll tell you who I do. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: I mean--there is always--I mean, I am a lover of greatness. I mean--and I, and my favorite reading is really biographies, you know, side-scripts of biographies. And I love Bill Russell. As an athlete and now as a philosopher. Just--in the way he manages his life. And the stories he's able to tell. Because, you know, we see the end product. When people see me, they see the end product. And that's why this is great, I get to talk about the formative years. And Russell talks about his formative years and the battles with Wilt Chamberlain, you know. And, you know, and Michael Jordan. So I have heroes or people I admire. And because--and sports--what's great about it is greatness shows up. It's like, you know, in ways and when we're challenged. So in terms of creative artists and creativity, what happens, I mean, you know, it takes a lot of courage to be an actor. It takes a lot of courage. It is a noble life, but it is one of the most daring of any of--of artists. And so I, you know. So I love actors. I mean, what they're are able to do, you know. I mean they're able to take--you take--very often there's--very rarely do you get a good piece of material. I mean you can take a piece of material and have an actor treat it the way John Coltrane treats 'My Favorite Things.' You know, that's--I mean, that's heaven. That's heaven. So I'm inspired, I mean, constantly. That's why I stay in the game, because I'm able to see actors do that. I go see artists do that. I'm able to see a writer, you know, put words together in a way that we haven't heard before, you know. I saw Alice Walker recently and I told her I said, "I quote you because you once said in print, you know, 'When you do it from the heart, it leaves a heart print."" And I believe that literally and figuratively that--that's true. And most black artists, that's the way they live, you know. So I'm inspired in this--so it's--I have a very blessed life, you know. I--I'm very blessed. My--you know, the greatest thing in life I think I ever accomplished in life is really being a father. Like I said, being the father that I believe my father would have been. Speaker 1: And so in that role, what about role models for your children? I mean, what are you trying to set up for, you know--set them in, you know, in life as--? Speaker 2: Well to--if--to--to strive for excellence. I believe they will experience racism. In spite of having a privileged existence of some degree, they will experience racism. And the greatest deterrent against--well, one of the--not a deterrent, but one of the great weapons against racism is excellence, is excellence. So I've prepared them to be--to excel in what it is you do. I have a bet with them, it's a thousand dollars they can--they can receive if they can show me anyone, in any area, that has succeeded without hard work. That's been there for twenty years. And my--my oldest son is, you know, my son is twenty. And they'll come up every night with something else, talking 'bout "Somebody's won lotto," you know (laughs). I said, "That's not a career. No, a career, a profession," you know. Because every person I know who's excelled works extremely hard, you know. Michael would go--Jordan would shoot the ball after the game's over, you know. Tiger Woods practiced harder than anyone else. That's, you know, that's my experience. That's what's--my destiny has been shaped by my ability to work hard, you know. And it's not all work, because I love it. So if you can find what it is you love to do, you won't have to work as hard. Story_ID: 4747 Speaker 1: You know, I can't help but think about you seeing your father, you know, pass away, but him playing basketball. And the three years you spent with him. And I was just thinking, do you ever think what he would think if he saw you now? You know, what he would--? What he would say? Speaker 2: Oh, it's--I mean, it's--so often I could have used--you know. So I've had to put together other surrogate fathers to get wisdom and guidance from, you know. And would just have prayer, private prayer sometimes with my meditation, just to connect with him and just ask for some guidance, you know. I think he'd be proud. I mean, you know, I've definitely given, you know--elevate the name. I mean, so there is somewhere in the Illinois penal institution--there's a Reuben Cannon. But also, at the Motion Picture Academy, there's a Reuben Cannon. So--the same name. Speaker 1: (Pauses) And your grandmother, I have to ask about her (laughs). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Ida. Ida. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You know, I can't--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Ida--. Speaker 1: (Laughs) I can't help but think about--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Ida--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously, laughs) What would she be saying--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously, laughs) She would have said, "Aren't you glad you didn't send me to jail?" She would--Ida Thompson, my grandmother, she--you know, it's--you know, the way--and you talk about, you know, why you have to love--why--. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, could you start over because you were looking down when you said that. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: Ida Thompson, my, you know, my beloved grandmother--I mean she would--today, if she saw me, and she would say, "Aren't you glad, Junior, you didn't send me to jail?" And I would--still I would do--the thing with black people, you know, we show our love in ways. I mean, the thing is that what we have to understand is that--and this is where we have to separate ourselves from Western thought at times. That love may show up and look--it may show up in ways that may not look like, you know, 'Father Knows Best' on TV. And that's--so her love for me was so profound and so deep. And she showed it in her way. And so now she would--I think she'd be proud, you know. She'd be proud. And still be challenge--I'd still be challenging and debating with her, you know, it's--it goes on, you know...