 Story_ID: 625981 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Sterns. Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Sister Mary Alice Chineworth, C-H-I-N-E-W-O-R-T-H. Speaker 1: Now is, we were talking about it off camera, but is there--first of all is, is Mary Alice your birth name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: My birth name is Innocence-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I-N-N-O-C-E-N-C-E, Victoria, V-I-C-T-O-R-I-A, Chineworth. Mary Alice was the name given to me when I received the habit. Speaker 1: Okay, I thought I'd ask that. Okay, and is there a story behind your last name Chineworth? Speaker 2: Well, my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] always urged us never to change the spelling of it and when I, I was doing some research in the Library of Congress genealogy library [Library of Congress Local History and Genealogy Reading Room, Washington, D.C.], I thought, well I'll look up the, the duration of my family name and I was delighted to find that it is the Chine [ph.] family on the River Worth, so it is a British name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We have no British blood. Speaker 1: All right, but that name was derived from a slave master right? Of your-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My Grandfather Chineworth-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --was owned by a man by the name of Chineworth who apparently could not handle his Malagash name, he was from Madagascar I understand and he just simply gave him his name, his own name and his, gave him a first name also British, Archibald, so my grandfather was officially Arch Chineworth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Archibald Chineworth. Speaker 1: All right, now we're gonna talk, more about him later but, now ma'am wha- what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 16, 1917, Rock Island, Illinois. Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I have been a teacher and an administrator all my religious life. Story_ID: 625982 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And Larry [Larry Crowe], also I just wanted to-- Speaker 1: Yes? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --interject, just give me one second. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Try not to be distracted by me, I have to move around a little back here-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): But just try to look at Larry and ignore me, it works-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's like 'The Wizard of Oz,' don't watch that man behind the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --camera (laughter) Speaker 1: All right, I'll try not to. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Although it's intriguing. Speaker 2: All right, okay. Okay-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: Well at any rate, the five favorites, these are light weight quick questions that are kind of a warm up. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 1: My favorite what? Speaker 2: Food. Speaker 1: Food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ice Cream. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Butter Pecan. Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 1: Blue. Speaker 2: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 1: Summer. Speaker 2: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 1: Pacific Coast, Oregon. Speaker 2: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: I've never thought about that. I don't recall that I do have. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I guess some people don't. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, a lot of people don't actually. Speaker 1: That's good. Story_ID: 625983 Speaker 1: So at any rate, I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] side-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but, we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Victoria, V-I-C-T-O-R-I-A, Magdalen, M-A-G-D-A-L-E-N, Schlicker, S-C-H-L-I-C-K-E-R [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth], is her maiden name. Speaker 1: And that last name again is S?-- Speaker 2: Schlicker, S-C-H-L-I-C-K-E-R, the S-C-H, is strictly German, Schlicker. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any idea what that means in German? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, it-- Speaker 2: Never thought about studying it. Speaker 1: Okay, is, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 3rd, Waseca, Minnesota. Speaker 1: And wh- what year? Speaker 2: I don't know, I look, it's on my file there, the papers I sent in. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But it was around the turn of the, turn of the--was-- Speaker 2: I have to figure it out. Speaker 1: Was she born in this century, or? I mean in the nineteenth cen- in the, in the-- Speaker 2: Eighteen-- Speaker 1: --twentieth century or the-- Speaker 2: Eighteenth. Speaker 1: Eighteenth, I mean the-- Speaker 2: Let me see-- Speaker 1: Nineteenth century then, yeah. Speaker 2: Ninetieth century I guess, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she, I'm ninety-three, she was twenty-eight when I was born. Speaker 1: Okay, 1880s, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. I figured that out and put it on my questionnaire-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I added, but I don't recall what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there's only two years difference between her and, her age and my dad's name, age. He's two ye- so when you figure that out, he's two years older. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and where was she born again, in? Speaker 2: She was born in Waseca, Minnesota. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: W-A-S-E-C-A, Minnesota. Speaker 1: Okay now, what do you know about your mother's ancestors? How, how far back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know that-- Speaker 1: --can you-- Speaker 2: Her, her father [Joseph Schlicker] was a son of a hotel owner, my grandfather--my great-grandfather-- Speaker 1: Now they're German now, she was a white woman, a German woman? Speaker 2: Yes, she was a-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --pure German. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And her grandfather owned the Hotel Schlicker, on, in Munich [Germany], a hotel which still stands. It was damaged in the war, World War II [WWII], but it was rebuilt and renamed The Schlicker Hotel [sic.]. Speaker 1: In Munich, okay. Speaker 2: Now my mother's father shared in the proceeds when my grandfather's great-grandfather sold that hotel, of course my Grandfather Schlicker got his share of it because they were, he was there, he was there more than one to, to share in that. And I just believe or surmise that it was with that money that he brought his family over from Germany, they were immigrants from Germany. Speaker 1: Is there a story passed down in the family as to why they would leave Germany to come to the United States? Speaker 2: No, there's no story, we do know that they came the hard way in steerage and that the infant son died on route and was buried at sea. Speaker 1: The steerage-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --means that they, they were, that's the cheapest-- Speaker 2: That's about the cheapest-- Speaker 1: --possible way? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, it must have cost the whole, his whole, I don't know maybe he's, went the cheaper way so that he'd have some money that when he came, I don't know. But at any rate, they lost this baby and that was always a sadness in the family whenever they thought about him. His name was Joseph [ph.], little Suppo [ph.], as my grandmother [Frances Roiger Schlicker] would say, who died on the way over. Story_ID: 625984 Speaker 1: And they came in at, into the New York Harbor, but they went almost directly to Minnesota, there was a whole colony of Germans in Minnesota, they lived in places that were named after German cities, like Ulm [Germany], there was New Ulm [Minnesota], that type of thing. So, my people settled in Waseca [Minnesota] and eventually my mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] grew up in Springfield, Minnesota. Speaker 2: Okay. So, what did they do for a living, from, from--? Speaker 1: My-- Speaker 2: --or did they? Speaker 1: --my grandfather [Joseph Schlicker] was involved in the, the sale of horses and cattle. He and his partner, Schlicker, I mean, Hillicker, owned Hillicker and Schlicker Horse and Cattle [ph.]. Speaker 2: Named Hillicker, now how do you spell Hillicker, H? Speaker 1: Hillicker, H-I-L-L-I-C-K-E-R. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Hillicker and Schlicker Horses and Cattle. And my mother had her own horse, she was a great rider, they, they grew up first of all in Springfield, but then they moved to Nebraska, that's when my grandfather went into business with Hillicker. Speaker 2: Okay, so they went into business in Nebraska? I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: In Nebraska. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Hillicker and Schlicker. Speaker 2: Now what, what city in Nebraska was this, is this? Speaker 1: Fremont. Speaker 2: Okay. Then I guess, what was his name? After John C. Fremont, I guess. The famous-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Was it, were they named after John C. Fremont, do you know? Speaker 1: I have no idea. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think there's a Fremont in most cities, most states have a Fremont, I think, so it must be a pretty popular. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a popular politician. Speaker 1: I believe it. Speaker 2: Well there, there was one, named Fremont anyway he-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --was a very-- Speaker 1: --probably the-- Speaker 2: --popular politician. He was an abolitionist too, from what I understand. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: John C. Fremont. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: It was a very small town. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Now, did your mother have any st- stories of growing up? Or are there any stories passed down that-- Speaker 1: Well she had two siblings who came over, there were two sisters, who came over with them and they settled in Springfield with the family and eventually married brothers, two sisters married two brothers, they married the Rubey brothers, R-U-B-E-Y. My mother was the first born in this country, when I was in Waseca, driving through the town, my sister [Magdalen Chineworth Bryson] and I said, "Let's stop in the court house and see if we can see mother's birth record." So we went to the court house and we looked for her record, she wasn't mentioned, so we thought about my uncle who was born two years later, and that we asked him to look up an Otto Schlicker and they found it. So we presumed that my grandfather didn't know at that, he had just come to this country and he didn't really realize he had to record a birth I guess but by the time my uncle came along, he knew what to do, or the doctor didn't record I guess, I don't know who was responsible, but, we found my uncle's birth in Waseca. Speaker 2: Okay. Now so your, your mother had two sisters but they were married in-- Speaker 1: Minnesota. Speaker 2: In Minnesota. Now, she had a brother too right? Speaker 1: Otto. Speaker 2: Otto, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Otto, was a barber and my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] worked with him in the same barbershop. Story_ID: 625985 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] have a chance to finish school in, in Minnesota or Nebraska, or? Speaker 2: She went as far as eighth grade, that's about the limit in, in that, in those days for women at that time in education was a very comparable to our high school education nowadays. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We used to think our mother knew everything (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] too, for that matter, had all the answers. Speaker 1: Now there's a, there's a popular TV show called 'Little House on the Prairie.' Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did any of those stories remind you of stories your mother told, or? Speaker 2: Yes, some of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I can't be specific about it, but-- Speaker 1: I (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I mean, I used to-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --love to hear stories about that-- Speaker 1: And Minnesota and Nebraska, that's the prairie life all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did she have any, it, it well, you know, was it did, did she have to walk a long way to school or--? Speaker 2: She well, had her own horse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I think she did very little walking, she and Hillicker, my grandfather's [Joseph Schlicker] partner had a daughter her age, they were very good friends, they called them chums in those days and even after my mother married, they would come to see us, you know, they stayed close friends all their lives. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was your, your mother Catholic? Was her family Catholic? Speaker 2: My mother's cradle Catholic, yes she's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --born Catholic. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: My father was a convert to Catholicism. Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother's family was Catholic, did, did she attend a Catholic school, too? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All, all her young life, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: The Franciscan Sisters [Franciscan Sisters of Christian Charity]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --were in charge of that school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And later on I had a second cousin who joined that order. Story_ID: 625986 Speaker 1: Now you knew your [maternal] grandparents too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very well. Speaker 1: Right, okay-- Speaker 2: All four of them. Speaker 1: Um-hm, and what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Joseph. Speaker 1: Joseph Schlicker, okay. And-- Speaker 2: Frances. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: With an E, Frances. She was Frances Roiger, R-O-I-G-E-R [Frances Rogier Schlicker]. Speaker 1: Okay. And oh, oh your, your grandmother's name was what? Was Fran-- Speaker 2: Frances Roiger. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: R-O-I-G-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roiger. Speaker 1: Okay, and they met in Germany right? They, before the-- Speaker 2: No, they met in--see my mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] was born here. Speaker 1: Yes. Right, but I, I'm assuming your grandmother and your grandfather met in Germany I guess? Speaker 2: Well that, that's a story. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: That's a very interesting story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Their marriage was an arranged marriage, my grandfather was getting on in years and he had never met anyone that he wanted to marry, yet he knew he had to marry sooner or later, so he went to the marriage broker and he said, "I want to, you to put me in touch with a woman who will keep my house and bear my children." So he put her in touch with Frances Roiger, he married her, not out of love but out of matchmaking and we always noticed that there wasn't that love that existed between my mother and father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.], and my mother would explain to us that that wasn't a love match it was an arranged marriage. But, I think my grandmother learned to love my grandfather but it wasn't reciprocated. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, now that reminds me of another TV show, and I probably watch too much TV, but there was a, I think Rip Torn and, oh gosh, I think, I can't think of the actress now, they, they were in--Anjelica Huston, I think, were in a movie where she was, she came over as a bride, you know, from, this is in the 19th century, latter part of the 19th century, she comes over and she marries this guy but he, he sent for her via mail. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: And then they got married and-- Speaker 2: That's right-- Speaker 1: They tried to make a go of it, you know, out on the prairie-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, it sounds like a similar kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. They did, it's a lot of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, my grandfather was in Germany remember when he married my, when he met, was put in touch with-- Speaker 1: Oh they were pr-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh then so, this happened-- Speaker 2: That happened in-- Speaker 1: --in Germany? Speaker 2: That happened in Germany, so that, because when they came over they were married and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right-- Speaker 2: --had children-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You see? Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: So that marriage, that matchmaking took place in Germany. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Think it was a common thing, or-- Speaker 2: Yes, apparently-- Speaker 1: --(Unclear) (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'Fiddler on the Roof' [Joseph Stein], you know, it's, that shows the matchmaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, I wondered if that was a, a Jewish tradition more than some-- Speaker 2: Not simply a Jewish, but Jewish still matchmake-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, they, you know, I, I grew up close to Jewish people and the, they had to more or less accept their parents' choice of a mate. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay, and that's from the parents side of it, but this is a, a single man that gets to a certain age and says, "I need a wife," and he can-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --go to a broker who-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's a business deal. And, I, we noticed that there wasn't that love, that is, that is displayed between my two grandparents and we used to question it, because we, we saw so much love expla- dis- displayed between my two parent--my parents. So that my mother explained to us that that was not a love match, that was an arranged marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which made a lot of sense to us. Story_ID: 625987 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name now, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Alexander Roth Chineworth [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.], A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, R-O-T-H, Chineworth. Speaker 1: Okay. If I can find that paper to write (laughter), okay here we go, Alexander Ross--? Speaker 2: A-L-- Speaker 1: What--okay. Speaker 2: --E-X-A-N-D-E-R, Roth, Chineworth, C-H-I-N-E-W-O-R-T-H. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 24, Missouri Territory [sic. Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what can--now, what can you tell us about his side of the family, about your father's side? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting, that, when my father told his parents [Lucy Branch Chineworth and Archibald Chineworth] that he was going to marry outside the race, they accepted my mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] and they loved her, but they expressed regret that Daddy didn't marry a nice colored girl. That's as far as their displeasure went, but they learned to love my mother very much and she, she met with nothing but love from them. Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna get 'em together at a certain point in this narrative but in the beg- let, can, can you tell us what you know about--you were saying that there's a tradition in your family that your grandfather came from Madagascar (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Madagascar. Speaker 1: And he-- Speaker 2: I can't document that-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but I'm trying with a blood sample of my Chineworth nephew, and I'm trying to get that through. There's some organization that will trace that back so that whether-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --they did come from Madagascar. Speaker 1: But he never, he never told you all what his name was in Madagascar? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I know the Madagash--Malagash names that are polysyllabic there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Very long over there, Antananarivo [Madagascar] is the name of the capital-- Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: --there. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Antananarivo. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, an ignorant person would have difficulty with that. Speaker 1: Um-hm, that's right. His name was Archibald Chinewor- Chineworth? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And did his master pronounce it the same way, Chineworth or, or? Speaker 2: I don't know. I presume so, because there were very particular about it. They never get (pronunciation) Chineworth. We won't accept (pronunciation) Chineworth and it's always ch- and we used to tell the kids at school when they try to say (pronunciation) Chineworth, we'd say, "How much is your chin worth?" Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we always got the right pronunciation of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Incidentally, I'll be going back to my seventy-fifth high school reunion [at St. Joseph's School, Rock Island, Illinois] in a couple of weeks, so the Chineworth name is still known. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you're, your grandfather, the tradition was he came from Madagascar and his name was given to him by his master and he--and this was in Arkansas right? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: But it--oh, the Chineworth's originated in Arkansas from what I understand. Speaker 1: I mean, the white master? Speaker 2: The white man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. He was-- Speaker 2: That's as far back as they can ta- they're five thousand of 'em on the, on the website, but we, we don't claim any connection with them, but they keep asking us to remain on the list. Speaker 1: Now was your grandfather a slave in Missouri or Arkansas? Speaker 2: Missouri. Speaker 1: Missouri, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Missouri Territory, it was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So this is like, this is before the Civil War, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, sure. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: He was a slave, slavery ended with the Civil War. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's-- Speaker 2: It had to be-- Speaker 1: Right, true. Speaker 2: --before 1865. Speaker 1: 'Cause, yeah, Missouri Compromise [Missouri Compromise of 1820] is what, you know, sprung the trap for the Ci- Civil-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Civil War. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: In a lot of ways. Story_ID: 625988 Speaker 1: Did your [paternal] grandfather have any stories about those days or what it was like to be a slave? Speaker 2: We could never ask him that. That's one thing my grandmother was insistent upon, "Don't talk about slavery to your grandfather, don't ask any pu- questions, it's too painful." And I will always regret that, because when I had the opportunity to go to Madagascar, I was full of questions, you know? Trying to trace my ancestry there and I knew very little about it. There are two stories about slavery from Madagascar and that is that the chieftains of the tribes in Madagascar, sometimes needed money and they'd sell their own people. And then there's a second story that says the people who lived along the coast were in--were captured into slavery. Now, the ca- the Malagash people ask me, "Was my grandfather kinky haired or straight haired?" And I said, "He has hair, was kinky." "Well then he must have been along the coast." That's what they said, and I don't know how true that is, but I always resented the fact that my grandmother wouldn't let us ask grandfather about slavery. It would have been very wonderful for us to know what his life was like as a slave, but we never got to know. Speaker 1: Yeah, did, what complexion was your grandfather? Speaker 2: Brown, dark--that's rich brown. Speaker 1: Very, very dark? Speaker 2: No, not black, not-- Speaker 1: But brown? Speaker 2: Black brown, but nice like chocolate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not milk chocolate but, not dark chocolate either. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, kind of like a mahogany? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Or whatever, okay. Speaker 2: And he, my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] was the same color. Speaker 1: Okay, and now what, now what about your grandmother on that side? Speaker 2: My grandmother was brown, she was Lucy Branch [Lucy Branch Chineworth], we think she was a slave too, otherwise how would she have known my grandfather's reluctance to talk about slavery, you know? Speaker 1: Well, did they marry during slavery, or, or after, or afterwards, after the-- Speaker 2: They must have married during slavery. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Now wha- what was your, what was your father's birthdate? Wh- when was he born, was? Speaker 2: My father? Speaker 1: Yes, what, what year was that? February 24th? Speaker 2: I don't know, he was two years older than my mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] so-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: When we figure out my mother's, then he's two years older. Speaker 1: Well, okay. Probably in the 1880s I guess. Speaker 2: I, I figured it out, it was on my questionnaire-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --someplace, but it's-- Speaker 1: Okay, let me look at it since we, I've got it right here, let's see. (Unclear) we do math in my head, which I'll get it, but, okay, 1888. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I--yeah, 1888. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So that's what-- Speaker 2: I knew it was eighteen something. Speaker 1: Okay. So, her name was Lucy Branch, was she born in the same Missouri Territory [sic. Missouri]? Speaker 2: I believe so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was married to someone else before she married my grandfather, she had a Patterson [ph.] family, and I kind of think that the Pattersons were her ow- owners, rather than her first husband. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Because some of my grandfather, some of my father's siblings were Pattersons and some were Chineworth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they say my grandmother had a second, or first family before she married Archibald Chineworth. Story_ID: 625989 Speaker 1: Now did your father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.], did he grow up in Missouri? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know when he moved to, to Fremont, Nebraska, but he must have been a young man when they moved. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think he grew up in Missouri. Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about growing up that he shared with you? Speaker 2: Only when they were together in Fremont, there were sixteen children, two families, I mean, the Pattersons [ph.] and Chineworths were sixteen of them and they must have had a wonderful childhood because he was full of wonderful stories about the big family they had and how they, how they loved one another, you know. I think most of all it was a model, in giving us a model how we should love one another because we're only four, you know, we're always caught squibbing, and squabbling and, quarreling and, and then he'd said, "You're not going to be loving with your, with your siblings until you're a thousand miles apart. You ought to enjoy one another now, the way my mother, brother and sisters did, there were sixteen of us," and then, "You're gonna hear the whole story." So, of course, I had a chance to ask my grandmother [Lucy Branch Chineworth], if all of that was true, you know? And, of course, it was fabricated, as I suspected it was, because when you have sixteen children, you're bound to have some kind of a disorder (laughter), but he always held that up as a model, as a model family. Story_ID: 625990 Speaker 1: They lived in town. Now what [paternal] grandpa [Archibald Chineworth] did, I don't know, I--it never dawned on me to wonder what he did, funny that you don't ask those questions. We weren't supposed to ask him too many questions anyway so, I just know that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, those are days that children are-- Speaker 1: They came-- Speaker 2: --seen and not heard-- Speaker 1: --to visit us-- Speaker 2: --and all-- Speaker 1: You know, from, from Fremont [Nebraska] to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to Rock Island [Illinois]. They, they visited us so we got to the--and we went to Nebraska to visit them, so I knew them pretty well. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But not as well as I knew my Schlickers-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --grandparents [Frances Roiger Schlicker and Joseph Schlicker], because they lived in the same town with us. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They moved there. Speaker 2: We're rolling again and you were saying that your grandfather basically lived in town? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And he, he did a number of different-- Speaker 1: I imagine-- Speaker 2: Jack of all trades? Speaker 1: I imagine so. Speaker 2: All right. But he wasn't a farmer, or-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --or what-- Speaker 1: When I first knew him he was already retired. Speaker 2: --Um-hm. Speaker 1: I have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --no idea what he did. Story_ID: 625991 Speaker 1: Now did your father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] talk about--did your father go very far in school? Did he--? Speaker 2: Fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He stopped to educate his sister Vina [Vina Chineworth], which is unusual because usually they, they make the sister educate the boy, you know? Speaker 1: So he helped pay for her-- Speaker 2: He helped pay for her education. But he continued his own education on his own, he was a great reader and he read all his lifetime. He died with a set of encyclopedias under his cobbler bench. He was an inveterate reader, he would carry on long conversations with my Schlicker grandfather [Joseph Schlicker] who was a great reader and a very intelligent man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they, they got along very well together. Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how he learned how to be, be a cobbler? Speaker 2: We never got to know. I, I should have asked him if he were an apprentice to someone or if he just picked it up, but he was an artist in it, he could have made a pair of shoes. He took great pride in his craft so that once people moved away, they kept sending his shoes back to him, their shoes back to him to repair. He made it an art. He was very diligent about his work, he loved it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I don't know whether he was an apprentice to some shoemaker and learned it that way or whether he went to some school or, I don't know how he got to be the cobbler. I should have asked other co- shoemakers that I've dealt with, you know, where did you learn that, you know? I go, where did you learn to be a shoemaker? Speaker 1: But, he, he was also a barber, right? 'Cause you, you were saying he was in the same-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --barbershop, or--? Speaker 2: He was employed in my [maternal] uncle's [Otto Schlicker] barbershop as a shoe shiner. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Okay so he was there-- Speaker 2: So he wasn't a barber. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, 'cause in, in, back in those days there, there was not unusual to have a black barber in a white barbershop, you know it's-- Speaker 2: No, I know-- Speaker 1: Just like, yeah, I, I mean it's some people watching-- Speaker 2: --but-- Speaker 1: --this now-- Speaker 2: --yeah and-- Speaker 1: --who don't understand. Speaker 2: But I think the barber was, I know the barber--that barber was white. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because he was my bro- my mother's [Victoria Schlicker Chineoworth] brother. But I, whether they had a black barber or not, but they did have a black shoe, shoeshine. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I was just pointing that out because I know today in 2012, 2010, as we speak, most people are used to having their hair cut by the same ethnicity as themselves-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: Well especially-- Speaker 1: --whether people have a white barber-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or black people have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --have black barbers-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but in those days-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a lot of black barbers cut white people's hair. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: As a service-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --profession-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, I-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --just wanted to point that out now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But your, your father was a shoeshine person in the-- Speaker 2: In the barbershop. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But was friends with your uncle? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 625992 Speaker 1: You told me before we started this interview, the story about how your parents met and so that's, that's a good story, so can you tell us what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, okay. Speaker 1: --happened? Speaker 2: When my mother and her brother [Otto Schlicker] were planning a party, they love parties, they were very sociable, and popular, so they were planning this party and they were drawing up the invitation list and my uncle said this to my mother, "Can you think of anyone else we should invite?" And my mother, having been a telephone operator, and had heard, heard my father, my father's voice, which was beautiful over the phone. She said, "What about that Alec, his voice is so good, why can't we invite him?" So, my uncle said, "Sure, put his name out, Alec Chineworth." So they added his name, he accepted the invitation, showed up for the party, fell in love with my mother at that time, began to court her. And as they were courting one another our favorite story was, "How did Daddy propose to you, Mother?" And she would blush and tell the story of her, that in those days there were no automobiles to drive your date around in but there were bicycles built for two. So they would get a bicycle built for two and they'd go on a date, and one day they were cycling together and my father said, "We cycle well together, don't we honey?" And she said, "Yes, we do." He said, "Will you cycle through life with me?" He was romantic, very romantic and she said, "Yes, I will." So that was his proposal. So he had to go and ask for her hand and ask my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Schlicker] for her hand and in those days that was very important, so my grandfather willingly agreed, he said, "I could love you like a son, he'll make a good husband to my daughter, but since the race is mixing here--." My grandfather was very cognizant of that see, my German grandfather and he said, "I would ask one favor of you, will you please get your marriage license across the state line in Iowa?" And he said, "Surely." So they crossed into the state line, went to the courthouse, registered for a marriage license, a copy of which I received, I asked for, when I entered the convent, I had to have a marriage, my parents wedding license, marriage license. So, on the license I was struck by the fact that a correction had been made when my mother registered, was registered Victoria Magdalen Schlicker [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth], the race was asked for and the clerk put white. My father's registration said Alexander Roth Chineworth [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.], and the clerk put Negro, as the race, then he looked at those two things and he said, "That doesn't match." He crossed out white and wrote Negro after my mother's name. I didn't find that out until I came to the convent. So my mother was a guest and she said, "Do you want me to do an affidavit on this and, and correct it?" I said, "No, you know who you are, I know who you are, let it go." Speaker 1: So officially, on their marriage records, they were the same race? Speaker 2: Officially. Speaker 1: From, both Negroes but-- Speaker 2: May have saved, there may have saved them some, some, some persecution, I don't know. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: The clerk must have had some reason. I don't know what the law was in there, in Iowa where they registered, but apparently in Nebraska, they couldn't have done that, that's why he sent them across the, the state line. Speaker 1: Hm, okay. Speaker 2: But apparently, the clerk didn't approve of it either, so they corrected it. Speaker 1: Or thought, well she must be black, if she's marrying a black man, right, or? Speaker 2: Yeah sure. Story_ID: 625993 Speaker 1: Your mother's [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] parents has no objections whatsoever to this? Speaker 2: Nope, I had one aunt, Uncle Otto's [Otto Schlicker] wife, Gladys Wheatman [Gladys Schlicker], she was a Swedish, married a Swede, and she was a social climber in Fremont [Nebraska], social (unclear), and she wanted nothing to do with my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.], now that perdured until some years later, I was about ten or twelve years old when we visited our [paternal] grandparents [Frances Roiger Schlicker and Joseph Schlicker] in Fremont. And we did not go over to Aunt Gladys's house, I remember that. However, while I was, when I entered the convent, she made overtures towards me and sent me par- a box of cookies, or she had made a cake or something and sent it to me, you know, she was very friendly but it took that long for her to accept our race, which is unusual really because, of all the relationship, that's the only negative in the whole race, in the whole family, but it stands out in my mind. Story_ID: 625994 Speaker 1: Now they, they lived in Fremont [Nebraska] until about when, 'cause you weren't born, were you? Speaker 2: Well my-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --my [paternal] grandparents lost my mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] to my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] when they were living in Fremont, that's where my father, my grandfather [Joseph Schlicker] was in business [Hillicker and Schlicker Horses and Cattle (ph.)]. Now, my grandmother [Frances Roiger Schlicker] would neither eat nor sleep once my mother left, so it drove my fath- my grandfather to distraction, he said, "Well, I can't go on like this, I will have to, we'll have to sell the house and the business." So he sold the business out to his partner, pulled up stakes, moved to Rock Island [Illinois], took a night watchman job in an automobile factory, bought a little home blocks from us, so my mother, my grandmother was happy, she was in the same city with my, she had other children but this was the favorite, absolute favorite to both of them so they were willing to pull up stakes and come. So, I grew up knowing them very well because they lived in the same town. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story about why your--was, was it just for better employment or something or why your father and mother moved to Rock Island? Speaker 2: Well my, my father and mother met Dr. and Mrs. Davis, a medical doctor and a new, brand new doctor on route from Fremont to Chicago [Illinois]. My father was gonna set up his business in Chicago, Dr. Davis and his wife persuaded them to stop in Rock Island, not to go all the way to Chicago, because Rock Island was a better place to raise a family. It was a good argument, persuaded my parents, so they stopped in Rock Island, my father setup his business there, it was very successfully, so they, they bought a home and stayed there, so we grew up in Rock Island. Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: It was a happenstance of what happened on the--a lot can happen on the, on the train that does not happen on a plane when you're traveling across the country. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because it takes twenty-four hours to cross the country and they had a lot of time, so it wasn't a hasty decision. Story_ID: 625995 Speaker 1: Well this is a good time to ask you about Rock Island [Illinois], about, you know, we were discussing it on the phone when we, we were preparing for this interview and I, and somebody said, "Well, what kind of town is Rock Island?" I said, "Well a railroad town, because of" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That right. Speaker 1: The song ['Rock Island Line'], you know, but I don't-- Speaker 2: Rock Island-- Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: --Railroad [Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad], built the town and now it's not, not a train, nor a plane, nor a bus, going into Rock Island today. I'm going there in a couple of days, I will in a ten days and I'm gonna have to go into Moline [Illinois], and be met at the airport there [Quad City International Airport, Rock Island County, Illinois] because there's no airport, there's no bus station, there's no train station, the name Rock Island is dead. The Rock Island Railroad has been sold, so there's no sign of anything there. The factories that used to be there, International Harvester [International Harvester Company; Navistar International Corporation], Casey Bicycle [ph.] and all of that, that, that, that's gone too, it's just a ghost town. Speaker 1: So it's ni- it's a new ser- oh, okay. Speaker 2: Just a ghost town. Speaker 1: You know that li- like a lot of places-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that (unclear). But when you were growing up it was? Speaker 2: It was very vibrant. Speaker 1: So, the International Harvester was there? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Casey Bicycle? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You told me there was a-- Speaker 2: Automobile factory, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Well what was kind of-- Speaker 2: Velie [Velie Motors Corporation, Moline, Illinois], the Velie family lived in Rock Island and they named the car that they manufactured, the Velie, V-E-L-I-E, I know you've never heard of it. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Because they was, it went out business long time aft- a short time after they were, started the car. Speaker 1: And, you said it was a federal arsenal or something there, in Rock Island? Speaker 2: The Rock Island Arsenal was-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --in Rock Island, and that, that was really a wonderful thing for my father's [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] business because the soldiers who were stationed at the arsenal, there were hundreds of them, all wore these beautiful wonderful good leather shoes, which needed a repair and shining, so that, it was a natural, you know, it was a very, very good lucrative business-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --to be in at that time, in that location. Story_ID: 625996 Speaker 1: Your father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] actually, he, he repaired shoes and then he had another, you said he had two branches of his shop? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: One where they had-- Speaker 2: Shine parlor, they called it a shine parlor, and it had about twelve shine chairs and he employed a number of shine boys and sometimes the place was filled with soldiers, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: They'd get off duty [from the Rock Island Arsenal, Rock Island, Illinois] and have to get a shoe shine and they'd come out with sparkling shoes, you know. Speaker 1: Now that's something you don't see any more hardly at all either, the-- Speaker 2: Shoe shine-- Speaker 1: --parlors, yeah where shoe shine-- Speaker 2: --never see it-- Speaker 1: People-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: People either shine their own shoes or they don't shine 'em. Speaker 2: That's right. Every time I shine my shoes I think about it. My, my father, God rest his soul, he was a good man and he loved the nuns and we had nineteen nuns in our parish school [St. Joseph's School, Rock Island, Illinois] and he'd say to my mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth], "Honey, get the nuns' shoes." So we'd pass the word along to our teachers, and they'd gather the, all nineteen pairs of shoes and put 'em in a big bag and give them to my father and he'd give them to the boys, first he'd repair whatever needed to be repaired, they didn't have to tell him anything, he would just look them over. If they needed a soles, he'd put soles, they needed heel, they'd put heels then he'd give them to the boys to shine brilliantly. And they used to love that. He did that a couple times a year. I sometimes, I'd say I wish for--I'd wish we had somebody to do that to us now, you know? Speaker 1: In those days, now, you, you're talking about during the Depression [Great Depression] right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. Those were, that was a, quite a service-- Speaker 2: Quite a gift-- Speaker 1: --he did-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Quite a gift, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause you couldn't buy new shoes. I mean-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --a lot, lot of people couldn't. Speaker 2: Couldn't they had to keep the sho-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What they had, and kept it repaired. So, I know they, they were pleased about it. I, that is a, is a memory, a nice memory of my, what my father and mother did. But sometimes my-- Story_ID: 625997 Speaker 1: My mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] would embarrass us by saying to the sisters, "Tell the sisters I'm sell- sending sauerkraut today." Oh my land, I would feel so bad. You see, my mother and [maternal] grandmother [Frances Roiger Schlicker] made sauerkraut, they'd get a half a ton of cabbage heads, they had a kraut cutter, and they'd fill a big stone crock with kraut, cabbage cut up, shredded, and then they'd do whatever, they'd put salt on it, whatever made it ferment into sauerkraut. And, my mother would say to us, "Go down into the basement and get a, get this pan full of sauerkraut." Well when she'd say get it, for the sisters [at St. Joseph's School, Rock Island, Illinois], I was so embarrassed, I said, I'd start to cry and I'd say, "Other children take the sisters apples, and we take 'em sauerkraut." And I was so embarrassed. But one time the sisters said, "Tell your mother I've passed by the dessert and took a second helping of sauerkraut," and that made me happy. I, I said, "Ooh she likes it," you know? But kids don't wanna be different, they just don't wanna be different, an apple for the teacher, you know; sauerkraut, no. Story_ID: 625998 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? An earliest (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I started school [St. Joseph's School, Rock Island, Illinois] at four, and that's when I got my call to the religious life. Speaker 1: Oh, well what-- Speaker 2: I was four years-- Speaker 1: --happened? Speaker 2: Four years-- Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: --old in kindergarten, and we were weaving paper mats with strips of paper and I was having difficulty and the kindergarten teacher said, "Do you need some help?" I said, "Yes, sister." She said, "Well let me help you." So she bla- leaned over my table, kindergarten table and she said, "This is in and out, and then out," and she showed me how and I looked at her hands and the little black sleeves on it, you know. And those hands just said to me, kindness, helping little children, and that day I went home and I said, "Mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth], I'm gonna be a sister just like Sister Mary Fidelis, when I grow up and help little girls." Well my mother was a cradle Catholic and my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] was a very fervent Catholic and they, they were fine with that, you know, they didn't have any ambitions for me other than what I wanted to do, so I was four at the time and I never lost sight of that call never, went through school. Twelfth grade, still remembering that I wanted to be a sister like Sister Mary Fidelis. Then I reached the junior high, junior in high school, I was a junior in high school just before I was going to go into senior year, my counselor said to me, "Have you given up the idea of being a nun?" I said, "Oh no, I've never given up that idea." "Well," she said, "you never talk about it." I said, "What's to talk about?" She said, "Well the order you're gonna in, what order are you gonna enter?" I said, "What order? I only know one order [Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary]." She began to cry, and said, "You can't enter us because you're a woman of color." Shattered a lifelong dream, just shattered, it was very, very painful. I went home--but when she told me that, she said, when she saw me crying and she was crying and there was a lot of weeping, and she said that, "There's an heiress in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] by the name of Katharine Drexel, and she has founded an order [Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament] for the education of Indians [Native American] and Negroes, Native and African Americans in, in todays' world and I am sure that she will take you, here is her name and address." So I wrote immediately and I said, "I would like to be a sister," and I told her who I was and my race and so forth. And immediately by return mail I got a letter from her saying, "We don't take you either." Speaker 1: Now this is the founder of Xavier-- Speaker 2: That's right-- Speaker 1: --University of Louisiana [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right-- Speaker 1: The black-- Speaker 2: --and she had a very good reason. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Her rationale was that she had to form leadership within the black race and if she'd take those girls into her order, the black orders would lose them, which is true. We, we had six superiors general from her order which is leadership personified, see? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, she said, "But here are the names of three African Ameri--," well they, colored was the term in those days, "here are the names of three colored orders, the name, the superior and the address." So I immediately wrote identical letters to each of the superiors general of the three black orders, and sat back and waited for the will of God. Story_ID: 625999 Speaker 1: Now what we were gonna do, I'm, I wanna go back to childhood but, but I wanted you, since you were flowing with that story, I wanted you to kind of get us to that point. I wanna take you back to growing up now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: In the City of Rock Island [Illinois], and town of Rock Island or, in my family? Speaker 1: Well, both yeah. Speaker 2: Both? Speaker 1: Yeah. The things that you remember, you know? Speaker 2: Well the thing I guess I remember most were the wonderful smells of my mother's [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] kitchen, the fragrance. She was a baker and a cook out of this world. She baked all of her own bread, she made her own donuts, noodles, whatever we ate, or she made it herself. And the sights and sounds of that kitchen were just legendary, people would just--I, she had a friend who said, "Do you mind if I come over and just watch you so I could see what you do all day long?" And she sat there in the middle of my mother's kitchen and watched every day, everything she did, you know? She seemed to accomplish so much, so much for sights and sounds of the kitchen. Story_ID: 626000 Speaker 1: Rock Island [Illinois] is a very small town by today's standards and everybody knew just about everybody else, especially everybody in the school. There were six hundred in our school, St. Joseph's [St. Joseph's School], Rock Island, six of us were black, that's a very small percentage, six out of six hundred. There was very little prejudice manifested, I went through school without having had any negative experience in that regard except, in hindsight, I realize that when sister cast me in a play, one time I was the queen of the midnight and I wore a dark blue cloud, or I was a Brown Eyed Susan, my face was encircled with yellow pe- petals and I was a brown eyed, brown (unclear), that type of thing, you know, they, they cast you in something that you wouldn't be outstanding, that you, your race was definitely noticed. And I didn't know it, my mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] said to me when she was making my costume as a midnight queen, she said, "Did you ask to be the midnight queen or did sister ask you to be one, be the queen of the midnight?" And I said, "Sister asked me to be the--," I didn't realize what my mother was aiming, aiming at see? But, she was a smart cookie and she realized then what, what we were against, you know? But, I excelled in studies and the, the girl who had the highest general average of the four years, automatically received a scholarship to the high school, the college that the nuns [Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary] ran, in Clarke College [Clarke University] in Dubuque, Iowa. So one time my mother said to me--everybody knew that I had the highest average so, she said, "Well has sister said anything to you about the scholarship?" I said, "No." She said, "Well you better ask her it's getting late and I have, you know, I'd have to get something, I have to get you something for college." So, I dutifully went to sister and I asked her, "Well, my mother wants to know what I'm gonna need for college?" And sister said, "Oh, I forgot to tell you, we thought you'd be very uncomfortable in the dormitory with the other girls, so we're giving the scholarship to Betty, whose sister was in the order." I was crushed. I'd just learned a couple years ago when I was speaking to Betty, her husband and I went to kindergarten together so we're very close. And I said, "You know, the reason I didn't get that scholarship was because you got it, because of Janet [ph.]." She says, "I didn't even go to college." I was really--I had gone away and (unclear), I just presumed that she went, see, I never even went to college, I wasn't offered any scholarship. So, those are the things that-- Speaker 2: Do you think they were--these are sisters-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you-- Speaker 1: Even though they lied (laughter). Speaker 2: Well (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) They do. Speaker 2: Now that's-- Speaker 1: Nuns lie. If the need be, if they have to protect their skin about color, oh they'll lie, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay so, so this is--you went to grade school and-- Speaker 1: I went-- Speaker 2: --and high school in the same school? Speaker 1: All K [kindergarten] through twelve [twelfth grade]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The same school. Speaker 2: So this was-- Speaker 1: Knew no-- Speaker 2: St. Joseph's? Speaker 1: Knew no other school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now that's the--it's closed now, but they're holding a fourteen class reunion, fourteen different grade years. We were thirty-five and they'd gone up to forty some to--anyway, it's fourteen, they (unclear) at fourteen. Story_ID: 626001 Speaker 1: I have to ask this though. Now, what was your neighborhood like? Was the--I, I, I take it you lived in an integrated neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I guess, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we did, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know what it is now, I go by there once in a while, I know they've torn our house down which really distressed me because I didn't think they'd ever tear it down, just not because it was my home, but there was a story behind that house. It was born, it was built of cedar wood, like a cedar chest? And it was not painted, it was oiled, the cedar wood was oiled, it was a beautiful wine colored wood, si- siding with cream trim. And eventually my parents [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth and Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] painted it white but I knew that it was built by the carpenter who was to have lived in it but he got sick. It was very well built, he had to move to Arizona when my parents bought it and I, there were so many wonderful features about that house and because it was built by a carpenter for himself. The carpet, the closet space was ample, and that type of thing, you know. But they tore it down and built a new home since I, the last time I was in Rock Island [Illinois], which was around about three or four years ago, so I'll go by and see 816 12th Street, but it will not be the house I lived in. But it was a happy home, and the four of us, two girls [Chineworth and her older sister, Magdalen Chineworth Bryson] and two boys [Alexander Chineworth, Jr. and Joseph Chineworth], and we, the girls had their room, the boys had their room, parents had their room-- Story_ID: 626002 Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you about your brothers and sisters, can you name your brothers and sisters for us and how do you fit and, and where do you fit in order. Speaker 2: Birth order? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: In birth order my sister Magdalen Frances Chineworth [Magdalen Chineworth Bryson] was numero uno, she was the first born, I'm the second born, Innocence Victoria [HistoryMaker Sister Mary Alice Chineworth], and my brother Alexander, Junior [Alexander Chineworth, Jr.], was the third and Joseph Elliot Chineworth [Joseph Chineworth] was the third, fourth, the baby. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did--what did they call you growing up? 'Cause your name was Innocence, did they? Speaker 2: Innie. Speaker 1: Did they call you Innie (laughter)? Speaker 2: Still do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some of my intimates still do, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Um-hm. Speaker 2: When they go back to Innie, I know I've known them a long time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I-- Speaker 2: I'll get that this weekend (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Speaker 2: I mean it's next weekend Story_ID: 626003 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this but we, we talked a lot about your mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] and father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] but when you think about their personalities and talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've some of my father's qualifications, characteristics, but I'm a duplicate of my mother. I have her genes, I have her, my, my body is exactly like hers, my disposition is like hers, yeah I'm a duplicate of my mother I know that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: More so than the other children? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact my, my sister [Magdalen Chineworth Bryson] was so crazy about my father that she just scandalized me by saying, "I wish mother would have died instead of fa- daddy." I thought that was terrible to say. Ooh, it just hurt me to my bones, but she felt that closely to my fath- close to my father that she would rather see my mother die. Speaker 1: Did your mother die long before your father? Speaker 2: My mother died just, at ninety-three, she, she was ninety-three, my father died at fifty-six. So she was mo- bemoaning the fact that-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay-- Speaker 2: --my father-- Speaker 1: Oh, I see, yeah-- Speaker 2: --died so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He died of peritonitis, there were no miracle drugs in those days so. A death sentence. They opened him up, put him back-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and sewed him back together. Story_ID: 626004 Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up now there were other, there're two other black students at St. Joseph's [St. Joseph's School, Rock Island, Illinois] you said when you were in-- Speaker 2: Sixth. Speaker 1: No, six-- Speaker 2: Sixth-- Speaker 1: Well, four-- Speaker 2: Four others-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was our four-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: The four Chineworths-- Speaker 1: Okay. --and the two Davis-- Speaker 2: Oh, only two others-- Speaker 1: The, the-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --children of the doctor who got my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] to stop in Rock Island [Illinois], yeah. Speaker 2: And he was a doctor? Speaker 1: Medical doctor. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she was a nurse. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Okay, so he was, was he the only black doctor in Rock Island? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, there, there was another one in Rock Island and then across--there were Tri-Cities [sic. Quad Cities], you see there were three cities, Rock Island, Davenport [Iowa], and Moline [Illinois], so there were black doctors in Davenport and black doctors in Moline and black doctor, at random six at least and, at least six. Speaker 2: Yeah that's what, that's where, is that on the Mississip- are they on the Mississippi [Mississippi River]? Or the old, the mo- Moline is near? Speaker 1: It's right on the Mississippi. Speaker 2: Yeah, right on the Mississippi. Speaker 1: Yeah, my father's business was a block from Mississippi and my home was eight blocks from Mississippi. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The Mississippi being the, the river road was 1st Avenue, and I was at 8th Avenue. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But my father's business was right, one block from Mississippi. Speaker 2: Now you were on-- Speaker 1: In back, there-- Speaker 2: --close to Omaha [Nebraska] too I guess, right? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Isn't Davenport close to Omaha? Speaker 1: Oh no. Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Omaha is in Nebraska. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know but I've only crossed it here. Speaker 1: Iowa is far from Nebraska. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. All right-- Speaker 1: They're both big states, you know? Speaker 2: Right, right. I was thinking that it's Davenport that's close to, that's across the river from Omaha. Speaker 1: No, it's across the river from Rock Island. Speaker 2: Rock Island, okay and-- Speaker 1: And Moline. Speaker 2: And Moline, all right. So, I can't think of that-- Speaker 1: The Tri-City-- Speaker 2: Dubuque [Iowa] that's across from-- Speaker 1: Who? Dubuque? Speaker 2: Dubuque across-- Speaker 1: Oh, it's way far from Rock Island, Davenport. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's the one across from-- Speaker 1: Maybe so, could be. Speaker 2: From the, Omaha---oh yeah. Speaker 1: Dubuque could be it, too. Speaker 2: Okay. Right, I get the Ds mixed up. Speaker 1: Um-hm, Ds mixed up (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right. Story_ID: 626005 Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [at St. Joseph's School, Rock Island, Illinois] you, you stayed with the idea that you wanted to be a nun? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: You, you never-- Speaker 2: Never gave it up. Speaker 1: Never thought about anything different? Now when you were in high school did you, were you engaged in the high school activities that most of the youth (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --were involved in? Speaker 2: I had to, yeah-- Speaker 1: Did, did-- Speaker 2: --more or less had to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, especially the, the banquet, junior, senior banquet and all those activities, we had to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you never thought for one minute and say, "Well, maybe being a nun is not as good idea as I--." Speaker 2: No, but my parents [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth and Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] made me do certain things, you know? They made me move in a black society that was not there but that, my father's nephew was childless, he and his wife were childless and they were society people, so they asked if they could present me to their social group when I graduated from high school. So I had that terrific summer of a lot of social events, you know. Speaker 1: What for--formal events or-- Speaker 2: Formal events-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --and non formal. I dated, I had--my parents made me live a normal life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I've never looked back and wondered what it's like to do this and what it's like to do that because I had to go through every one of those experiences. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember my father handed me a highball one night and I said, "What's this?" He said, "I want the first one to come from me, I wanna be the one." He taught me ballroom dancing, so, but I did date. My sister [Magdalen Chineworth Bryson] married a guy from Iowa and I would visit her and, and I'd meet people but I let 'em know right away that I'm not interested in dating, not interested in keeping company or still going sto- steady with anybody, I have, I, I was very frank with them. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did you run for class office or anything like that when you were-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --in high school? Speaker 2: We didn't even have class officers, but there was competition between one of the boys and me because we sort of got, achieved the same scores all the time in tests and things like that. I never saw him after high school graduation, there, I understand he'd got, he, he went to Connecticut and took a Ph.D. but I don't, I've tried my bes- I hope somebody will have heard about him, but I, but I've constantly asked about him, Joe Carnes [ph.] was his name, probably dead by now, most of them are dead, you know? We were fifty and only five left, maybe seven because a couple are in nursing homes that I know of. But I've never known what happened to Joe Carnes, I've often wondered, you know. It seems unusual 'cause I kept in touch with almost all of them. Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But nobody ever heard about him. Story_ID: 626006 Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't ask you about now, now, you, you were saying before we started this interview that, that once your family was on its way to see the crosses burning on a hill (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That you were, you, you all were, your name is Innocence [HistoryMaker Sister Mary Alice Chineworth] but your family are pretty innocent too I guess because-- Speaker 2: I think so-- Speaker 1: --you had-- Speaker 2: --I, they were not aware of the racial tension and they knew the Klu Klux Klan [KKK] was showing itself, its colors, they walk around in their white gow- a white sheets and so forth. And then came the cross burnings which were not near us, we had to take a drive, south of the ci- town [Rock Island, Illinois], and I remember my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] and mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] so well saying, "We're gonna drive by and see the burning crosses." And, looking back, I said to myself, how, what innocence that was, naivety to think that they, they could have been lynched if anybody-- Speaker 1: Or he would've-- Speaker 2: --would-- Speaker 1: --he would have been-- Speaker 2: --would've stopped the car-- Speaker 1: --the prime candidate for that-- Speaker 2: --I mean, if they would have stopped the car and had seen my mother and father in the front seat and us four in the back, they, it would have been, it would have been murder, I'm sure. But, it was just an educational tour to us, they were forever educating us, you know, getting us experiences and they thought that we should see that. Speaker 1: So, so you never, growing up you never witnessed any negative reaction to your father-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh Speaker 1: --being married to your mother by-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh, never. We were so proud of him, loved him to death. And when our grand- our black [paternal] grandparents [Lucy Branch Chineworth and Archibald Chineworth] came into town to visit us, you know, that was a high point of our lives was that grandma and grandpa visited us because if we lived with our German grandma [Frances Roiger Schlicker] and grandpa [Joseph Schlicker], and never called them Grandma, Grandpa, we called them Mama, and Papa which was a German term for that. And I just wished I had grandparents in town I could call grandma and grandpa, that was what I wanted, so when grand- my father's people came, I could call them grandma and grandpa and that was just so great to me, you know? They were the sweetest people, I loved them to death. Story_ID: 626007 Speaker 1: Now, we're catching up to where we left off before now, you, you asked about becoming a nun and you were told you couldn't do it and you investigated a black order of nuns [Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament], you were, you were supposed to have a college scholarship and they lied to you about that. So, so what did you do for college and, and about becoming a-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --nun. Speaker 2: --I was supposed to enter in '35 [1935], after you graduate most, in those days, they entered right after high school graduation. Speaker 1: So you entered a convent at, at, or, or an order at-- Speaker 2: They entered right away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were in correspondence with an order, those who had vocations and it was understood that they would just go right in and the order would educate them. Well, when I entered [the Oblate Sisters of Providence], when I was supposed to have entered in '35 [1935], I had gone to be presented to society, in Minneapolis, Minnesota and I'd been away from my family all that summer and when I came back, unh-uh, I wasn't ready to enter, no way could I leave my family, I loved my parents [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth and Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] to death and I said, "I've been away from you for so long, I just don't want to leave you so soon." So she said, "Well, talk to father." So I went to the pastor, Monsignor Durkin [Patrick Durkin], and I said, "You know I, I just, I've been away all summer I just don't wanna go to the convent right away." And he said, "You don't have to, you don't have to, just tell 'em you won't be in there until next year." So I just wrote a letter and said I wouldn't be there until next year. So, it was all right with them, you know, they can't make you, you have to go in on your own, you know? Nobody can make you, it'd be it wouldn't be valid. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --my father said, "You can't loaf the whole year." So there was a woman's department, there was a woman's college in the making across the river in Davenport [Iowa], but they weren't ready, the facility wasn't physically ready, so they held there classes in the seminary which was really rare, and exceptional. So I went to, that year I spent, I took college courses and, and at the woman's col- Marycrest College [Marycrest International University, Davenport, Iowa] but it was St. Ambrose College [St. Ambrose University, Davenport, Iowa] because it was a seminary and I, I studied that year, so that when I entered I had that experience of college a year later when I entered. And I was ready to go in a year. Story_ID: 626008 Speaker 1: Now what order did you choose and, and why? I know there were three black orders (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes and, and I got, I got, I wrote identical letters to them and then I waited thinking that the one I am most impressed by would naturally be the one I want to enter. So I got these three answers, this last one came from the Oblate Sisters of Providence and I was very impressed because it was intercultural, bilingual, had five schools in Cuba and intercultural, they had sisters from--when I entered there were sisters from ten different countries; well, I loved that. So I chose the Oblate Sisters of Providence, I wrote a letter asking to be accepted and I was accepted immediately and I entered in a year after I graduated from high school [St. Joseph's School, Rock Island, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell something about the history of that order, of the Ob- Oblate Sisters right? Speaker 2: The Oblate Sisters of Providence was the first order of women of African scen- ancestry in the world as far as I know, we're never challenged on that. It was founded by a Haitian refugee who settled in Baltimore [Maryland] on Paca Street near the seminary of French speaking priests because French was very important to the Haitian refugees, that's the only language they knew. Speaker 1: Now what year is this? Speaker 2: Eighteen hundreds [1800s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighteen ten [1810], around there. Speaker 1: All right, now this is--she came as a result of the Haitian Revolution-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --of the-- Speaker 2: And her name was-- Speaker 1: A lot of people in Haiti. Speaker 2: Her name was Elizabeth Lange [Mary Lange] and she brought money with her because her father had given her a fortune and she was able to bring it out of the country and-- Speaker 1: Now who? Now, there may be a story here, so that's why I'm stopping, it, it--who is her father? Was her father--? Speaker 2: Her father, it's, I have gotten, I, I did research on those lines and we really don't know, one researcher said that his name was Mikel Lange [ph.], but we don't have that, we only have her as (pronunciation) Lange, Lange, the French Lange. But nobody knows what he did, he certainly had money and he sent her a fortune now and again, what was considerable, which she would immediately contribute to the order. But she had enough when she came from Haiti to buy a home to start a home school, because she found the children were unlettered, there were no, no provision was made for black children here in Baltimore. Speaker 1: Now le- let me just interject this, is that, a lot of people don't know that at the time of the Haitian Revolution, Haiti was the richest co- colony in the world, in the, perhaps the entire world. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Lots of money in Haiti-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When they had the Haitian Revolution. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And wa- was her father black or mulatto or a-- Speaker 2: We think she wa-- Speaker 1: Or was white? Speaker 2: He was white because she was a mulatto-- Speaker 1: Okay so-- Speaker 2: And her mother was black. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause there were like three classes living in the side by side of Haiti, you had like whites-- Speaker 2: Black, white and mixed. Speaker 1: --who had mixed children and then you had mulattos who had mulatto children and then you had-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right. Speaker 1: --black people. Speaker 2: Black children, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: They do that in the South now. Speaker 1: Okay. So she, so her father was white? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he would be very careful of, to send her money which she used wisely, always gave it to the order. Speaker 1: And the-- Speaker 2: But the order wasn't even founded at that, she bought a home in Fells Point [Baltimore, Maryland], started a school [Saint Frances Academy, Baltimore, Maryland], a home school within her home and carried it on for ten years on her own money. Finally, she ran out of money and she said to the priest [James Nicholas Joubert] who was helping her with the catechism classes, "I have to close the school I just don't have any more money." And he said, "Well why don't you join the sisterhood? The Sisters of Charity, Mother Seton's [Elizabeth Ann Seton] group, because they run all the schools around here and they can run yours too?" She says, "Father, we are women of color, Mother Seton could not take us, no white order ta--." In order to be a sister in those days of the Catholic church, you were impossible. There is no way, there was no order that you could enter. Story_ID: 626009 Speaker 1: Now how did you, how did you--well I guess I, I don't know this and I don't, I don't thi- a lot of people don't understand, how do you fo- found an order if, if I can't join a--I mean, who can found an order of, of, of priest or-- Speaker 2: Right Speaker 1: Nuns or, who can do that? Speaker 2: Father [James Nicholas Joubert] said to her, "Why don't you enter Seton [Sisters of Charity of Seton Hall]?" And she said, "We cannot because of our color." He said, "Well if I wrote a rule, and sent it to Rome [Vatican City] for occupation, would you be willing to start an order of your own?" And she said, "I'd be happy, I've dreamed of it, so have my companions who were helping with the school [Saint Frances Academy, Baltimore, Maryland]." So everything fell into place, he said, "Well if you have three companions I'll write the rule, send it to Rome, if it's approved, you can make the vi- you can make it officiate under me and when you're ready I'll say that you can make for your vows." So on July 2, 1829, a year after they got into this little house and made the novitiate, four women, Lange [Mary Lange] and her three companions knelt in their little chapel in a rented house on George Street [Baltimore, Maryland] and pronounced their vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience and with that act, there was founded the first congregation of women religions of color in the world. Speaker 1: Okay, 1820? July 2, 1829? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now was the priest who gave her advice was, and, and wrote the, the-- Speaker 2: He was a Sulpician priest who ran the or- I mean they, Paca Street was a big seminary [St. Mary's Seminary; St. Mary's Seminary and University, Baltimore, Maryland] on Paca Street and they were or--they were educating for decades, they educated every priest that was ordained in, in the states because he--there weren't any seminaries accept that one. There was one site of the seminary in the whole country. Speaker 1: Now we, we're also saying here to that, for those that may not know it that, that Maryland was founded as a Catholic colony-- Speaker 2: Um-hm yeah-- Speaker 1: At this point-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, that's one of the centers for Catholicism in the-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --country. Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's true. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, they were off to a good start. Now there's a monument at 610 Georgie, the house was 610 George Street, now there is a monument, the city had put, put up commemorating that event at 610 George Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's recognized. Speaker 1: So here, here in Baltimore [Maryland]? Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here in Baltimore. Story_ID: 626010 Speaker 1: The order [Oblate Sisters of Providence] was founded at, in 1829, now she [Mary Lange] had to be, she was, I guess in midlife then I guess (unclear)? Speaker 2: I would think so because she was in her, she'd ran a school [Saint Frances Academy, Baltimore, Maryland] for ten years. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: She wasn't a baby when she came, so we figured she must have been about middle aged. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But that's all conjec- we don't have her, her birth certificate, we never found it. You know when you flee a country as a refugee you don't always, you're not able, able to get all the papers out. Speaker 1: Now one, one question I had. Now you might not know, but, but--did, did her father like go to France or, or did he stay in--? Speaker 2: We don't know a thing about the father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Except that he continued to keep in touch with her and send her money. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I don't think he was in Haiti when he did, I think. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He must have been in Eur- Europe because Haiti was already in disarray. Speaker 1: It had gone through so many changes and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I doubt if he stayed in Haiti. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We don't know any of that. We still do, constantly do research trying to find out some little glimmer of something that we didn't know. But she was a very modest woman and never, never claimed any notoriety for herself so-- Speaker 1: Were there any stories about her that-- Speaker 2: Very, very few. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm, very few. Speaker 1: Okay. Now she is a candidate for cann-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for canonization-- Speaker 2: Canonization, that's right. Now, we see, we hear that she's, she was in Cuba on route here [Baltimore, Maryland], at the time she would have been a Cuban citizen probably but there was a law that you could not become a Cuban citizen unless you gave up your own language and learned Spanish. And she was crazy about the French language, she said she's French to her very soul, so she left Cuba immediately when she heard that and came over here and she settled at the seminary [St. Mary's Seminary; St. Mary's Seminary and University, Baltimore, Maryland] where they, she heard nothing but French, loved French, all the writings and so forth in French. Story_ID: 626011 Speaker 1: Now are the, the goals of the ob- Oblate [Oblate Sisters of Providence] order, are, what are the goals of the order and, and are they different from any of the other groups? Speaker 2: We were educated for the, we were formed for the education of black children, that was our goal. And our foundress [Mary Lange] was prompted to do that because there was no facility for the education of black children. So she opened many a school here [Saint Frances Academy, Baltimore, Maryland], you know? Started small, but the order has been involved in education ever since. And she also had a great love for the poor, so she always reached out for the marginalized and the poverty stricken people, so that's in our tradition too, to share what we have with the poor. Speaker 1: Hm, okay. Speaker 2: Our dependence upon divine providence says, we share what we get from, get from providence with those who do not have. Story_ID: 626012 Speaker 1: This is 1936, you joined this order [Oblate Sisters of Providence], now where did you join, in?-- Speaker 2: On Chase Street, which is in the inner city-- Speaker 1: He- here in Baltimore [Maryland] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it's the old motherhouse. Speaker 1: Here in Baltimore? Speaker 2: Yeah, the old motherhouse was called Saint Frances Convent [Saint Frances Church and Convent, Baltimore, Maryland] and academy [Saint Frances Academy, Baltimore, Maryland], it, it, it really was a trifle thing 'cause at one time we had orphans, so it was an orphanage, too. But when I entered it was simply an academy and the convent, the motherhouse that was really very crowded with novices and students and sisters. So, when then got a chance to by this property out here in 1933, mother superior was approached by the lawyer, Mr. Galvin [ph.], he said, "Mother, there's a property out in (unclear) that you can't afford to miss and it's on sale for," I forget what amount, what amount it was, but it was more than Mother had. But eventually, it didn't sell, it was the Depression [Great Depression], so eventually it came down to such a low price that Mother said she couldn't afford not to buy it. So she had three bonds and in cashing in the three bonds, she had just enough to buy the property, forty-six acres, a couple of buildings were on it, a mansion, which burned down in 1946, electrical wiring and a barn and a couple of other buildings there. But, we couldn't build this house for ye- decades af- after that, you know, it just, we had ride out the depression. Then one day sister said to mother superior, "Mother I know how I can get you a million dollars." And she said, "How can you get a million dollars?" She said, "We'll make aprons and sell 'em for a dollar a piece, I'll make a million aprons and we'll have a million dollars." Mother said, "Go ahead." So, we sold, made and stitched and sold aprons for some years, we, we couldn't visit home, but we knew that if we took a sales at our home, like have a Avon [Avon Products Inc.] sale. That our parents would be glad to support that because we couldn't home, at home any other way, so we had all over the country, we had sales, and we financed the building of this place [Our Lady of Mount Providence, Baltimore, Maryland], it cost a million dollars to build it, now it would cost many million, you know, but in those days it cost only one million dollars, the ground was broken in '58 [1958], I believe it was, you know, my dates are, take all this with a grain of salt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we moved in in 1960 [sic. 1961]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I moved in with the first crowd. Story_ID: 626013 Speaker 1: Okay. Now I wanna go back now to when you first joined [the Oblate Sisters of Providence], and ask you-- Speaker 2: Thirty-six [1936]. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-six, [1936], now you joined here in Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: On Chase Street [Saint Frances Church and Convent, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay now did you go immediately to college here? Or did you-- Speaker 2: Well you begin, you know-- Speaker 1: You'd be at-- Speaker 2: Our college, accumulation of college credits was very haphazard. We were not welcome on Catholic campus, campuses because we were black. We could not go to the college of Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] or The Catholic University of America [Washington, D.C.], or any of those places. Speaker 1: Now, did-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Did the church or bishop-- Speaker 2: The Catholic-- Speaker 1: --recognize the-- Speaker 2: --church was racist, it still is. Speaker 1: All right now-- Speaker 2: If you don't know. Speaker 1: I understand but I, I just wanted to-- Speaker 2: It's as-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --racist as it can get. Speaker 1: Okay, but-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: After the priest [James Nicholas Joubert] wrote the letter ba- back in 1800s-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for the establishment of the order [Oblate Sisters of Providence]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was the order officially recognized by the Catholic church? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: Nineteen--1832. Speaker 1: Okay, but here in this country? Speaker 2: Didn't recognize it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. We're half human, we weren't even fully human they really didn't think we were. Didn't think we could keep vows, didn't think that we could do it. In fact that perdured until the 1920s, if a black man wanted to be a priest, the church would send him to the South to live as a brother, a celibate brother for ten years to prove that he could be celibate, now you know, that's how bad the racism was. So, we could not, the pastors were clamoring for accredited teachers, how can you get accredited if you can't go to secular college and the Catholic college won't accept you. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, it was a catch-22, or whatever you call it. So, that went on for a number of years and finally the Catholic University of America, my alma mater, decided well, "We'll let in a couple of those black nuns." They didn't even accept women, no nuns, white or black, but finally they admitted nuns and they took two of ours and they got their degrees and I--Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania] was the first to open, you know, they, they got their first degrees from Villanova, and then the next was the Catholic University. I went through scholarship, on scholarship to every degree I had was on scholarship, the scholarship for Negroes, while while under Mrs. Putnum [ph.] was my bachelor's [degree] which I finished off at Mount Mary [Mount Mary College; Mount Mary University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], School Sisters of Notre Dame for free, master's [degree], from the Catholic University of America, from scholarship for Negroes [United Negro College Fund] and Ford Foundation [New York, New York] for the doctorate. Story_ID: 626014 Speaker 1: So, well what was the experience like? I mean did you, I mean did the experience meet your expectations? I mean what, what was it like? Was it, was it a, too become involved in an order [Oblate Sisters of Providence]? Speaker 2: You know, from the minute, I can still remember September 14, 1936, on Chase Street in Baltimore [Maryland], I had come by train, my, my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] had gotten me a first class bedroom or whatever it is, he didn't want me to be Jim Crowed, he know that--he knew enough to do that, you know? He wasn't that naive about travel. Speaker 1: Well I thought you did, didn't have a choice at a certain point and when you got to the South there they would-- Speaker 2: He knew I was going south of the Mason-Dixon Line, so he got me into a first class accommodation bedroom or whatever it is. Speaker 1: Oh, so they couldn't segregate you if you were--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I got that, I came in first class, I got off at B and O [Baltimore and Ohio Railroad] station, which was just a walking distance from the convent [Saint Frances Church and Convent, Baltimore, Maryland], but I didn't know that and I hailed a cab and the cab took me like around the block to the--and he said, "Are you entering the convent or the academy [Saint Frances Academy, Baltimore, Maryland]?" So I must have looked kind of youngish, I was wearing a suit that I had knitted, you know what knitting is? I knitted the whole suit, skirt and, and jacket, navy blue and the trim was red, I wore a red hat and I said I'm entering the convent, he said, "Oh, well this is where you get out." So I went in and rang the doorbell and the sister who opened the door had a big red birthmark on half her face, and I said, "Oh my, they took her in spite of that birthmark?" 'Cause I thought nuns had to be perfect, you know? So, she said, "Do you--I'm, just sit here and I'll get mother for you." I said, "Mother?" 'Cause we never had any mothers in the order that I was taught by [Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary], so I sat there obediently and along came mother and she had the whole half of her face was de- deformed by lupus and I said, maybe they have to have something wrong with your face to enter here, you know? Two out of two, so I sa- she said, "Now dear tell me your real name? First of all, tell me your real name." I said, "Innocence [HistoryMaker Sister Mary Alice Chineworth]." "I mean your baptismal name?" I said, "I'm baptized Innocence." Well she didn't believe it, anyway, it was legal, so she took me downstairs, they were eating supper, September 14th it was Monday, and it was the first day that they were back in school and in school, when we were in school, we used to have reading like in monasticism, they setup monastic tables, long tables and there was one person appointed to read from a lectern during the meal. So I saw her go up to the reader and tell her she doesn't have to read, she wanted me to be comfortable and I wouldn't have been comfortable at, had I heard reading, so she stopped. So then she gave me a place at table and they had meat, cold cuts, tomatoes and lettuce, I remember so well the whole, because it's the best supper, we had it the whole week, you know, I didn't know at that time, but I enjoyed the supper and I was excited and they introduced me to my companions who then, I was the last to enter because I didn't want to enter right away so I, I'd been to a party, September 8th was my entrance date and then my mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] had taken me to a party in Indianapolis, Indiana and I didn't rush home so I was a week late. So all my companions had gotten here and they were settled you know? So I was a late comer and I thought that would keep me from saying, making my vows with rest of 'em, but they didn't penalize me for that eight days, those eight days. So, I had the most unique feeling as I walked through that gate, I'm home, I felt so at home and at peace, I cannot exp- it's--the only comparison with that is when I went to Madagascar, I just felt, this is it, I'm home and I cried when I left Madagascar, now I don't know whether it's, that's all imagination or not, but that's how I felt. Well that's how I felt when I entered the convent, I just felt so at home. Story_ID: 626015 Speaker 1: It was the first black community social of any kind that I've ever been a part of. Everybody looked like me, instead of all of them are white, everybody looked like me, and I loved it, I didn't learn any black history or anything, we weren't into that, but the fact that we were all black together, there were a couple of whites among the old sisters [Oblate Sisters of Providence], some of them were just look like white but some were really white. There was an old Mother Margaret Mary [ph.], so she was actually white, we've always had some are white, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But the majority were black and I was, I had this terrific feeling of having come home and I've never been sorry. I loved being here, if I had a, a thousand lives, I'd do the same thing. I just thank the Sisters of Charity, the BVM's [Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary] that they didn't take me because I would have been sent off to Europe or someplace and hidden away, you know, washing pots and pans or something. But these nuns reconci- recognized my ability, they gave me every opportunity, took a long time, they took me from the time I entered in, at the age of nineteen until I was thirty-two to get my first degree [at Mount Mary College; Mount Mary University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. We had to teach and study part time, teach and study part time, after I got that, then I had to work on my master's [degree] and then it took me ten years between master's and doctorate [at the Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 626016 Speaker 1: Your first teaching was--did you teach grade school, or? Speaker 2: Yeah, fifth grade. Speaker 1: Fifth grade? Okay. Speaker 2: And we had pedagogy, see we had educational courses all through an officiate, so we were well prepared to teach, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then there was a certain dignity that the habit leant to the, to the classroom, you know? So you never had any problem. However, pastors were very persnickety about your qualifications after a while because they knew that we should be educated, but there was no way to educate us unless the college is open to us. Eventually that ironed out, the, they got around that, it took me so long to get to the first bachelor, because I had to accumulate ca- credits according to what was available, but the colleges would not let us come on their campus but they would send two faculty members each summer to teach courses and sometimes, I remember three, three summers we taught nutrition, that didn't help me get toward my degree [from Mount Mary College; Mount Mary University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], my degree was in English. So, you know, it was very difficult, very difficult, but, eventually we had every opportunity. Speaker 1: Now, now you moved around quite, quite a bit, now you taught in Minnesota, right? Speaker 2: First I taught here, first I taught in Charleston [South Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then-- Speaker 1: Charleston-- Speaker 2: Minnesota. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then Alexandria, Virginia [St. Joseph's Catholic School, Alexandria, Virginia], and that's, that's the end of my, my mission work. Speaker 1: So you, you taught-- Speaker 2: I went-- Speaker 1: --English? Speaker 2: --to South Carolina, my first and last mission, it was the first place I was sent to and the last place I was sent to, so I have had four mission experiences. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you teach all the subjects in grade school or, or? Speaker 2: I taught fifth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Then when I became principal I taught seventh and eighth. Story_ID: 626017 Speaker 1: Now there, there are other orders of black nuns right, there are two other orders, well, well who? What are the other orders, just so we know? Speaker 2: The Holy Family Sisters [Sisters of the Holy Family] of New Orleans [Louisiana], their founder [Henriette DeLille] was just nam- declared venerable, she was a beautiful soul, she should have been acclaimed a saint as soon as she died like Mother Theresa because she was, she would go around and pick up the slaves who, when a slave was sick and could no longer work they threw 'em out in the gutter, so she'd go around and rescue them and take them home and take care of them until they died. Beautiful woman, very well educated and free, never was a slave, free woman of color, so thanks be God, she's venerated now, she's venerable. And the other one [Franciscan Hanmaids of the Most Pure Heart of Mary] was founded in Savannah, Georgia, but now it's headquarters is in Harlem [New York, New York], and they were, they were really founded for social work, and-- Speaker 1: Were they founded in the '20s [sic. 1916], or something? Speaker 2: Um-hm, they're very small, they're still very small. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were, the founders made her novitiate with us so their habit was very similar to ours [Oblate Sisters of Providence]. Story_ID: 626018 Speaker 1: When you started all, all the nuns wore habits right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Most of ours still wear habits, you hardly ever see a nun out, in our order [Oblate Sisters of Providence], out of habit, but most of the other nuns are out of habit. Speaker 1: Is-- Speaker 2: The three black nuns for some reason, I'm glad because we need to say who we are, people have to recognize us. When I get on the plane and I need something, I'm not gonna ask any guy passing by me and my chair for something, I'm gonna look for that little insignia that they're employed by that airline, and I think we owe it to people to let them know our dedication. I really do, I'm very strongly about that, I'm never go without my veil, never, never, even with my family. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so it's invitation-- Speaker 2: I feel denuded when I don't have a veil. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, it's just a part of me. When you wear something seventy-five years, boy that's a part of you, you know? Speaker 1: Yeah, that, I know it, it must of have been in the early '70s [1970s], or so when they finally start, stopped wearing, some of the nuns stopped wearing the habits? They said it wasn't ne- wasn't necessary. Speaker 2: Say 1960s-- Speaker 1: Oh the '60s [1960s] Speaker 2: So it's Vatican II [Second Vatican Council]. Speaker 1: Okay, Vatican II, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, most of them went haywire at that time, whew. They were so glad to get out of the habit, the philosophy was that we shouldn't mark ourselves up as different, because people shouldn't respect us because we're nuns, but because of who we are, and I said, you know, I've been in the ocean and I've been asked, "Are you a nun?" Yeah, well then they'll spill their guts you know? "Let me tell you what happened to me," you know, you just sort of attract people to you, you know? But I was in a bathing suit, so of course they didn't know who I was, I had to tell 'em, but once they know, and you don't have to tell 'em if you're in a habit, that speaks for itself. To this day, although the habit, this is off the rack, this is not the habit, but the veil makes the person, see? They see this veil and they see, they know your dedication. So we've had people coming up and, "I'm so glad you sisters kept the habit," we didn't keep the habit, but we kept the veil. Story_ID: 626019 Speaker 1: As you were matriculating as a, as a teach--now what was your, I mean did you--are there any stories from your teaching career that you wanna share with us? Speaker 2: Well, I'm still in touch with some of the students I taught, I just got a letter last week from a lady in St. Paul, Minnesota, whom I haven't heard from since I left there, she wrote the most beautiful, intelligent letter, typed, single spaced, several pages, and enclosed her families picture and she said some very wonderful things about her experiences as a student of the Oblates [Oblate Sisters of Providence], you know? But that comes to us so many times, I receive, I remember receiving a letter from a department head in Texas, university in Texas, she was head of the English, or some department, and she wrote on the top of the headline, a la- which lauded her as head of the department, she said, "All this is window dressing, I got my education from the Oblates." Camille [Camille Cosby] says the same thing, you have a mark, you leave a mark on your students that, I think we've been very successful teachers, I really do. Story_ID: 626020 Speaker 1: You taught school from el- el- elementary school from '39 [1939], to '50 [1950]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Then, you taught in Charleston, South Carolina, in secondary school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: From '58 [1958], to '50 [1950], '58 [1958], to '59 [1959], right, in Charleston? Now did you, after coming out of the experiences you had growing up, I mean, were you kind of, I mean did--how did teaching in the South affect you? I mean-- Speaker 2: You know what hurt me most was the segregation within the race. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Charleston was notor- notorious. I would have kids in my fifth grade, when I first went, I was fifth grade, I went back the second time, I was high school, when I was in fifth grade, I had kids in my fifth grade who were the best of friends in school, but after school they would never go home with one another. And I said, "You're such good friends with Mary, don't you ever go home with her?" She said, "No my mother won't let me." I said, "Why not?" "Because she's too dark." That's within the race, that's pitiful, that-- Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 2: --is so pitiful. Speaker 1: Fifties [1950s] in Charleston-- Speaker 2: And it's still going on, I think it's still going on, I haven't been for a long time, but I don't think they've lost it. Speaker 1: Hm. (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still going on. Speaker 1: Hm-- Speaker 2: Which is pitiful. Story_ID: 626021 Speaker 1: Did you all do anything, well you taught like during the, World War II [WWII], did you do anything special during the war, or? Speaker 2: You know my brother was a Tuskegee Airman-- Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't-- Speaker 2: --so I had a lot of, you know-- Speaker 1: What's your brother's name again? Speaker 2: Joseph Chineworth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he met his bride [Mary Chineworth (ph.)] in Tuskegee [Alabama], and they had a very happy marriage, they have three sons, two of them dar- died in young adulthood, one is still living, but I was very involved in the war because of that, you know, and they're a bunch against war of all kinds of course, I don't think there's any just war, there's no civil war, there's no legal war, there's no reason for war, no reason for us to kill one another, there's a war on the car--streets of Baltimore [Maryland] right now that's just pitiful. Speaker 1: Yeah, the drug war. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: It is the most pitiful thing. Speaker 1: Now were, were you a part of any of the pacifist movements in, in those days? Dorothy Day? Speaker 2: No I'm not-- Speaker 1: And the-- Speaker 2: No I didn't take up any--no I've been extremely careful about taking up causes 'cause I could overdo it in a minute, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lose my rationality completely--oh, this is warm, I'm so warm, aren't you warm? Story_ID: 626022 Speaker 1: Let me ask you since we're, we're talk--talking about teaching and, and--now you, you taught Camille Cosby right? Speaker 2: No, I didn't teach her-- Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: --but she was in our (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was there? Speaker 2: --grade school. Speaker 1: Okay, but she was in the, one of the-- Speaker 2: Oblate Sisters of [Oblate Sisters of Providence]-- Speaker 1: --Oblate Sisters-- Speaker 2: St. Ann's--St. Cyprian [St. Cyprian School; Holy Comforter-St. Cyprian School] in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: In Washington? Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her mother [Catherine Hanks] still lives there. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now do you have any students that, that are favorite students from those days that you've taught, that you? I know you mentioned a couple a, a little while ago. Speaker 2: I had James Henson [James E. Henson] whose uncle was the famous Matthew Henson, from the North Pole. Speaker 1: Right, yeah-- Speaker 2: I taught-- Speaker 1: --Matthew Henson-- Speaker 2: --him. Speaker 1: --accompanied, well in fact, he accompanied Peary [Robert Peary] to the-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --North, and then he actually took Peary to the pole. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: With the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well I-- Speaker 1: --Native Americans-- Speaker 2: --I taught his nephew. I taught the niece of [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks the famous photographer. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I guess if thought about it, I could name a lot of the-- Speaker 1: So there-- Speaker 2: --students. Speaker 1: --was a Du Bois-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Du Bois. Speaker 1: --you know? Speaker 2: I didn't teach her though. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: She was the granddaughter, granddaughter of Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]-- Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: --in our academy [Saint Frances Academy, Baltimore, Maryland]. Then we have girls who finished at our academy whose sons became famous, Williams, somebody Williams, Montel Williams, I think-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --it is. Speaker 1: Montel Williams' mother? Speaker 2: Yeah, her [sic.] mother was one of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the ro- mayor of Baltimore [Maryland], [HistoryMaker] George Russell. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: His mother [Anna Short Russell] was one of our students. Reginald F. Lewis, his mother was one of our students. Speaker 1: The famous business man, yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah he's a--a museum is named for him [Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American History and Culture, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Oh, I guess I could name a lot of them, um-hm. Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: We have quite an impact on black history. Story_ID: 626023 Speaker 1: We were saying just before we took the break that your brother [Joseph Chineworth] was a Tuskegee Airman and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --he actually, he was a fighter pi- pilot, I just wanna make that distinction (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was a fighter pilot. Speaker 1: --and flew, you know-- Speaker 2: He--they didn't lose a bomber. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: They prided themselves that they didn't lose a bomber. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now when he came back, his wife grounded him, so he had to get out of the [U.S.] Air Force, but he loved flying. Speaker 1: What, what did he do with the rest of his life? Speaker 2: He became a foot specialist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, ultimately he practiced foot care for a while and then he said, he got a, his office was on the mezzanine floor of a big drug store and the manager asked him one day if he'd be interested in buying that drug store, and he said yes, so he became a business man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Joe Mar Drugstore [ph.] was its name. His name was Joe and his wife's name was Mary [Mary Chineworth (ph.)] and then they came, they called it the Joe Mar; it was very successful. Story_ID: 626024 Speaker 1: Now, I have a note here, now I don't know, wh- what you know about this, but in 1950, it says here that, and you were about thirty-three then, the white religious Catholic orders opened themselves up to black nuns. Speaker 2: Around 1950. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: What happened? What was the occasion and what, did, did they make an announcement? How did they do it? Speaker 2: No, it was very subtle, very quietly done, and it was started with one order. The Sisters of Blessed Sacrament [Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament] were very quiet about it, they took, and they took--the off--the first are very light skinned people, you know, so they wouldn't be too noticeable. But eventually by 1960, they were all wide open, in fact they're recruiting from Africa right now, they don't care how black you are. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you consider this a breakthrough in those days? Or did-- Speaker 2: In 1950, when I first heard that they, the BVMs [Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary] took their first girl, most of them did not persevere, they found it too stifling, or too whatever, because there was an order found as an organization called, the National Black Sisters' Conference that is made up of single, there's one or two black members in an all-white order and they needed the support of other black people so they formed The National Black Sisters' Conference. Speaker 1: Now, when was that formed in rel- in relation to 1950? Was that formed in the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: It was after 1950 because see, they didn't have these single black members until 1950-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --so it had to be after that and, in fact they just celebrated their thirty-fifth [anniversary] I think [sic.], I don't wanna say. But, they were founded by one of the black nuns who was in a white order, white Mercy Sisters [Sisters of Mercy] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and she got the idea from the priest, the black priest who got together for self support, racial support. And so she says, "If a priest can do it, the nuns should do it too." So, she started it. And very successful, it's helped all those women, they, they have a conference, a convention every year and the, the people who are the single or double, one or two black members in an all-white order, they gravitate toward that. They seem to need that racial support whereas, we, but we very seldom go, 'cause we don't need that, you know? Story_ID: 626025 Speaker 1: Now you've, you've, I have it, well here that, that you, when you joined the Oblate Sisters [Oblate Sisters of Providence], you, a whole new world of information, you were saying that, a little while ago that a lot of information about black people and, and what we were doing, it just kind of opened up to you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause you, real- really hadn't been aware of a lot-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --of the ag- the struggles and the cultural activities of black folks-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --since you got involved. Speaker 2: When I entered, I, I learned about the struggle between white and black orders, but I wasn't exposed to black culture, we, we--in order to prove that we could be, black women could be nuns, we imitated the white sisters to the utmost, we didn't wanna be different in any way. So we just hued to the line of what sisters do, we didn't get involved in anything that was not, nun-ish, and it's, it's sad that I expected to find a lot of black culture, I didn't get that until I went to the NBSC, National Black Sisters' Conference, that's when I, I learned a lot about the race and that pride. Well there was a su- period of racial pride that everybody was exposed to along that and, and I was-- Speaker 1: What was it, a black conscious movement? Speaker 2: Ye- yes, I was really grateful for that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's-- Speaker 1: I noticed now you, around your neck you have a-- Speaker 2: Africa. Speaker 1: Africa-- Speaker 2: And always wear it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never wanna forget my African roots. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was designed by an artist who, he's a Polish guy who designed the big monument that's outside the cathedral in Warsaw, Poland, he was a artist in residence in one of the missions where we were in (unclear) Alabama. And the pastor asked him to design something with the African continent as the background and, he, he figure--he designed this, I think it's so delightful, you know? There's the corpus of Christ's on top of the black, oh it just seems to fit so well. So I like it and we, we string these in our own (unclear), we sale them in our own gift shop. Speaker 1: Okay, now were you around when the Black Catholics United [ph.] was formed? I, I know there's several different black-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Catholic groups-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Late groups-- Speaker 2: --I was around here. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about some of those and how they kept-- Speaker 2: I wasn't involved with it in any way, but of course, we participated in it, you know? Speaker 1: Now, there's Black Catholics in Action and then there's, I don't know, no that was big at one time. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know that one. Speaker 1: You don't know that one? Okay. Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no but whenever the black Catholics get together we, we participated, we, they have conferences national, on a national level and we're always involved in that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We take an active part. Story_ID: 626026 Speaker 1: Now during the, you know, the latter part of your teaching career, the Civil Rights Movement was heating up, Brown versus the Board of Education, the '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and that. Did you, did you pay particular interest to, you know, what was going on then? Speaker 2: I'm ashamed to say I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It, you know, we [Oblate Sisters of Providence] weren't engaged in politics in anyway and that was so political, you know? So we were discouraged from being political, I unfortunately, that changed later on, but at that time we weren't participating in anything political though. I would have liked to say we marched on Selma [Alabama], but we didn't. We were heavily engaged in the ma- in the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] riots. Speaker 1: In '68 [1968], when (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Heavily engaged in that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, that's about all. Story_ID: 626027 Speaker 1: Now, you came to, came back to Baltimore [Maryland] in '58 [1958], to this particular group [Oblate Sisters of Providence] here in Baltimore? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: To edit a newspaper right or? Speaker 2: To, to-- Speaker 1: To-- Speaker 2: --edit our magazine [Providence Magazine]. Speaker 1: Oh, your magazine. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, tell us about that, what? Speaker 2: Well, really when they brought me home, it was to the old motherhouse on Chase Street [Saint Frances Church and Convent, Baltimore, Maryland], and the print shop was there, so the magazine originated there too. And, it was only after this house [Our Lady of Mount Providence, Baltimore, Maryland] was built that the magazine was moved into the quarters here at the motherhouse. But it was a, a one person operation and it was a very weighty responsibility because not only did I have to, well I had professional help to design the magazine, but I had to go out and get the or--the stories on the people, I couldn't, you'd try to encourage people on the missions to write a story but you'd have to almost go out then and write it yourself to get it. So I did that, I, I had to take photographies and I learned to take the pictures I needed, then I'd come home and write the stories, have a layout design editor lay it out for me, free of charge, and then I would nurse it through the printer, pick up the magazines, and address them on the address-o-graph, five thousand of them, take them to the post office, did the whole thing. So, I, I folded it, many years, I did that for many years, but I saw that we were losing money on it. Speaker 1: So you were folding them by hand? Speaker 2: No, I folded the magazine, I, I closed it up. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, you closed it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because I figured I was losing money, I knew that it was losing money, my plan was that each student, each family in every school would--it was only a dollar a year and I asked the sisters to add that dollar to the annual fee and they would keep getting the magazine and it would support us also. But, the bishops were against adding anything onto the bill, that was strictly community, you know. So that didn't fly, and I, I knew we couldn't afford to lose money, so I proposed the whole situation to the council and they agreed that it should fold, so. Speaker 1: Hm. So that was in 1960? Speaker 2: I think it was around '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626028 Speaker 1: You were telling me before that, this building [Our Lady of Mount Providence, Baltimore, Maryland] was, tell us about the pur- the purpose of this building we're in right now? And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were crowded on Chase Street [Saint Frances Church and Convent, Baltimore, Maryland], over crowded, on Chase Street we had the boarders, the sisters [Oblate Sisters of Providence] who were at home, whose home it was, the infirm, who were hosp- infirmed and had to be in the infirmary, we had all of those things in operation plus an (unclear). So, the (unclear) out here had burned down, so we were housed temporarily on the inner city in another convent, that didn't belong to us, so there were five reasons big weighty reasons why we should build out here and put everything together. So, we had a terrific campaign and made a lot of aprons and had a lot of sales and eventually, well, it went up on a wing and prayer, it went up a wing at a time, you know, one end was bricked in with cinder block until we got enough money to do another wing, so it's a capital E this being the spine and the three wings went up separately, the chapel wing was first and then the kitchen wing and then the academic wing. So when it was ready, we moved out, all those operations became the novitiate, the novitiate had a headquarters here, the college was housed here, the infirmary, the child, no, no, 'cause we didn't (unclear), the--it was a home for every, all the sisters who were not on mission, so all those purposes that we needed it for were fulfilled when we built the house, it was a wonderful move. Speaker 1: Okay so at, at that time now, were you the, were you the, now you were their ins- an instructor and the registrar of the school? Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they brought me home from the mission to be-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --at the registrar and to do public relations. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, you said when the school op- opened there was a visit from Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], he gave the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the keynote-- Speaker 2: In '62 [1962], I have to remember '60 [sic. 1961]-- Speaker 1: --inaugural speech-- Speaker 2: Yeah, inaugural speech that was exciting, yeah, the development director made that contact. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But he didn't follow through on it, he didn't ask the Kennedys for a thing. See, the purpose of doing that was to get their support, but he flunked that one. Speaker 1: And Kennedy being as-- Speaker 2: But that was exciting, it was in all the papers right across the country, everybody knew Bobby Kennedy had been here. Th- and then they said, "This prestigious Mount Providence Junior College [Baltimore, Maryland]." Nobody had even heard of us, because he was here it was prestigious. Story_ID: 626029 Speaker 1: Tell us something about the college [Mount Providence Junior College, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: The college was a two year liberal arts college for women and I recruited students, I was a recruiter of students and I asked Ford Foundation [New York, New York] for money to support the inner city students I recruited. They were, very generously did that for us and we were able to bring in a number of students and we had a fine facility here, academic facility, plus private rooms for them, wide across the top floor. And they had never--some of them, inner city kids had never had a bed of their own, we had one student who never knew what bed she would be sleeping in, and we, we really, I think did a good job for the short time it was in operation. We educated those girls and they went on to four year colleges and became teachers. I don't have a precise follow up of it, but we did keep in touch with them for many years, they have good marriages, and, and they come back and see us and it changed the lives of many of them, you know? But it was a difficult thing to keep going because we had a lot--we didn't close because of lack of money, we closed because of lack of students, it was, it was very difficult to recruit students to a private two year college with a free college down the road, community college of bol- of Baltimore [Baltimore City Community College, Baltimore, Maryland], University of Maryland, Baltimore County [University of Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland] has just opened, it was one big factory building when it started, now it's all over the place. But it was foolish, three small religious colleges closed the same year, so we were in good company, it was just no reason for it. Speaker 1: So the, the years of operation from, were from 1962 to 1972? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And you were talking, we were talking before we had the break about Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] coming-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You said he flew in in a helicopter? Speaker 2: And flew in a helicopter Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]? Speaker 2: And, and forgot his, left is speech in Washington [D.C.], and either he flew back, but I know the whole helicopter thing went back to get his speech and came back. I don't think he stayed here, I think he went back to get it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I know it what--delayed the program, program for a while but it was very exciting. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: Extremely exciting. Story_ID: 626030 Speaker 1: A lot of people were starting to, they were fe- you know, becoming drawn into the civil rights struggle-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in those days and, I know you mentioned Selma [Alabama] but the March on Washington was 1963, did you participate at all in that or anybody from this order [Oblate Sisters of Providence]? Speaker 2: Nineteen--it was at the? Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], yeah that's the summer of-- Speaker 2: That's not the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] riots? Speaker 1: No, it's not the riots, that's when King delivered the 'I Have a Dream' speech. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: In front of the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that, that was his year for that, '93 [1993]? Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], 'cause I don't-- Speaker 1: It was year-- Speaker 2: I'm off-- Speaker 1: --after you all opened up, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. We were going strong at that time, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had a little problem with the sisters, you know. We were always told not to get involved politically, you know, and here was this, this tension brew- you know, building up with all of this civil rights business. But we rode the waves, you know, and, and we were, I hoped, I think we contributed something worthwhile to it, you know? Story_ID: 626031 Speaker 1: When did you become conscious I guess of being black, I mean it's, as such, you know, in as, as it was fr- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not until I entered. Speaker 1: --framed and-- Speaker 2: Blackness-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --meant nothing to me until I entered. It was sort a, a moot question, you knew you were different and it's something to feel you're different, it does something to the personality to know you're different. And yet, you grow up with that, you also know that your parents are different, see we knew that we--our father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] was black and our mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] was white, we loved them both, but if you've never had a white father, or never had a black mother, you don't know the difference, you know? Then people say, "Well what was it like to have a black father?" Well I never had a white father, you know? So you, it was just life, you're just like the little, the child, the mother who had no arms and someone could ampu- prosthesis on her to see how she'd like it, and to hold the baby, and the child didn't like it, it was, used to be held in her legs, you know? So, when you're born into a situation, you don't know anything else so, however, you know it's out there. And when I entered a black community, I knew I would, I would experience something vastly different from anything I've ever experienced before, and I loved it. Speaker 1: Okay what, what I was asking about that period of time is that there, there's a period of time--you were saying that when you first joined, the objective of the order [Oblate Sisters of Providence] was to do everything, I guess as white as possible-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to impress upon whites that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --black pe- people could be-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --nuns just like-- Speaker 2: White people (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) White people. But there was a period of time I guess where, where you know, there was a consciousness of being black aside from, you know, beyond just the color. You know, evidenced by the, the crucifix you have around your neck, now relating to Africa, red, black and green colors and, you know, there's awareness of I guess some sort of a Pan Africanism or-- Speaker 2: But not everybody has that awareness-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know? Like we have Cuban citizens and we have Dominican Rep- we have citizens from many different, it's ten different countries at least, and not everybody can relate to that because they'd never had that in their home country. Story_ID: 626032 Speaker 1: Well, when did you really start relating to that, as such? Speaker 2: When I, I guess, I don't know. I think probably with the National Black Sisters' Conference, I think they gave me racial pride. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I did not get in the order [Oblate Sisters of Providence]. Speaker 1: Now about, about when did they start up? Speaker 2: They started in, it must have been thirty-five years ago, thirty-five or forty years ago. Speaker 1: Okay so that's in the early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: About seventy-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Five [sic. 1968], I guess? Speaker 2: I think it was a least about that time, 'cause they celebrated their twenty-fifth a long time ago, I think they had to be thirty-five or forty years in existence, you can check that out on the website because it's the National Black Sisters' Conference, you can get that. And I think I got much of my pride in race, my racial pride from my contacts with them, I went every year because I was in leadership and I thought if I am a black nun in leadership, I should know what the Black Sisters' Conference is doing, you know? So I didn't only go every year, but I went every month to monthly meetings up in Pits- Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], we had the meeting right at the switchbo- at the airport [Pittsburgh International Airport]. Because the nun [Martin de Porres Grey] who started it lived up there and she had monthly meetings and I just felt that I should know what's going on. The black sisters, the order, three orders of black sisters are notoriously missing in that annual conference. Speaker 1: Were they still clinging to the idea that they had to be whiter than the white nuns? Speaker 2: I don't know, but they just will not--well, I know why, the main reason why they exist, National Black Sisters is because of their, they're made up of people who are in minorities in big white orders. We don't have that problem so that alone counts us out. They have no, the, the superiors of the black orders just have no interest in supporting that, you know? I don't say they don't support it but they don't, they don't pay our way through, through that. We have to manage that some other way so. Speaker 1: Okay. But, well do the, well, I guess that--do the black orders? Did they go through a similar consciousness changing in terms of identity as the, as the-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --black sisters-- Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: --in the white order? Speaker 2: I would say the, the, the order [Franciscan Handmaids of the Most Pure Heart of Mary] in Harlem [New York, New York] was closest to it because they were right there in the midst of a black community and that's what they worked with constantly. There's a heavy Creole element in the Holy Family sisters [Sisters of the Holy Family], and they're very different from the other two orders, you know? That wa- there is a difference there, a different, a cultural difference there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And we all recognize that, they're very slow to move into any active black thing, they're not as slow as they used to be, they're a little more willing, you know, to send membership and so forth. But, for a long time they only had one sister who would go every year, we don't have but three or four, so they're, they're not supported by us unfortunately, you know? But we don't have those, that same compulsion, you know? We're not minorities in an all-white order, we're majorities, see? In our order so, so we don't have--it's just like the sisters come from Belize, they couldn't understand black prejudice at all because their whole country's black, you know? "What are they talking about," you know? So, it depends upon the milieu in which you move, you know? Story_ID: 626033 Speaker 1: You--we had mentioned the role that, you said the, the, you remember the, the riots? What, what role did you play in the, in the, in the ri- riots in 1968? Speaker 2: That mar- that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah now-- Speaker 2: --riots? Speaker 1: --you were, in '68 [1968], you would have been, you would have been the, let's see--okay, well what were you doing in '68 [1968], I mean you? What position did you hold? Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958]? Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: When Dr. King was killed and the riots took place. Speaker 2: I was here [Our Lady of Mount Providence, Baltimore, Maryland], I know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I was, I was brought home to do PR [public relations] work so, I was working at the magazine [Providence Magazine]. Speaker 1: Well the magazine was closed at that point. Speaker 2: Oh don't tell me-- Speaker 1: Closed in '62 [1962], so-- Speaker 2: Oh, there I go again-- Speaker 1: Yeah, all the net--okay the National Black Sisters' Conference was found- founded in '68 [1968], and yeah, so maybe--were you, okay. Speaker 2: I was engaged in that, I went to every-- Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: --meeting. Speaker 1: Right, so-- Speaker 2: But as far as riots and so forth are concerned, we had missions, we, we were in all four parishes in Washington [D.C.], one in every section and we were very active in ministering to the people who were victimized by the riots, I remember that very well. Speaker 1: There were quite a few what? Homeless people as a result-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --of the burnings of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --peoples' homes?-- Speaker 2: It-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --was terrible because we were very active in that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember that well. We fed people, you know, tried to get them housing. Speaker 1: How, how did you, how did you feel about Dr. King? Speaker 2: Oh, how would you feel about that? I just think he's just unspeakably great, he's a great man. We revere him, I think he's a great man. A man who suffered very much at the hands of Hoover, J. Edgar Hoover, he was maligned, he wasn't totally accepted as he is today, and I think he suffered being away from his family and all that, he, he's just ten feet tall in my book. He's just a great man. He had a great impact upon the country, I don't think anyone can deny that. Story_ID: 626034 Speaker 1: I remember in 1960, I guess it was '68 [1968]? That there was a lot of--well in the late '60s [1960s], a lot of, lot of ecumenical activity around liberation struggle? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, medically, liberation theology became-- Speaker 2: Yeah in, in South America no one-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Especially in Latin America, yeah-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --because of the poor guy who started that was ostracized and then excommunicated I think, if I'm not mistaken. It was such a novel idea that, you know, he just didn't, didn't fly at all. But, I just felt it was the greatest thing that could have happened, liberation theology, you know? Why shouldn't the church of all organizations fight for liberation, you know? I was amazed at Rome [Vatican City], you know? But, this isn't the avenue in which to, you know, discuss short comings of Rome or other church or our own orders as far as that's concerned. But, I was very much aware of it, I read everything I could about it, formed my own opinion as a result. Speaker 1: Were you, were you reading any of the black theologians in those days, guys like Cone and Washington [Joseph R. Washington] and for writing the history of the black church and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I, I read Sippy [Shana L. Sippy] and Davis [HistoryMaker Angela Davis], I don't remember Cole. Speaker 1: Yeah, James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone] and-- Speaker 2: I just know the name-- Speaker 1: --Washington and-- Speaker 2: --I don't remember reading him. Speaker 1: Okay. We were talking about the history of the black church and people were talking about liberation theology-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well yeah in-- Speaker 1: How, Howard-- Speaker 2: We've been-- Speaker 1: --Thurmond's [Howard Thurmond] writings and all that-- Speaker 2: We've been involved in the, in the black church for so long, I mean it's always been our pre occupation, I mean they used our convent for a black parish churches at one time, you know? Because they didn't have any place else to worship and yet we saved three pews in the back for whites because we were an all-white neighborhood, you know? So there's always been that tension you know? Don't be too, too much one way and, and to the exclusion of another because that's not God's way, you know? But it's hard, in the real world it's very hard to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause the real world is not an ideal world. Story_ID: 626035 Speaker 1: You became the president of Mount Providence [Mount Providence Junior College, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1969, now how, how did this happened and, and what were, what were your plans and what did you do as president? Speaker 2: What'd I do with what? Speaker 1: As, as president of-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Mount Providence in-- Speaker 2: Close the college (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, you became president in '69, [1969], we know it closed-- Speaker 2: In '72 [1972].-- Speaker 1: In '72 [1972]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So you, did you know it was gonna close when you became the-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --president? Speaker 2: --didn't feel, I couldn't do it, I didn't associate, we had money, but there was no way as I told you, there's no way, we were the third small Catholic college in Maryland that year, there was just no future for us, you know? You don't bypass a free college and university to go to a private as, as one father, one potential parent said as he drove into the parking lot, his was the only car there-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --to bring his dau- his daughter to, no he wouldn't have any of it, you know. It's just a dead duck, it wasn't the time. Story_ID: 626036 Speaker 1: Now in '72 [1972], okay the sisters [Oblate Sisters of Providence] opened a child development center? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And redid a Mass center. Now-- Speaker 2: Because we had an academic facility for the college [Mount Providence Junior College, Baltimore, Maryland] and we, we voted that it should remain academic, so, we have a magnificent child development center, they take infants from six weeks to toddlers and, through kindergarten. So, we find that, we feel it's a minister, a ministry that's badly needed because we have faculty and people work at the university right next door and the, whatever this outfit is-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you're right across the street from the University of Maryland [University of Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland]--? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. So these parents dropped the kids off on the way to class, leave, pick 'em up in the evening, and it's a, it's a ministry and they like it, they do very well. When they leave here from kindergarten, they do excellently well in their academic careers. You can't make money though with a quality education, there's no way to make money with quality education. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: It's too demanding. For instance, when we, when we opened the child develop, the infant department, we had to double the faculty, because you have to have so many faculty members, staff members for every infant, you know. And the same thing with all the other age, the younger they are the more they need supervision, so the more student, the more staff you have then the two year olds and in the three year olds, and the four year olds, and five, kindergarten maybe could do with one teacher, you know? Depending on how many she had, so you can't produce college ed- quality education to make money, but as a ministry and import--and we were founded for that. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you, did you all cons- continue to sell aprons and--? Speaker 2: You know we're getting back to an apron sale, we think we're gonna start again to sale aprons and they're not a dollar. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We get anywhere from twenty-five to thirty-five dollars an apron now, believe it or not. We had a sale of--we had an auction at our la- our 180th banquet, we had an auction of celebrity aprons, we asked various celebrities to send us an apron with their autograph, and we had aprons from, you name 'em, these famous people on CNN, and every famous person that we had any tie to, Camille Cosby, Bill Cos- [Bill Cosby]--anybody who would sign an apron and decorate it, we auctioned it off, we got a thousand dollars for some of those aprons, so we're back into aprons in some way or form. Story_ID: 626037 Speaker 1: You continued to go to school, now, I know you earned a Ph.D. at some point, but we, we don't have the year for it, can you, can you tell us about what year it was? Speaker 2: The year I got my doctorate? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, a lot happened in '72 [1972], the school [Mount Providence Junior College, Baltimore, Maryland] closed-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. I, I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --worked full time during the doctorate, I had to work, I remained the president of the college while I was doing my work. I fulfilled my full time by do--spending the weekends down in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, this from Catholic University [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, Catholic University. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626038 Speaker 1: Don't let me skip anything, but in 1989, you became superior general of the Oblates Sisters [Oblate Sisters of Providence]? And so, what did you have to do in that capacity? Speaker 2: That's the president, that's what-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You ha- that's another name for president and you have a vice president or vicars, we call it and the whole council, so you really, as there, as impotent as the president is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] getting taken to the woodshed all the time for what he's not doing and he ca- he's impotent, he has nothing to do. Speaker 1: So that's what it means to be the president? Speaker 2: That's what it means to be the president of the order, exactly. Unless you're an especially charismatic person who, you know, can bypass all that, I, I don't think I was charismatic. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. Speaker 1: Well you seem charismatic-- Speaker 2: I had-- Speaker 1: --enough. Speaker 2: --been in office for so long, in one office or the other, I was given principalship still un- under temporary vows, I hadn't made my final vows, when I was made principal and superior at Alexandria [St. Joseph's Catholic Church, Alexandria, Virginia]. And you get that reputation or idea that people see you as in charge, and the archbishop, the newly appointed, met me and said to one of the sisters, "How long has Sister Alice [HistoryMaker Sister Mary Alice Chineworth] been superior?" And sister answered, "Forever." That's a sad commentary, 'cause that's the idea they have of me. But now, thanks be to God, I'm fading into the shadows and heading for the last round up. As I say, when you're ninety-three, you don't buy any green bananas. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 626039 Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996], a book was published called 'Rise 'n' Shine: Catholic Education and the African American Community' [Mary Alice Chineworth], and it was edited by, by you right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What, what was the, the kind of (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a catechistical, but I didn't do any writing, I simply edited it, edited the work of others. I was amazed when I got the break, the book, the lead, you know, whatever credit as one of the books, and people ask me to sign it and I say, all I did was edit it. You know, what? That's a, that's a job, I know but, I don't think the editor should even begin to compare with the people who wrote the book. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a good book, still used now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And the gist of it is, is it abo- about the viability and the energies still in the Catholic--Catholic education?-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --for the black community? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, they're a lot of cities in the U.S. where to, in order for your children to get a good ed- education, you gotta send them to Catholic school, this is-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --still true? Speaker 2: It's, it's so sad that there are no more teachers, sisters, because we've had to withdraw from so many Catholic schools and as a result, they close up because they can't afford to hire people 'cause we had a stipend whereas, lay teachers get, you know, full pay. So, the sisters withdraw and the school has to close, unless it's a very wealthy parish, which is very rare. It's unfortunate because, they really need Catholic education and they need sisters, sisters teach better than anybody, (laughter), that they're preoccupied, that's all they do, you know? Lay teachers have to go home and take care of their husbands and their children and so forth, but they have, the sisters have a single focus, to educate those kids and believe me, they do it. "You're gonna get this or you're die, I'll die trying to put it in your head" (laughter). But it's, there's a will there you know too. And, people come back to us all the time, "I just wish I could send my children to the Oblate [Oblate Sisters of Providence] school," they just value that education from Camille [Camille Cosby] on down, they value it, speak very highly of it. Story_ID: 626040 Speaker 1: Is it getting, is it, is it harder to recruit sisters no- now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, next door to impossible. Who wants to embrace a life of poverty in this age of materialism? The rare person, the very rare person who's specially called and everybody's grabbing 'em, at great expense, we've got our Ph.D. out there doing recruitment [for the Oblate Sisters of Providence]. People say, what a wa- no, it's the best thing we could've put, put the best foot forward, you know? She can relate to these women as nobody else can, she knows what it is to have a, a doctorate, be a college professor, live independently, have your own car and apartment, and so forth, give all that up and come in, vow of poverty, chastity and obedience, she knows what it is, so she can talk with authenticity, see. Story_ID: 626041 Speaker 1: How would--now, you have to do a lot of imagining here, if I was a young woman and was thinking about becoming an Oblate [Oblate Sisters of Providence] nun-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how would you convince me to do it? What would you say to me? Speaker 2: I'd have a hard time myself, I really would. I'd have a very hard time selling the order for many reasons. I love the order, and I'd die for it, and I want everybody to come in and have the happiness that I've had in it, but I know that what I'm up against in trying to convince somebody to do that, you know? I wish I could bring in a lot of people. I remember saying to the girls at the academy [Saint Frances Academy, Baltimore, Maryland], "You don't know what you're missing," and I--it went over, they came in to see what they were missing. But, that doesn't happen now, you know? Number one we're br- we're bringing in women who are forty, or older, they've had careers of their own, they're mature, so you can't bring 'em in to an order and teach 'em like teenagers, you know, try to form them, they're already formed, you know? And, there are women out there who have finished, you take women in Bal- in Washington [D.C.], a girl, a young girl who grew up in Washington, when she finished high school, she could get a wonderful government position at a good salary. By the time she's forty, she's ready to retire, she's wonderful recruitment material, but what has she got? She's got her own home, got her own car, she's got her own way of life, even though she's never married, see? So, that's a lot to give up. And what did I have to give up, two dollars a week from my father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] and mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth], that's about it. I'm, I was very sheltered, and I went in from one shelter straight into another, I mean it's a completely different ball game, you know? The ideal had to be there, that's all. And if you could get the ideal across that this is something you get that you will not get any place else, and that is community living, there's nothing like it, you'll have these women, these career women saying, "I can do everything as a career woman that I could within your order, prove to me that I can't." I would take her on, and I would say, there's one thing you don't have, if you were to fall ill tomorrow, who's gonna take care of you? Your parents are aging, they, then you have to take care of them maybe, rather than, before they take care of you. What, what is your amusement, what do you do for your amusement, if you don't have a steady boyfriend, well whose your companion, your confidant, you know? If, if, you find somebody and you're disappointed in them, then you're broke, heartbroken, you come into a community, you've got a lot of sisters that are closer to you than your blood, the affinity among community members is just simply unspeakable. I would try to sell that. I don't know if it would fly. Speaker 1: Okay, well that's a good, you know. Speaker 2: You think so? Speaker 1: Well, it, it makes sense. Speaker 2: I think it makes sense, and it's so true, it is so true. I see, these lonely women out there, I, once they're out there and growing old in their loneliness, they don't, they're not good membership material because they're already set in their ways. But, if you can get them before they do that, you know? A lot of those women, of course many of them have married, so, you know, however, even though they're married, that they don't have any ties and, and are divorced, they can enter but they can't have any liabilities. Another thing that's keeping members out is their debts, their plastic debts. Speaker 1: Okay, so if, if you have a, a debt, you can't join? Speaker 2: No, and plastic cards have made it very easy, plastic, you know, credit cards has made it very easy for them rack up a debt, so they have to clear that up before they come in. Now some orders are wealthy enough to say, "Well we'll take care of that," but we can't do that. Story_ID: 626042 Speaker 1: What would you consider today to be the future of, of being a sister in any order? And let alone the black ones, but-- Speaker 2: From a personal viewpoint? Speaker 1: Yeah, just from a personal viewpoint, I mean, do you think it's got a future or is it something that's fading out now, or what? Speaker 2: I sometimes wonder about what the future of religious life might be, but then when you read the history of religious orders, the average length of the religious order is two hundred years, now that doesn't mean that when you're true--like we're 180 well will we be dead in two, twenty years? That doesn't mean that. But, taken all the orders that have degaussed and gone out of existence, take an average of when, how long they stayed in, it's about two hundred years. So, when I say what's the future of religious life? I, I don't know, it's, it's very problematic to even wonder what the future of religious life is. It is, it already undergone so many changes, that if it continues it's gonna undergo still more changes until you won't recognize it from what it is now. All met, already the religious life today is unrecognizable to what it was when I entered [the Oblate Sisters of Providence] in '36 [1936]. It was unheard of for women to live alone, religious sisters to live in apartments by themselves, unheard of, it was unheard of for you to seek your own job, course, we're given obediences, "You're to go to Alexandria, Virginia this year," and you go, see? That was communicated at that time, garb, you'd walk into a store pick a dress off the rack and put a veil on and you're, you know, you're dressed, we all wore exactly the same to the nth degree-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --exactly the same habit, all made by hand, by us, we ordered our veils from a specialty company that did nothing but make veils for nuns, you know? Now we, there's no such, they've all gone out of business because people aren't wearing veils and we have hunt around and find what, you know, what we can do to get these made. So, that's just the garb, and the lifestyle, but there's a third dimension, you know? And that is the spiritual life, what has that undergone? What changes has the spiritual life undergone since I entered in '36 [1936]? Terrific changes, even within the church, the Mass we hear now is in English, I rejoice at that because I was a sch- a Latin scholar and I was forever parsing the prayer sentences, you know, when we were in Latin. I was a terrible, that there was a terrible distraction to me, so I rejoice when we went into the vernacular, you know? That's just one little teeny, tiny change. So the whole picture is so very different from what it was years ago that looking ahead it's gonna be still more different in the years to come 'cause changes are ready to take place. Its cha--they're changes taking place constantly, every six years, every four years, we hold chapter which is the highest governing board in the order while it's in existence. The, the time that we're sitting in chapter, that's the highest, every legislation that we hope to pass has to be done in that time. And God knows what the next chapter will bring, you know? It m- might permit us to do something that I didn't, can't even think of 'em, you know, now something so very different. So, your question originally was what do, I think? Speaker 1: What was the future of-- Speaker 2: Future-- Speaker 1: --of religious life? Like?-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, and I, I can say simply it's gonna be very different in every way. What it will do to numbers? I don't know. It may increase numbers, it may decrease numbers, but it's interesting to que- an interesting question to think about and to even imagine, you know? Story_ID: 626043 Speaker 1: What do you personally think about women as priests? Speaker 2: About what? Speaker 1: Women (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Women priests? Speaker 1: --as priests, right. Speaker 2: I don't see any reason in the world why we women can't be priests, but the Pope doesn't even want us to discuss that, you know, there's nothing in the, in the scripture that says we can't be, I think maybe someday it will happen, that might be another change we'll see that we don't even foresee now. Speaker 1: What about abortion? That's another big issue with-- Speaker 2: Abortion is wrong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very wrong. We have to, if we're true Catholics, true to our religious beliefs, we have to respect life from conception to natural death and that doesn't permit any abortion, we're hard and fast about that, have to be. Story_ID: 626044 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you, if you could? Speaker 2: That's a hard one, seems to me that if there were, it would pop right up to my mind, so I guess there's nothing. I don't say I'm satisfied with everything I have done, there are things I would do differently, but not significantly major things, you know? They're some ideas that I had when I was president [of the Oblate Sisters of Providence] that didn't fly, and I regret that because we would be really better off had they flown. But they-- Speaker 1: What was that, I just have to ask you what were they? Speaker 2: Well, for instance, we could've had a nursing home on our property out here [Our Lady of Mount Providence, Baltimore, Maryland], which the commun- the government would've paid for, all we needed to do was give up the ground and in ten years we'd own the land, you know? But, oh that didn't fly you know. So you're, you're as capable of, of bringing about change as Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is of getting people satisfied, is what he's doing with science, he's in the woodshed for science today, tomorrow he'll be in the woodshed for something else, you know? I, you know, the president is impotent really, almost impotent, you know? Because there is so much he can't do without getting the [U.S.] Congress and his, his advisors, I mean, whose the guy in charge of the science program that he pre appointed? What's he doing? Why are these--how, why are they beating up on Obama for that? He appointed somebody to take care of that. Speaker 1: What's the issue today? Speaker 2: Some-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Something about science, he's not doing anything that he promised to do in science, you know. Well what--the man has a plate full enough now, you know, what can he work, miracles? Story_ID: 626045 Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I'm concerned about the family in the African community, African American community, I feel that the demise of the family is going to bring about the demise of the race because without a family the race cannot endure. That was our whole strength, you know? Family, and it's just not happening, Baltimore's [Maryland] a pitiful place and I don't think it's too different from some of the other big cities. There is a murder in Baltimore every day at least one and sometimes more than one and they're always black with few exceptions. There's a teenager killed, at least one, in drug related killings every day, some of them very close to us, because we had a telephone operator whose son was killed, that's pretty close, you know? So, I am greatly concerned with the future, about the future of the African American community, it's killing itself, by killing it's family, that's my opinion. And I come from a strong family background and I know we knelt every day that God sent and said the rosary, we didn't care who was visiting that day, it's rosary time, you're welcome to join us, but this is when we say the rosary and we go to another room kneel and say the rosary, some people have joined us and some would sit it out. The family that prays together, stays together, that's true. So God is missing in a lot--historically and actually, factually the black community is God fearing, and you never hear anybody having a terrible crisis without saying, well God will help me, you know, they, they call, they're really God fearing. But where is God when these families break up, you know? The family that prays together, stays together, no doubt about it. Story_ID: 626046 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well on a local level, I designed what we call the assisted living quarters for those people who are not sick enough to be in an infirmary, but who can be free, yet they have help to get through each day, that was missing, they were either in the infirmary or active, yet there were some people who want to be active but they needed help. So I figure, I, I had a whole wing, air conditioned and outfitted for that and I feel that's one of my main legacies. Another thing I did was scheduled conferences with every sister in the house, that wasn't done before. People on a mission had that privilege of talking to the president of the superior general, but if you lived in this motherhouse [Our Lady of Mount Providence, Baltimore, Maryland], you didn't have a voice in that same sense, you know? And I noticed that this superior [of the Oblate Sisters of Providence] is doing the same thing so, I think the highest form of imitation, of, of, of flattery--no, imitation is the highest form of flattery. So it pleases me so much when she's doing something that I did, she's done a couple of things. Story_ID: 626047 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, I think, we were, you were, we were talking I think during the break about Jewish people and, and it just made me think about other religions with all the discussion in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], about you know, religious dialogue across different religions. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you think that, that what we're suffering from now is basically a lack of Catholic values or just values period or do you see that, does everybody have to become a Catholic to be able to--? Speaker 2: I, I think I'm a strong believer in ecumenism, and the--ignorance is terrible, ignorance is painful and hurtful. So I think the more you know about another religion, will help you to understand it better and you're accepting of it, you know? Some people are afraid of Muslims, some people are afraid of Jewish people, if, if you learn about their faith, then you don't have to fear it, you know? I, I think it's so sad when people think theirs is the only religion, you have to be a Catholic to go to heaven and I, you know, that's, that's stupid to say that. So I think that ecumenism is be--I belong to a Jewish Christian affiliation until this year, I resigned from it, because I can no longer drive. But, I learned so much from them and, and I was attracted to it because I grew up with Jewish rabbis you know, and a Yiddish speaking mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth], so it's nothing I fear, I knew about their holidays as much as they knew about mine and I, I, think ignorance is not bliss, I think we should stamp out ignorance. I remember being at dinner one night with an Imam, you know, Muslim leader and I enjoyed it so much, I learned so much from him that I rejoice every time I see him in, in, in a group that I have to be in because I, I learned so much, first time I was ever that close to anyone in that position. So I think ignorance is the thing to beware of. Story_ID: 626048 Speaker 1: Just got two more questions. One is, tell us--well it's about your family, now tell us some--a li- a little bit about your family today. I know, first of all, were your parents--did they get a chance to see you become successful in the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --religious life? Speaker 2: My mother [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth] lived to see me get the doctorate [from The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] and to be, to become superiors general [of the Oblate Sisters of Providence]. My father [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.] died when I made my first vows, which was very sad to me, but he knows, I'm a firm believer in the afterlife and I know that he's looking down, I know he's pleased about the whole situation. He was a very loving father, and as I left him, I remember hi- his hugging, embracing me and he said, "Remember if you don't like, come on back." That openness, you know? That acceptance so, that's great, a great feeling to have. Speaker 1: And you have nieces and nephews? Speaker 2: I have five, I should have brought those pictures in, my sister's [Magdalen Chineworth Bryson] five grandchildren have seventeen children and it's the most wonderful set of people you ever want to see, and I'm very proud of them. My brother's three sons, only one of the three sons lived, and passed into young adulthood, but they had marriages, one married a girl from the reservation, he courted her six years before she consented to leave the reservation and marry him, she died recently. And the other sons didn't have successful marriages and they died young, but each one had a child, now I'm not close to them at all unfortunately. My sister ingrained it into her children that they should never neglect me, so her son and her daughter are very loyal to me and their children are the ones who keep close to me. So, they make up my family. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626049 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: You think I'd remind you? Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, actually no. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am how, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a compassionate, loving, generous, member of the community. I ask no more than that. I don't want them to remember anything I've done or haven't done, but remember me as generous, loving, and a loyal community member. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I'm sure we will. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're very welcome. Now what shape is all this gonna take? Speaker 1: Well it's, it'll be you sitting where you're sitting now, and we, we will, we'll only see this part of you and you'll be talking about all the things you just talked about. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, what a bore-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --what a bore that will be. Story_ID: 626050 Speaker 1: These are the seventeen children, offspring of my sister's five grandchildren, they are in families of anywhere from two to five, one of the grandchildren has five boys and the others have anywhere from two to three or four children. I think the photograph is self explanatory because the siblings are dressed similarly, those in black are siblings, those in plaid shirts are siblings, those in blue dresses are siblings and they're all, that's as much as I can say about them. Speaker 2: We're doing this on pur- purpose, don't be alarmed, it's going sideways to fit (unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead and I know this sort of should be apparent but I need you to go ahead and provide any description-- Speaker 2: This is a photograph taken of me when I was elected to the presidency of the order [Oblate Sisters of Providence], the president of the order is called the superior general. Speaker 1: These are the five parents of the seventeen children that we just saw. Among these five, four are medical doctors, physicians in their own right. Speaker 2: You can name them if you like. Speaker 1: Left to right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one is not a doctor? Speaker 1: The second from the right is a, an employee of Hewlett-Packard [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California], an administrator at, Hewlett-Packard she cr- is climbing the corporate ladder. The others from left to right, left to right are Jeanette [ph.], whose a speech pathologist, Edward [ph.] is a pediatrician, Juliann [ph.] is an orthopedic surgeon and Jackie is a, Jacqueline [ph.] is a dermatologist, she was in charge of the dermatology department at hod- John Hopkins [sic. The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Who's in this one? Which one should he focus on? Speaker 1: The one, the lower right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The circular one? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's-- Speaker 2: The lower right is my golden jubilee, I was fifty years in religion and some of the family was able to come for that occasion. The others are, well actually the four, our four siblings, my-- Speaker 1: All-- Speaker 2: In the mid- in the cen-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): These all here? Speaker 2: That, those are my-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Speaker 2: Hold, hold on a second. He's still shooting this one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so now this would be-- Speaker 1: Yeah, those are the four of us. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you turn it? Speaker 1: Yes, I can turn it. Speaker 2: Those are the four of us, my, all of-are deceased except me. Speaker 1: So starting here? Speaker 2: My sister Magdalen [Magdalen Chineworth Bryson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seated is my brother Al [Alexander Chineworth, Jr.] and standing behind Al is my brother Joseph [Joseph Chineworth] and yours truly at the right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: All right, another one on here or? Speaker 1: I don't think so, unh-uh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's an interesting frame. Speaker 2: Yeah it is. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's a nice picture. Speaker 2: I know you want this one, right here? Speaker 1: Yes, that's my, my parents, I wish you could do something with clearing, with cleaning that up a bit. Speaker 2: Well, we'll make it clear first. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, they can make it a little more-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --focused. Speaker 1: There's nothing else significant on there. Speaker 2: You just have to name them left to right, that's your mother and give her full name and give us year. Speaker 1: Okay, now? Speaker 2: Are you ready for her to do it? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: Yes, right now. Speaker 1: This is a, the only picture I have of my parents together, my mother is at the left, Victoria Magdalen Schlicker Chineworth [Victoria Schlicker Chineworth], and my father, Alexander Roth Chineworth, Sr. [Alexander Chineworth, Sr.]...