 Story_ID: 648689 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers; our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Garnet, G-A-R-N-E-T, Fredrick, F-R-E-D-R-I-C-K, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N [HistoryMaker Garnet Coleman]. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nine, eight, sixty-one [September 8, 1961], the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a business consultant but primarily my ad- vocation is, my occupation, I'm a member of the Texas House of Representatives. Speaker 1: Okay. You represent the-- Speaker 2: The 147th district [District 147] in Houston [Texas], which is central and southeast Houston. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 2nd of December, 2016. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Houston, Texas, in Third Ward, in my district office, legislative district office here on Almeda [Road] at, near Southmore [Boulevard]. Story_ID: 648690 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require a short answer, they're kind of a warm up. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, more and more it's the milkshake which is not a food, so that's kind of but, yeah, I really like lamb chops. I don't know why, but I really do. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, one--yeah, one that I like is: thinking is underrated. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), all right. You're probably right about that. Story_ID: 648691 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's [John B. Coleman] side; we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, Gloria Jones Coleman, G-L-O-R-I-A, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth, let's see, November 18, 1934, District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family. How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side and what are the stories from that side? Speaker 2: Well, we can, on the, on her paternal side, we can trace back to 1760 and the, you know, primarily the D.C. area [Washington, D.C.] and, so that's Virginia but mostly actual D.C. proper. We are related and know many stories, not totally verified, but we're related to the people who are related to Sally Hemings. We're also, we're working through this now but that it's family lore, I guess it would be, is that we come off the Mount Vernon plantation [Mount Vernon, Virginia] owned by the Custis family and then became free people of color who lived in, live in LeDroit Park [Washington, D.C.], right around Howard [Howard University]. And, so my mother's doing a whole thing on this and we're looking for the gaps, 'cause there are gaps in, and she's being very serious about making sure that everything is verified but she's gotten, she's gotten very far in the Jones family and the Bruce family, which are her father's mother and father. So it's, the, she's done a really good job of getting there. Speaker 1: There, are there any stories about people on the Jones side or the Bruce side that are, that you, that are handed down with the family? Speaker 2: Well, you know, particularly that piece on the, we had a hand portrait of Custis, Parkes, Custis and that hand portrait, that's who we're related to. So, and also we have a dish, a--Parkes dish, with a P on it from Mount Vernon and, so we go to the, that's where it gets confusing because we go to the Parkes, it's clearly there but the Custis family, in particular, and then it gets confusing because everybody's named the same name. So you had generations that are named exactly the same name as the generation before. And, so when we get to the part of, you know, who the freed slaves were, that's where we lose track but I know that back to, prior to the Civil War, the Bruce family and the Jones family that comes out of both--free, were free men of color, free people of color-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the District of Columbia. Speaker 1: And the Custis, of course, were related to Martha Custis [Martha Custis Washington] who was [President] George Washington's-- Speaker 2: You got it. Speaker 1: --wife. She became Martha Washington. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So Martha was married to Custis [Daniel Parke Custis] who owned Mount Vernon, she received that after he died; and then she married George Washington, who adopted all her children. Story_ID: 648692 Speaker 1: Now the Hemings side, you're related to people that are related to the Hemings, right? Speaker 2: Yes, and this is where, again, it gets to, the Quanders who are our cousins. Speaker 1: Qua- okay. Speaker 2: They-- Speaker 1: We've interviewed the Quan-- Speaker 2: Oh, have you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some of the Quanders, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, there's actually there's a Dr. Quander who lives in Austin [Texas] but, yes, we are, we are related to the Quanders, we are actually first cousins. So, you know, it's a small world up there in Washington, D.C., particularly going back to that time, you know, slavery, free people of color--the--that's why we always knew our story was true, we just couldn't find the link but we knew it because we knew the Sally Hemings story was true. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So, you know, we're hearing all these things, my mother [Gloria Jones Coleman] and every--growing up and then she's telling us, well, you know, of course that's the case. So if you could do DNA now on that, you'd probably figure out that we could figure this all out pretty easily but, yes, we are related to the Quanders who are descendants of Sally Hemings and [President] Thomas Jefferson. Speaker 1: Well, the Quanders go, they can relate, they can trace their history back to 1619 in Jamestown [Virginia] to a boy that came off the White Lion ship of that group of black Africans that were sold to Jamestown in 1619. Speaker 2: We, and again, that's my mother was telling me the story the other day about, she met Joe Quander [Joseph Quander, Jr.] who lives, like I said, in Austin, and she said, you know, "We're very, we're cousins," and he didn't know and then when they figured it out and said, "Yeah, we're very close cousins." So they're like, I can't get the removed pieces but they're blood cousins. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, so this is, yeah, so it's great to be able to trace, you know, the family back that far. So many black people just cannot, have a hard time trying to-- Speaker 2: It's amazing and when I tell people, you know, we have pictures from 1850 and, you know, we got, you know, we do have that. When my mother was working on this, she gets to like the 1700s but then it goes to, because we, it's mostly the white folks, it goes to, it's England, and we can't figure out the rest of it. So maybe with the Quander information we can because, again, we have, my first cousin is a double cousin to the Jarvises and the Drews and the; you know, it's a, it's a, D.C.'s a small, it's really a small town. Speaker 1: Right, you're right, right, right. Story_ID: 648693 Speaker 1: Now what about your grandparents, your mother's pa- parents? Speaker 2: So my--this--my mother's mother is, was half Japanese, half Puerto Rican. The, her mother came from, I'm not sure, her mother's parents came from Spain to Puerto Rico and her father came from Jap- Japan to Puerto Rico and then they moved to D.C. area [Washington, D.C.] and that's as far as we can get. We can get to Japan and we can get to Spain. Speaker 1: So that takes us back to what, the early, part of the 20th century? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We're--and, so, yes, so, we, what we know about my Japanese grandfather [sic. great-grandfather] is that he immigrated in 1870 and the family from Spain, the Collados, so they would have been somewhere around the same time but from Spain to Puerto Rico and then they had a daughter and my grandfather, his name's Jinkobura Fujiwara [Gensaburo Fujiwara], married Monserrate Collado [Monserrate Collado Fujiwara] and then moved to the mainland. And, so my mother, the Jones, my grandfather [Charles Jones, III] married Fu- Shizu Fujiwara [Shizu Fujiwara Coles] and my mother [Gloria Jones Coleman] is the, their child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so on the Jones side, wow, that's the side that, you know, goes back, probably to the Mount Vernon plantation [Mount Vernon, Virginia] but they--large family. My grandfather had eleven siblings and, so the family, uncles before that, like I'm named for a great uncle. And, so those names passed down from the generation of the great-grandfather, and also, you know, going back in the District, you know, for as long as we know. Story_ID: 648694 Speaker 1: You know, when I heard the name Garnet and saw you were born in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I thought of the abolitionist Henry Hi- Highland Garnet for which-- Speaker 2: That, I, which is really interesting because I'm trying to figure out where, we're trying to figure out whether my [maternal] uncle was named for him. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause there's Garnet elementary school [Garnet-Patterson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: He, though he's forgotten in most of the country, in D.C., he's remembered. He was a U.S. ambassador to Liberia before he passed away (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The name's spelled exactly the same. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, my Uncle Gar- who I was named for, the kind of give and take between Garnet and Frederick Douglass, I always, I went and looked it up and I said, "You know, I wonder if they were thinking that and said, 'Well, let's name, Garnet and Fredrick and then Jones, it's Garnet Fredrick Jones [Garnet Jones].'" Speaker 1: Right, right, exactly (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I just said, "You know, this isn't, this just can't be, you know, that, it just doesn't happen that way." Speaker 1: Yeah, it does sound like it was devised, you know, it was a plan, you know what I mean? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, yeah, so I'm glad I asked that question 'cause I thought, well, maybe, he's probably not but then I said, "Well, yeah, there's a Garnet elementary school I know in D.C." Speaker 2: There, and there, and, yeah. Speaker 1: He's-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Now he spent a lot of time in D.C., in the black community in D.C.--the--he and Martin Delany and others used to live in the same boardinghouse when they were doing business in D.C. with the government and that sort of thing. So-- Speaker 2: Well, and the Garnet name actually does come from a previous generation of Joneses as well. So they kept names like middle, first names became middle names of the next generation but I, you know, again, it just, I ran into the same thing and I said, it just can't be just coincidence, I mean, you know. We tend to find name--name people after folks who are significant. Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: And I--so I--that's just my thought-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --that you don't get those two names next to each other by accident. Speaker 1: You're right. I have friends now named Malcolm, Martin, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: There's a reason (laughter). Speaker 2: There's a rea- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Story_ID: 648695 Speaker 1: Now what did your grandparents do, or your mother's parents do; and what did she say about growing up? Speaker 2: My grandfather [Charles Jones, III] was, worked on the railroad as a porter and also a dining car waiter. They were, he and his, a couple of his siblings, they were entertainers, as well, so they performed at like the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], performed in New York, they did a song and dance routines and, which was very interesting but they, so they cobbled together those two ways of making a living. My grandmother [Shizu Fujiwara Coles] was a seamstress, she designed and made clothes on my mother's side, so my maternal grandmother and, so they were--that--it's interesting. My family in Texas is college educated. These are folks who were civil servants and, so they may have done some college, may have done teachers college or something like that, but they worked, you know, they were blue collar workers for the most part but that was a good living in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] in those days. But, yes, that's what my grandfather worked on, the railroad in the congressional dining rooms and then also as an entertainer on the, I guess you would call it the semi-Chitlin' Circuit in those days. Speaker 1: Well, you'd make a good living any, around any congressional, anything (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause the porters, you know, being a porter was a good job in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, you know, they were, they, you know, they weren't poor, but they also knew how to make family and money work to everybody's advantage. So they may buy a house together with their brother or sister or cousin, everybody lives there and, so that's the way they owned, you know, owned property. And, so my grandfather's family came off of S and 1st [Street] Northwest. So we just used to call it S Street and that was the, basically the family home and, so my mother [Gloria Jones Coleman] lived there. My--her parents got a divorce and she lived with her aunts, and they raised her. Story_ID: 648696 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what did you call that community? Speaker 2: LeDroit Park [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Dr- LeDroit Park (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) LeDroit Park. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So Shaw [Washington, D.C.] is the neighborhood that would be to the, basically to the south. So this is all around Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. So if you took the neighborhoods and drew a circle of half a mile and put Howard in the center, that's the, those are the neighborhoods. Those were the black neighborhoods. Speaker 1: Yeah, and-- Speaker 2: And, so the name, you know, we even know where the original house of our, it's still there, I'm told that is still in Northeast D.C. and in North- Northwest D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. So when I went to Howard for a while, the, you know, I was back home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, literally. It, you know, it's interesting to me 'cause we always visited, but it was, you know, the D.C. part is, you know, clearly--I always thought it was unique because there aren't that many people from D.C., originally, you know, and our family has been in that same neighborhood, you know, going back at least to the 1850s, be- before that I'm sure but I don't know exact dates, and I can get them for you. Story_ID: 648697 Speaker 1: So I take it your mother [Gloria Jones Coleman] went to school around that area, around, around the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Yes, she did. Speaker 1: --campus (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She went, yeah, she went to--did she go to Banneker [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.]? Yeah, I think she did and she went to Miners Teacher College [sic. Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], which was part of Howard so she was, she went to Howard and I'll get the right school names for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she come down to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it would have been Dunbar. Speaker 1: Dunbar. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, it's not Banneker, that's exactly right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Which is considered one of the great black high schools in the country. Books they've written about it and-- Speaker 2: My first cousin went to Dunbar and, so, yes, you know, when we talk about the value of education, certainly in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], just like here. I mean, you know, there was great value put on education and I think every community in, black community in America at this point, is trying to make sure that we do that again. Speaker 1: So your mother became a teacher? 'Cause you were saying she was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually, she married my father [John B. Coleman] while she was in college and we all got born, so she never completed school; and they moved back here to Houston [Texas]. Story_ID: 648698 Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side and this is, this may take a while. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We're sitting in the John B. Coleman Building, right, which is a five story building here and he was a medical doctor here in Houston [Texas]. So tell us about John B. Coleman and his family. How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, we know that his--well, the Hubbard family we can trace. That's his mother's [Clara Hubbard Coleman] family. My grandmother's family, we can trace back before 1900 in--they come out of Trinity, Texas and they were, they were a large family as well and they come off the forty acre and a mule land in, there in Trinity County [Texas] which is just about a hundred miles north of Houston. Speaker 1: Now is this a, like a black town or a black area? Speaker 2: Well, yes and no. If you think about East Texas, the best way to think about East Texas is it's the same as Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, you know, where it's a, it's the sou- southern United States. So the population of black people in this region all has to do with plantation, crop style slavery and then sharecropper, and Reconstruction had a big impact on this area of Texas. And, so the forty acre and a mule land was done. They were, you know, landowners, continued to be landowners and the family spread across from west of here to Waller County [Texas] and, again, east and north to Trinity County and on my grandfather's [William Coleman, Sr.] side, Houston County, Crockett, Texas. So they're from East Texas, you know, and what that really means is they're from the country and they're from, you know, this idea of owning land but post-slavery and the people around this region came from the sugarcane, cotton. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 2: That's the reason the population is so large. So if you find black populations are large in the southeastern Texas just like they are large in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Same thing, exactly the same, same history which is myths because I think a lot of people today think of Texas as a western state or southwestern state, when we are quite, we are (laughter) very southern, and particularly Houston. Speaker 1: Okay, right, right, it's right on the, almost on the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico], you know, too. Speaker 2: Exactly right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, you know, we're--everything there is to say about Reconstruction, slavery, civil rights, we're the same, just the same discussion as any other southern state with a large black population. Story_ID: 648699 Speaker 1: What about the Coleman side of the family, though? Speaker 2: Well, we, you know, we're, I'm from, we're figuring that out now too. My grandfather died when my father was very young. He was sixteen, and he had been, both my grandmother [Clara Hubbard Coleman] and grandfather had been married before. So the--he was born in Crockett, Texas. We know he moved to Houston [Texas], probably around 1912. Speaker 1: Now is Crockett, Texas named for Davy Crockett-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of all people that fought at the Alamo [San Antonio, Texas] and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, okay. Speaker 2: It's Houston County [Texas]. Crockett's the city. And, so we've been able to, through death records and through [U.S.] military records to find his first son, which was--his name was William Smith Coleman [Coleman's paternal grandfather, William Coleman, Sr.], and then he also had daughters from his first marriage and then when he married my grandmother, they had three children. So my father, John B. Coleman, my uncle, Hubbard Coleman and my other uncle, Clarence Coleman, but they had half-sisters that lived in the Third Ward [Houston, Texas], in the same neighborhood that were, as they called them, Mr. Coleman's first, from his first marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he was very active, civically, in the area. Speaker 1: Your grandfather? Speaker 2: My grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: He was the secretary of St. John's Church [St. John Missionary Baptist Church] on Dowling [Dowling Street; Emancipation Avenue, Houston, Texas] which was the lay leader. And, so he was very well known in the segregated Third Ward area and because of, leading things like getting McGowen Street paved 'cause before that it was a shell street with ditches, you know, so they got, or before that, it was dirt. So they were able to get, you know, better infrastructure. He was a, he worked at a jewelry store and he was the delivery man for that jewelry store in downtown Houston [Texas]. And, so I think what's clear is the civic activity came from both he, you know, and my grandmother. My grandmother did hair. She had a, kind of like a beauty hut (laughter) or house, off room, where she did hair with hot combs and, you know, the whole nine yards, and they were successful people but they weren't educated people but parts of the Hubbard family--was my grandmother--my great uncle was a dentist. They pushed education as the great equalizer but they were also entrepreneurs, my grandfather and grandmother. They had rental houses within Third Ward and continued to own real estate throughout, throughout that, you know, their time and same with my aunt, she owned houses in Third Ward so it's this idea that, the idea of, I guess we'd, I'd call it, so we'd call it self-sufficiency today but using everything you have to make life better and, so they were successful at it and that's something that stuck with me, my grandfather and grandmother's success with no education, you know, in a segregated community, obviously. So in Third Ward, there was a mix of everybody which is one of the deals. You had, you may have had a, like I said, my uncle, dentist, who's the dentist, A.R. Reese, living next to, or in the same neighborhood with my grandfather who had probably as much as a high school education. Story_ID: 648700 Speaker 1: Now did your father [John B. Coleman] like, now your father went on to be a doctor but did he always aspire to be a doctor or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The story my grandmother [Clara Hubbard Coleman] told was, yes, he wanted to be a doctor from early on and she just, I have to tell the story because I always cringe. She said, "Yeah, we knew he wanted to be a doctor. He used to take the rats and cut 'em up, the dead rats." I said, "Oh, my goodness," but, yes, and-- Speaker 1: That tells us a lot in this one little story. I mean, there were dead rats around them to cut up and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --and, yeah, so that just tells you about what kind of neighborhood it was [Third Ward, Houston, Texas], maybe in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, you know, it was a riot. I mean, you know, this, there was unequal infrastructure, you know, between some, black communities in segregation and other communities and remained so for a very long time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But yeah, no, the influence on my father and his brothers came from my great aunt, Mayona Reese [Mayona Hubbard Reese], who was married to Dr. A.R. Reese who, you know, had--is--dental degree from Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. So, you know, that's usually, that's a generation earlier than, than most people who end up with, you know, professional degrees. So they instilled the importance of getting, not only a college education but a professional degree. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so two of my uncles--my dad, who was a doctor, I have another uncle, Jarvis Whitfield, who's a doctor, my uncle Clarence [Clarence Coleman] was a lawyer and my uncle Hubbard [Hubbard Coleman] owned an insurance company and was in real estate; and they all had college educations. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did they all go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], or? Speaker 2: My father went to Fisk. Story_ID: 648701 Speaker 1: So I guess we were, we were really at my father [John B. Coleman], right, that's where we were (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah, so first of all, I wouldn't say this if I didn't believe it and I probably wouldn't have said it twenty years ago, twenty-four--my father was a very, was a Renaissance man. We wouldn't use that term down here but he just did so many different things and that, to me, is amazing because his primary profession clearly was being a doctor, an obstetrician, gynecologist but he was an entrepreneur as well. He owned part of a radio station, he opened a, kind of a hospital clinic and it's interesting because it was an abortion clinic. So he opened it right after Roe v. Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973] and, so he told me the reason that he did abortions is because his time at D.C. General [District of Columbia General Hospital, Washington, D.C.], he had seen too many deaths, coat hanger abortions. He just said, he just could not not do it. So he owned a club, it's on the modern Chitlin', Chitlin' Circuit called J.B.'s Entertainment Center [Houston, Texas]. So he would have acts like, you know, Millie Jackson, The O'Jays and things like that. So he started promoting concerts in the '60s [1960s] and did that, you know, all the way through to, owning his own venue and the like. He did concert tours, would promote across the South with acts like The Jackson 5, The Commodores, Earth, Wind and Fire, you know, the acts at the time, and he and his partner had the largest promotion company in Houston [Texas] for a while. And, so all of these different things, radio station, hospital, then, you know, owning real estate but the, I think the most interesting part of all of it, of course, was this entertainment industry thing that, at that time there was really no barrier to entry, you just had to have some money. Story_ID: 648702 Speaker 1: The other side of that was, that's who he [Coleman's father, John B. Coleman] was as a, I would call it, businessperson; but the big piece that he worked on was education. You know, was very, he knew that, and he told us all the time, you know, you have to get your college degree, you have to, you know that, the idea of a good K through 12 education [kindergarten through twelfth grade] was important to him as well and continuing forward he thought that that's what all particularly black people should do. So, he was the lead of the local, they didn't call them chapters but the local fundraising or- organization for UNCF and was for an awfully long time. Speaker 2: It was United Negro College Fund, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) United Negro College Fund. He started the actual Lou Rawls 'Parade of Stars,' started here and, but it started with the radiothon that he did on his radio station. And, so, you know because of, what he had received from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and his peers that it was very important, you know, very important to make sure that other students had an opportunity to attend, attend the, you know, attend the UNCF schools. He was also chair of the Texas Association of Developing Colleges which was the UNCF group in Texas. There were a lot of UNCF schools here. It's, unfortunately, just like Fisk, has, was in trouble and is in trouble, they are too because of not enough enrollment. Speaker 2: Yeah, Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]-- Speaker 1: So those are two state schools (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two state schools. But, yeah, Bishop in-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Bishop [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas], Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Dallas, Texas]-- Speaker 2: Paul Quinn, um-hm. Speaker 1: --Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] so, you know, at least four. And, so we were lucky like a lot of states to get the, start with the, in the public system, separate but unequal and that was very important to him. He was a regent, appointed by Dolph Briscoe in 1977 to be the first person of color to be on the Texas A&M Board of Regents [for the Texas A&M University System], and he said, he choose that over UT [University of Texas System] because of Prairie View. Because Prairie View, in his mind, in the constitution and many other people, it should have been part, a flagship, it should have been the flagship as, even though it was a black school [HBCU]. It should have been funded the same way and the same would apply to TSU which is compared to University of Texas that it should have had more, more resources. He also served on the Texas Southern University Board of Regents at one time. So with the--he believed that getting rid of segregation in our public schools was important and we do, we didn't, we weren't doing as well at that, as, you know people wanted to. So he got very involved in raising money for bond issues, helping support school board candidates--that was important. Story_ID: 648703 Speaker 1: I think one of the biggest things he did, back in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s], the--this was, again, a very southern town and the mayors here, you would hire, had these police chiefs like Herman Short who essentially was Bull Connor and, you know, we were known as the throw down gun capital of the world and, but you couldn't change the police chief unless you changed the mayor because the mayor, literally, hires the police chief. And, so there was a guy whose father [Roy Hofheinz] had been county judge and mayor, Fred Hofheinz who was running, ran for mayor in '71 [1971] and he was, you know, a progressive for--and, so the idea was to get a mayor in that would treat, that we would have as, we had one council member, Judson Robinson, Jr. [Judson W. Robinson, Jr.] who went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], he and my father [John B. Coleman] went to Fisk together but to get rid of all the negative things, it was important. So the black, this is the first time they put together a huge bloc of black money and mobilized the black community as a bloc to elect a mayor. So he was very involved in that financially and put everything he had into it. They didn't win in 1971 but they won in 1973 and that's when Houston [Texas] started really changing and, so he became, out of that, a civic leader that, who was recognized in the black community, particularly for his profession, he delivered everybody's babies. I say it like--, "Oh, yeah, your daddy delivered my baby." I always hear that all the time. Speaker 2: He was an OB/GYNE [obstetrics and gynecology] doctor (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah. I mean, and that was his deal. I mean I don't, I don't want to--the most important thing to him was being a doctor and how he found time for these other things, I don't know but he--they changed Houston. So, you know, they literally changed Houston for black Americans, black Houstonians by just electing a mayor. And, so then he became recognized as someone who, who understood how to move people and so governors would, you know, that's how he got on the Board of Regents at Texas A&M [Texas A&M University System]. He supported Governor Briscoe [Dolph Briscoe] and Governor Briscoe appointed him to the A&M board but it went nationally as well, you know, U.S. Senate candidates and the like but, so he became sort of somebody that people would look at across the board on major, major issues that affected Houston and Texas and sometimes, nationally. So-- Speaker 2: These are days when Texas--Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was a senator and you had like, Texas is like, seems to be more of a liberal Democratic type-- Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: --political atmosphere. Speaker 1: Well, in--so you had a split, and you remember here, it was all Democrats so there were conservatives-- Speaker 2: In the Houston area? Speaker 1: Everywhere, and everywhere in Texas, everywhere-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's right, that's right. That's when the Dixiecrat-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, yeah. Speaker 1: The one party state. So you had conservative Democrats and liberal Democrats and that was the split in all things. Well, you know, like I said, they were very active. My uncle was the lawyer for the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]. The, you know, the idea that people could make change in their own community, you know, is really important because that really has formed me, see, 'cause I know one person can make a difference and that was not a foreign concept to me and because of my father and my uncles, it, you know, my one uncle was primarily the main person who got the first black member of the school board elected, Hattie Mae White and, so these, this is what my family did. They understood that they had a responsibility for the community that they lived in and my father was very much that. I mean, you know, he was the, he embodied that, that thought but, so did his brothers. And, and so I say that they've all been kind of role models to me because they did the same things but in different, different ways but again, with my father, you know, he was like, well, you know, his--how he made his living had 100 percent to do with being in the black community. That's, his patients were black. He was, the chief of staff at the old Riverside Hospital, Houston hospital for Negroes [Houston Negro Hospital; Riverside General Hospital, Houston, Texas] when he came back from--to do--came back from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you know, these are the types of things that I think that--he understood what his obligation was and coming back home says a whole lot because a lot of people didn't come back home. A lot of people came here--doctors--because of the good, the large population that they could serve but he, you know, that was a big, very, being a physician was big, that was his deal. I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --he was a 24/7, 365 physician. Speaker 2: And everything else as you mentioned here so he was like a dynamic per- personality-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh-- Speaker 2: --in black Houston to be sure and-- Speaker 1: --oh, yeah. I mean, you know, yes, so-- Speaker 2: --especially here in the Third Ward [Houston, Texas]. Story_ID: 648704 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Gloria Jones Coleman] and father [John B. Coleman] met? Now he was at medical school at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Yes, so, yes, it's a really good story. I think all of this is a good story. Well, when my mother was a freshman at Howard [sic. Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], she actually was freshman class with my now fath- my deceased father-in-law. So they were all there at the same time, and my father had started medical school and they got married when they, he was, they were in internship. They were introduced by a friend, Joe Miller [ph.], he just died from--was Shreveport, Louisiana, in the funeral home business, and it was a very short courtship and when--they got married and that's when they started having children and, but I think that the--again, the idea of Howard being a national school and that's how he ended up meeting this woman from right around the corner who was, you know, attending Howard at the same time and in, I don't really under- I didn't, you know, quite fran- frankly understand what the necessary attraction was except that my mother's a very pretty woman and still is, and, you know, my father was very traditional and not in the sense of--traditional as a family person and he found the person that he wanted to be with and fortunately they made it back here because they could have just as easily stayed there. My godfather was the corporate counsel at the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], Herbert O. Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], who was the Houston [Texas] professor at Howard University and, so, you know, that impact on the family in terms of civic participation in a sense was great. But, yeah, with my mother and father, you know, which is one of those things that--he was in medical school, she was in undergrad school; they saw each other as a good fit, and it turned out to be so. Story_ID: 648705 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their likes and dislikes, what they look like, how they walk, talk, sense of humor, their talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: A lot of ways, I--it's kind of split. So, there's a picture of my father [John B. Coleman] right there. The--when I'm angry, I'm my mother [Gloria Jones Coleman]. I'm definitely my mother. I--and you can bleep this out. I become the, I become--bitch and I say that because my mother doesn't take shit from nobody and I--that's the best way for me to explain it. Very strong woman, understands that she's her own person and always has. Now my father, I have a tendency to follow his, the way he did things, you know, whether it be entertainment, I used to own a club. Whether it be civic life, here I am a member of the legislature [Texas House of Representatives]. You know, those things that make a difference, education, I do that in the legislature and understanding that a person can do more than one thing. You don't have to be one thing, you can be a lot of different things and people have lives that extend and they do different things in those pieces of lives. So in that way, I'm like my father. I believe in helping people. I, you know, I really believe in raising money. I believe in philanthropy, although I don't have any money, but I give away as much money as I can give away. I try to make an opportunity for people. I mean, that was my father. That--you know, I represent TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]. You know, I understand the needs of the colleges and education because it was, it was really a big deal but also on the being a businessperson side, I mean, I open businesses, not, probably not, something my parents wanted me to do but, you know, I owned a bar [Fredrick's Riverside Wine Bar (ph.)] at twenty-two. So, but the--and then I worked in the entertainment center [J.B.'s Entertainment Center, Houston, Texas] next to it and, so continued that, bringing acts to Houston [Texas] and going through that Chitlin' Circuit group, which was great. So it was one of those things that, you know, I think, I'm all pieced in to the point that I'm on the Public Health Committee and been on the Public Health Committee since 1993 to now in 2016. So, you know, it, I very much mirror, I would, I would have never said that before. I mean, my father and I, like a lot of fathers and sons didn't get along all that well 'til a certain time but, again, if I could be him, I would want to be, you know, I mean, it's--I--it took growing up to understand how special a person he was. I didn't, you know, to me he was just my, you know, my, you know, it would have--but, now I'm just like, how do you do all that? You know, how do you do that, and the time that he did it in. So that, to me, was just, it was just phenomenal, and until I'd got in that world, I was like, dang, how could you do all--(unclear) you do this? Speaker 1: Yeah, it is awe inspiring. I mean, when you, when you--you're looking at all the, the list of things he's done that are in this outline and, you know, the very building, I mean, the letters outside are like four feet high or something, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And he's, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The library [John B. Coleman Library] at Prairie [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]-- Speaker 1: The stories about him and I've heard about him this week, at least four times, from other peo- people we've interviewed. Speaker 2: Well, he was a regular guy too and that's the part that I try to be and, but I am, I can't help it. He showed that you could be both from the hood and mixed with the upper echelon of the, of the state, nation and still go to after hours clubs (laughter) and have fun. I grew up with him, he had great Super Bowl parties and the like, I mean--at the house, it was great. He was, he was just everything. Story_ID: 648706 Speaker 1: Now what is it about Hou- I think I was discussing this on the way in here but what is it about Houston [Texas], Houston's black community? They, there's a Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] and a Third Ward [Houston, Texas], but the thing that unites them is the loyalty the people have to these, the high schools and the wards and the--they, you know, that your father [John B. Coleman] would go to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and come back to Houston, you know, it seemed like it wasn't--just take it for granted he's going to come back. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Cause it was just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he wasn't going anywhere else. Speaker 1: Right, I mean it's a-- Speaker 2: Well, so it's true. We are very rooted as people in this state, all hundred--just all together but you had communities like Third Ward and Fifth Ward that people were out of. It was their small town in the midst of bigger Houston and remains, remains so to this day and, so the fact that we had high schools and feeder patterns and rivalries, crosstown rivalries between Fifth Ward and Third Ward and Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] and Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] that kept this idea that there was a--you were from somewhere but within Houston. So if I say Third Ward outside of Houston, if I say I represent Third Ward, they go, oh, okay, I know that. That's how the black--so they know Third Ward, they know Fifth Ward and they know that-- Speaker 1: Right, it's known outside of Houston, people know-- Speaker 2: They know. Speaker 1: --about Third Ward (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, so that's all I have to say. You know, I represent Third Ward and they go, oh, yeah, yeah, you know. So there was a remnant of segregation for the most part but it was also a sense, there was a, and I think there still is and we're renewing it, the sense of pride of being from this community which was for black Houston, particularly Third Ward, black Houston, that's where everything was. The university, you know, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League, all of the institutions that we recognize as important institutions in black America and the reason why black people flourished is because of having a university. I mean, you know, the middle class was, any place where there was a black university, there's a middle class and the fact that people came back to improve their community and work on that, even if they just went to, you know, went to undergrad. You can trace that through other families that, you're good to school but you came back and contributed to your community. It, you know, that's what you did. Speaker 1: And, now your father's family--I read that the Colemans have a history in the Third Ward, going back a hundred years. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Yes, sir, and, which is, again, somewhat unique 'cause hardly anybody has a history going back a hundred years in Houston and, you know, it's such, it's such a new place. I'm proud of that. I'm proud of my family in Texas, in particular and my fam- family in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], it's very different but their backgrounds are different, it's totally different. Speaker 1: And, so you're raised in the Third Ward and what's interesting to me is you don't, you don't hear this in a lot of places where a father is this big figure in town, and his children are raised in the same neighborhood (laughter). Speaker 2: That's exactly right, still live in Third (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, 'cause usually, I mean this generation, your father's generation, you know, so many of them in other cities moved out of the neighborhood they're raised in to a suburb or something and they buy a bigger house and there's a whole different dynamic going on. Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. So when my wife [Angelique Coleman] and I went to finally, you know, buy a house, we lived in an apartment in the neighborhood, we moved to this neighborhood, University Oaks [Houston, Texas], it's right by U of H [University of Houston], down the street from TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], lived there since 1987. I'm not moving out of Third Ward. It's not going to happen, and I say that to say that we're that rooted. I never--it's unusual, as you said, it's just unusual and, but, you know, my aunts and uncles, my aunts, uncles are deceased, still live in Third Ward. Speaker 1: Yes, it's pretty much, you know, if you're in D.C., say, and you become successful, you move away from Howard, you move out to P.G. County [Prince George's County, Maryland] (laughter) or some place or you move out to Maryland. I mean, if, you're in Atlanta [Georgia], you move to some other-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Fulton County [Georgia] or somewhere (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fulton County, yeah. You don't stay in Au- on Auburn Avenue. It's a-- Speaker 2: Well, some, I, again, I saw that with my father. The fact that you're responsible for the community that you live in and that you give back but also, you know, you were a product of it. I am a product. My daughter lives just about five blocks over in the duplex. She's a college student on Rosedale [Street], she lives in the hood, she lives in Third Ward. So, you know, it's one of those things where it--we have our own culture and history, it's just, we do and, so we're working on things right now to revitalize the community and to stop it from being gentrified and build new housing, improve the education and the healthcare in the region and that's because I care so much. We started a land backing program through a redevelopment authority [Midtown Redevelopment Authority, Houston, Texas] where we've--they've bought 3.5 million square feet of land, Third Ward. Story_ID: 648707 Speaker 1: I want to ask about growing up now. Did you have an earliest--oh, I didn't ask you about your siblings. Now tell me about your siblings. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, first. Speaker 2: I have, my sister is the oldest in the family, Kathleen Coleman and she was, she's four years older than me, and she has, you know, she went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. That Howard thing keeps coming through, too. So she graduated from there and she's been in the--she's actually is in, an art broker. So she's in the art business and teaches school and is doing well. My brother is three years older than me, John B. Coleman, Jr., finished from Howard's engineering school in chemical engineering and also Rice, he has his M.B.A. from Rice University [Houston, Texas]. Now he still, he works in the energy industry. He actually prices gas on the, on--in interstate commerce in trades, so he's with Shell Oil Company and has been in the oil and gas industry his whole time. He worked on cogeneration, very, very smart guy, very, very smart guy, you know. My sister's smart too. She finished her master's in transportation. They're--we--I'm a little bit of each one of them. Story_ID: 648708 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah and maybe pictures influence. I really--we lived with my [paternal] grandmother [Clara Hubbard Coleman] when my mother [Gloria Jones Coleman] and father [John B. Coleman] came back to Houston [Texas] until they could find a house and I remember, you know, it was a doublewide shotgun is what I call my grandmother's house 'cause it was wider, it had a hall and it had a bigger porch and, you know, all of us would sleep in one room, the kids and plus with my cousins and everything, and I just remember this place that just was sunny and full of kids, full of role models and influences, and also I remember ste- stepping in an ant bed (laughter). I will never forget that, 'cause we have a lot of ants around here. Speaker 1: Are these dangerous ants? Speaker 2: Well, they can be if you're allergic but, yes, they hurt. If they're red ants, they really hurt and, you know, of course it was pain, but I remember that. I, you know, this was two years old and I remember that as the place where I lived and that just kind of focused me on being here. The same with early schools, early nursery school, as they called it then, you know, in the community. So, and also the street that I live on. We had a lot of children on Ewing Street, North MacGregor [Way], and the idea that we had a, we could, we had like thirty kids. So, you know, it's always growing up with knowing that there were just, we had a lot of peers, and it was safe. If I think--that's a fact. I could be at any house, you hear this all the time, but it's just true. I mean, I spent as much time down the street in Dr. Barnett's [ph.] house and Dr. Hollins' [ph.] house than I spent at home and vice versa, you know, so, yeah, I'm--the--my memories are having a lot of friends and a great community where I wish everyone could grow up like that. Story_ID: 648709 Speaker 1: What's the main street through Third Ward [Houston, Texas]? I guess, or through your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, through my neighborhood, it's, we're between Southmore [Boulevard], oh, and North MacGregor [Way]. So, really, Wheeler [Avenue] and North MacGregor where I live now and where my mother [Gloria Jones Coleman] lives, between Southmore and North MacGregor. Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, well, a couple of good smell--bad, one bad smell, one good smell. Bad smell, when they release the methane, that's how close we are to the cracking plants, when the methane is released it--and there's fog, you smell that all day. So it's like a sulfur smell. Speaker 1: Can it be smelled today? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause we smelled something yesterday (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, you did. Speaker 1: --and today. Speaker 2: If it was foggy, yes, it just hangs with you, and you know that, you know, it's distinct; and it--the east part of town and the surrounding areas, we smell it all the time. Story_ID: 648710 Speaker 1: The other smell was the--oh, go ahead. Speaker 2: We're rolling, we're rolling. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The other one, the good smell is the Nabisco plant [National Biscuit Company; RJR Nabisco, Inc.], there on Holcombe [Boulevard] at Almeda [Road]. It's not, no longer there but you could smell the bread baking, you know, and just the, it just was a great smell to smell that bread and when we, of course, rode bikes and played up in--I mean it just was, it was there. So the bad one is, and I'm used to it, the plant flare offs. The good one was the bakery and the next one would be the cuttings of grass, St. Augustine grass, when it was cut because the smell just permeated, you know, the yard. So those are, those are smells that, you know, that really, anywhere I am and it's been raining or it's humid and the cut Augustine grass, I mean, it just brings me right back home. That's what I think about when I think of my [paternal] grandmother [Clara Hubbard Coleman], she had this, you know, really nice carpet of art--St. Augustine grass and it just, you know, it's soft, you know, but it's-- Speaker 2: Is that the grass that's around? We were--there's a certain kind of grass that seems very thick and green (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) St. Augustine. Speaker 2: That's St. Augustine grass. Speaker 1: It runs, this, like this, like a vine and then the thick blades come up from it and it's really like a plush carpet and it's--it, you know, it has the distinct feel if you're a kid rolling around on it, and you mostly find St. Augustine grass in the South and, so down the seaboard, you know, Louisiana, Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We noticed a little greener--and it seemed like--the quadrangle at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] seems to, is that St., St., St. Augustine grass? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It has a bright color. Speaker 1: It's bright green. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And it's thick. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. The difference between other grasses that are very thin and a blade could be the size of my little finger on St. Augustine grass. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now what about like, let's see, sights, sounds, smells. We talked about smells, sounds? Speaker 1: Sounds, the trains-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know. Houston's logo has a train in it, a locomotive and this city, unlike, it's just like anything else, it's a seaport, but it made its way before the seaport on goods moving through Houston [Texas] and connecting different train lines and to this day, I can hear the trains coupling at night and decoupling, you know, (makes sound). I can hear, hear them going by. I can hear that growing up. We lived three blocks from a train track and, and like I said now, I don't live that close to one, I may be ten blocks, but I hear it at night all the time, all the time. I mean, it's just distinctive-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and heard it growing up. Story_ID: 648711 Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: I went to grade school at--well, I went to St. Stephen's gr- elementary [St. Stephen's Episcopal School, Houston, Texas], I mean, St.--yeah, it was--went to just the first grade. Then I went to River Oaks Elementary [River Oaks Elementary School; River Oaks Elementary IB World School, Houston, Texas], second and third, and then I went to St. Anne's school [St. Anne Catholic School, Houston, Texas], fourth through eighth. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, pretty much. I mean, you know, I liked, I liked St. Stephen's. River Oaks Elementary was weird be- because there were only five black people in River Oaks Elementary. There was me, the Cooper children and Shonda, this friend of mine, Shonda Goldberg [ph.]. We were--that was it and I--we're--I suppose we kind of integrated it because this is the wealthy area of town and it--I--it just didn't feel the same way that I felt at St. Stephen's or at St. Anne's. Now-- Speaker 1: So is this an official part of school desegregation? Speaker 2: I think it was the latter part of--we need to get people into these schools, and my father [John B. Coleman] thought that it was important and Dr. Cooper's [ph.] children, who I, you know, grew up with, we all went together in the same car, and it was very important to do those things and they--but you had to keep it going. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so, again, we were the, we were the--it. Speaker 1: Now St. Anne's Episcopal church school? Speaker 2: Okay. St. Stephen's Episcopal-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --St. Anne's Catholic and, so I'm an Episcopalian and, so they--the churches were very close to each other, St. Stephen's [St. Stephen's Episcopal Church, Houston, Texas] and St. James' [St. James' Episcopal Church, Houston, Texas], which is on Southmore [Boulevard] which is my church. I was actually baptized Episcopalian in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at St. George's [St. George's Episcopal Church]. So these, you know, this was a part of my world and then there were, at that time, Episcopal schools, but my mother [Gloria Jones Coleman] decided on St. Anne's, and I think that started, unfortunately, that--those days started a trend where we had people, black families left to go to private schools and also left to integrate schools that were more than predominantly white, if you want to call it, if you can get there but that also meant that, that drained the middle class from schools in Third Ward [Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And, so we're trying to reestablish that now. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, 'cause peo- people I've interviewed, the older people especially, take such pride in Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] and Phill- Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because of their--not just the football teams and stuff but the-- Speaker 2: But academically. Speaker 1: --academically, yeah. They considered them superior schools (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, superior schools, and people will say, and you hear this everywhere but this is what, you know, my father and mother would say that they took the best black teachers and moved them. And, so they moved them to places like Lamar [Mirabeau B. Lamar High School, Houston, Texas], Bellaire [Bellaire High School, Bellaire, Texas], which I finished, I finished at Bellaire but moved them there. Speaker 1: Integration like snatched up these great black tea- teacher-- Speaker 2: And the idea that in segregation, people of all incomes lived together. You see, this wasn't, you know, you--the person who was cleaning a building downtown went to the same school with the funeral home owner's children. That's, that was the deal. So they--and, so just like going to church together, you know, eating in the same restaurants, having the same experiences, you know, that was, that was the result of that and, you know, teaching is something that is very important to black communities and we had very good teachers and really mostly because Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] had a, was a teachers college in the beginning. So we had a lot of very good teachers. Story_ID: 648712 Speaker 1: So what were you interested in in school, for the most part? Speaker 2: I've always been interested in civic stuff; I've never been a big math guy (laughter). History, I really liked history, and we had to take Texas history and U.S. history, and I found those things to be really, really, really interesting. I liked science, it just wasn't, it wasn't as interesting to me as history and other, other things. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Any particular kind of history in those? Speaker 2: Like everybody else, I was--Texas, you know, we're weird. We, you have to take Texas history and a lot of places don't do that. Speaker 1: Right, but that's true. We don't--in Ohio, you don't have to take Ohio history. I think in a, on a high school level in Illinois, you have to take some Illinois history, you used to. But I don't know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have to take it in college here too. Speaker 1: Really? State-- Speaker 2: State, local and national one and two or the political--man--you know, the required political science courses. Speaker 1: You know as a criticism, you know, nationally that Texas does not necessarily teach the, an objective history of Texas (laughter). Speaker 2: No, they don't. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, they don't, and it's getting worse instead of getting better. And, so it's the supplemental things you learn where they deviate from the textbook and make sure that the history is clear. Being able to, if you stay in Texas, in high school, you take government and economics and also history, but college, you take state, local and national history. So the--that is where the truth is told. So the truth about slavery, the truth about Jim Crow, the truth about racism, the truth of lack of participation, the ability to participate in government; all of those things. Story_ID: 648713 Speaker 1: Now was there any discussion when you--now you were born in '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], yes. Speaker 1: You would have been, like, two years old, I guess, when John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated then? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you wouldn't have been very aware of that but-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: In-- Speaker 2: --I wasn't aware of it. I saw stuff on TV. You see, I remember those things. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was constantly being shown (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Constantly on TV and my mother [Gloria Jones Coleman], you know, to her--she saved the paper of the day of his assassination and because of her connection to Washington, D.C., it just, you know, it was like being a part of all of that for her and the same with Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]. I mean, you know, that, that connection of people who, particularly Johnson, who moved us along, moved us forward as a black community and Houston [Texas] had a lot to do with Johnson because the NMA would meet here, National Medical Association, during his presidency and they put a lot of--and he's from Texas. They put a lot of, you know, arm on him, made sure he understood what he, what they expected him to do. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. We got a little story last night about the NMA and the Na- National Medical Association of black doctors putting pressure on. They backed the Medicare and Medicaid. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The people don't know that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I know it now and then I--it was because I was reading but, yes, in my, you know of course my father [John B. Coleman] and my father-in-law were members of NMA. My mother was the treasurer for the auxiliary to the National Medical Association. That's how I, I grew up in that but, yes, yes, most definitely and, again, those stories don't tend to get outside of Texas but these were--his home state and the black people in his home state, and particularly black doctors were a big part of Medicare and Medicaid advocacy to Johnson and obviously, a big part of electing Kennedy because, you know, you know, this was a Democratic state but the African--black folks were mostly Democrats, at that time. And, so that's how Kennedy became president, he won Texas. Speaker 1: Um-hm. That's right, right, right. Right. Story_ID: 648714 Speaker 1: The kind of history you were taught in school was probably, I'm guessing, was the Alamo and things like that? Like-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a lot of that. Speaker 1: --like the John Wayne, Fess Parker type of history where there-- Speaker 2: A lot of, a lot of what we would call stereotypical Texas that identifies Texas and a lot of it was Central Texas that be--which, whichever people, you know, people, the lore is around Central Texas, not around the cane fields [sugarcane] and Brazoria County [Texas] or Brazos County [Texas], not around the cotton--cotton was talked about a lot but not who was picking it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, that's why, you know, we look at populations of black people, they're all along whatever that agricultural base was. That's why a bunch of black people in north Texas and Lubbock [Texas] and, you know, in the plains, well, how did they get up there? Well, they were picking the cotton (laughter), you know, so the same is cutting the cane and they still cut cane in, you know, and it's--it was very much that, if you think about it, that commodity, those commodities that slaves picked. Speaker 1: Did you have a balance of that kind of discussion when you were growing up around-- Speaker 2: Yes. I caught myself, you know, I'm the same age as Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you know, which is a big deal to me. The idea of understanding what it was like by story to be in segregation. My father-in-law used to always talk about when he would drive, we as a family, we would drive back to Houston [Texas] and he said he had to get to a black city with a black hotel 'cause you couldn't stay in a white hotel. And, so I, you know, these are stories that I grew up with and that basically it was about change. There was a fear in not, in driving at night and also not being in a town where you could get a hotel and that fear continues with a lot of people to today but, so that told me there was something different, I mean, you know, I--and that kind of--those stories stayed with me, you know, stay with me now because, you know, you grow up knowing to make sure that you don't, you have either your hands on the wheel or don't go for your glove compartment, you know, we hear this all the time but it's true. And, you know, even though I lived in a black world, for the most part, except for some of my schools, I thought that that was kind of, you know, it wasn't different but we had our own intact community that was a good, good community, although it was--came from segregation, just like the NMA, the National Medical Association instead of the American Medical Association. There was some, I saw all this as, you know, with the split was in the country, and it was a split by race. Story_ID: 648715 Speaker 1: Did you have favorite teachers in school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, and, god, really interesting. Ms. Dowdell [ph.], she was my four year old nursery school teacher and I know that sounds--when I got elected [to the Texas House of Representatives], she sent me a note and one of the pictures, class pictures that she still had and, you know, and they were very, I was, like I said, I was lucky, I was at very nurturing schools. I mean, they just really were, and I remember that because, you know, those were very formative years and if I'd had a bad experience at St. Stephen's [St. Stephen's Episcopal School, Houston, Texas], I'd have had a bad experience forever because that did it. Mrs. Samuels [ph.], who owned Kiddie Kollege [Southmore Kiddie Kollege, Houston, Texas] on Southmore [Boulevard], right near St. James' Church [St. James' Episcopal Church, Houston, Texas], that was, that was great. That was the first pre-nursery, you know, early childhood learning now, you would call it, school I went to, and I--it's weird, but those are the people--well, I had great teachers at St. Anne's [St. Anne Catholic School, Houston, Texas]. When I went to public school at the end, I just--my world was very different when I was, it was, it was, it was a bad time. Story_ID: 648716 Speaker 1: Now was Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] all black when you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --went to Jack Yates? Speaker 2: I didn't go to Yates, I went to Bellaire. Speaker 1: Oh, you went to Bellaire, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jesuit [Strake Jesuit College Preparatory, Houston, Texas] and Bellaire. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Jesuit and Bell- okay. Speaker 2: My father [John B. Coleman] went to Yates. Speaker 1: All right. They've got a little confusion here on this program but, so you went to Jesuit High School-- Speaker 2: Strake Jesuit for a couple of years-- Speaker 1: And then Bellaire High School [Bellaire, Texas]. Speaker 2: I graduated from Bellaire, I bounced around a little bit, a couple of schools in between. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you--I mean, were you, did you have any trouble at school, at the high school level? Or why did you-- Speaker 2: Well, this is what we know now. I mean, I have bipolar disorder. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And starting at around sixteen, it started, particularly the depression part, I was always depressed, and when you're not successful because of something when you're used to being successful, you know, and you come from a high- highly driven family, you know, it, which to immediately say is that I'm just not as good as them, 'cause why am I not able to keep this going? I mean, you know, Strake Jesuit is hard to get into. I mean, I did really well in my first few years and it just all fell apart. Speaker 1: So this would benefit--'cause a lot of people that have bipolar don't admit it and I had a dear friend of mine for many years that said, they told me, she used to have it but she, I know she was dealing with it 'cause I was with her all the time, you know, I know she's dealing with it 'cause she's a genius, you know, really. I mean, she could do so many different things 'cause, you know, except when she was depressed, you know, but, how, so how did it--so you were sixteen when this manifested itself? Speaker 2: That's right and-- Speaker 1: You said the depression part was the part that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --it's characterized by mood swings, right? I mean, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I didn't know that ups were ups. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I thought that was normal. So it was even more devastating to get depressed because, you know, I thought it was normal to be going a thousand miles an hour, brain clicking, you know, just, the world was great at that time, during those times and-- Speaker 1: Adolescence is the time of big change, anyway, for most people. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And they're changing from a juvenile mentality to an adult mentality and, which is--that's the reason why they had juvenile court, 'cause you're not really responsible for what you're doing as a juvenile as much as you are later on. So there's a lot of changes going, you're growing, you know, yeah. Speaker 2: A lot of them but, now they know that you can diagnose schizophrenia, bipolar, early. They used to not say that a child had bipolar disorder and, now they know you can. That's the change in early diagnosing certain illnesses early and I knew it was something going on but I couldn't figure out what it was. So, you know, you become who you think you are. I became defiant, you know, I rebelled, all of those different things and I was hospitalized when I was seventeen because they just couldn't figure out what was going on, and that was--I never wanted to be hospitalized again, which did happen by the way. So it affected my ability to learn, to finish things and, you know, because of that it took me eleven years to finish college, you know, with a two year break, owning a bar [Fredrick's Riverside Wine Bar (ph.)] and it affected me in the legislature [Texas House of Representatives], not during a session but I was hospitalized in my, just before my second session. And, so in terms of talking about it, I think it was very--and my therapist said it was--in fact the best that I could do is to tell people, you know, that it can be okay. You know, that you can manage an illness and that was before the good medications but even with that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So being unique as a black legislator saying, admitting you have bipolar and that you've been hospitalized, but many people say, particularly African Americans, you know, that, "I never would have sought help had you not said, you know, that you were getting help." Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Story_ID: 648717 Speaker 1: I remember, interestingly enough, I heard [HistoryMaker] Dr. David Satcher, when he was surgeon general, speak at St. Edmund's Episcopal [St. Edmund's Episcopal Church] in Chicago [Illinois] about black people and mental health, how we really don't deal with it, you know-- Speaker 2: We don't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in healthy ways. So-- Speaker 2: And that's some of the stuff that I've been working on the, on the mental health side but I was always, you know, when I got to the legislature [Texas House of Representatives], I was doing healthcare, so it was--but there are a lot of places where we were misdiagnosed as well and there's a professor actually--that schizophrenia is often misdiagnosed and the lack of diagnosing in black people are bipolar, you know, it's just this, they go to the same doctors and come out with a different, different diagnosis. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. So you're struggling with this in high school and, so you end up going to different schools and then-- Speaker 2: Went to four high schools and graduated in the fifth high school [Bellaire High School, Bellaire, Texas] in the summer, yes, it was, it was not good. It was not, I was not, I was intermittently successful. Speaker 1: Now did your parents [Gloria Jones Coleman and John B. Coleman] understand what was going on with you? Did they-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, there's this thing, and sometimes it's good to be a doctor's child, sometimes not. In the profession of medicine, psychiatry is not, is not respected like surgery. So the idea that you go to a psychiatrist, well, you know, they're not really doctors. And, so because we lived on--my neighbor was a newly trained physician, she, Dr. Judith Craven, she helped us find the place for me to go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they, you know, obviously, agreed to do that, to go to a hospital here in Tex- you know, at home. Speaker 1: Yeah, now-- Speaker 2: But that was a tough, that was, that was not-- Speaker 1: Yeah, in those days, those are the days when Freudian psychology was still a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --way to try to treat mental disorders, I mean, the preferred way. Speaker 2: The-- Speaker 1: And it has taken a while to convince peo- people that these are physical, physi- physiological-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that do have psychological implications but-- Speaker 2: They do. I mean, you know, again, if I'm not depressed, I can do whatever anybody else can do. If I'm not overly hyper, you know, manic, I could do what anybody else can do. So, and actually I can do things better than a lot of people. So, you know, but that's not something, you know, it's sort of like, you know, we hear this is trite, but the crazy uncle. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: That's like, what do they call it? That's like an iconic figure in the black community, I think the movie, 'Soul Food' had a crazy uncle. I mean, I had an uncle, a World War I [WWI] vet that they said was shell shocked who stayed in his room and, upstairs, and come down every now and then. I mean, there's so much, that's such a common, that's almost like the Indian [Native American] grandmother with long hair, you know, in the black community. There's something, everybody from the family has a story like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, but, you know, part of being black is being ashamed. So to have something that's different than perfect, we are ashamed of that because we know we have to be more than perfect. So that shame of being different than even the standard black person, means that we try to hide it and don't want to say, you know, that you have a mental illness or, you know, substance abuse problem before it's too late. You know, these types of things that just break that idea that you had to be perfect. Story_ID: 648718 Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or, or people during the era that you were in high school that were special in terms of--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--but it came from, you know, neighbors and folks like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dr. Moritz Craven, who was a dentist, deceased now, lived two doors over, and I was doing something stupid, yelling at my father [John B. Coleman] in the middle of the street and he called me over. He wasn't a teacher but he called me over and he said, "You know, you shouldn't be doing that," and when he, when I went to his funeral, this year, last year--I'll never forget that because he didn't have to do that. He could have just gone back in the house, and these were close friends of my parents and me. Mrs. Craven [Judith Craven] was one of my role models, you know, Dr. Craven, but that was special because, you know, people were, you know, they might not do that. That really made a difference. So, you know, the teachers problem is that I wasn't in school long enough anyway to remember who my teachers were in high school, I can't even tell you, you know, that--it was always people who weren't teachers. Story_ID: 648719 Speaker 1: As you graduated from high school [Bellaire High School, Bellaire, Texas], and it was a struggle to graduate-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you were saying. What was your, what were your prospects? What did you think you were going to do as a career and did you have something in mind, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm very, went very far away from that because, again, education is the great equalizer but you also want to have an education that actually pays something 'cause that's what, you know, and it's good, you know. They said, go get your piece of paper, now go get something that you can guarantee you a job. And, so I wanted to be a tax lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I started off in accounting at Howard's business school [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.] and then I, of course, go to law school, you know, that's what you do and, again, I took eleven years to finish college and I finished with a political science degree. So again, I moved more into social science and probably had it been any longer, I probably would have gone into sociology. Speaker 1: Well, political science is like a ticket to law--I mean, it's like a path to law school, anyways, apparently, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Supposed- yeah, it is. Speaker 1: That's what they say but-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --but-- Speaker 2: It's something that I really enjoyed as a study and even now because of being in government, I see the, what moves us more than anything in government are the people and, so understanding sociology is a big picture the way communities move, it's probably the best degree for somebody in government. Speaker 1: Yeah, now this says something, though, that you wanted to be a tax lawyer. That's a profession that a lot of people that are tax lawyers now never imagine when they were in high school 'cause they couldn't, they didn't know anything about it. So it says some- something about the way you were raised and what you're aware this was. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it--believe me, yes. Out of all of my siblings [Kathleen Coleman and John B. Coleman, Jr.] and my cousins, I'm the only one without a graduate degree or professional degree. Story_ID: 648720 Speaker 1: This is Howard University [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.]. Now you started in--was it '79 [1979]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ni- 1979, okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Howard and, so you were, did you announce, I mean, did you go after po- political science immediately or did you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You started in business, you said, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I started in the business school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so a lot of the curriculum--and I was an accounting major so, you know, that meant that you had to do spreadsheets and all of that and learn FORTRAN [Formula Translation] and computers and those types of things and-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --I took different kinds of history, like I took Russian history and I took the equivalent of world history and, you know, I took symbolic logic as a philosophy course which is very mathematical which I shouldn't have done because I'm not mathematical and, you know, so those things that were requirements and also, you know, for--business law one and two, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So those were the types of things that I was doing. Story_ID: 648721 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite tea- teachers at Howard [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: God, I can't remember his name. It's the guy that taught-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) business law one and two and he was really good, really good. I mean, you know, young brother, went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], you know, was teaching this, these business law classes and he was, you know, he was enthusiastic about teaching and then because I thought I was go- wanted to go to law school, I paid attention and wanted to do well in those classes. I got to find his name. You know, being fifty-five now, I can't remember anything. So, but I can tell you that he made me feel confident. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And confidence is a big deal; and that I could, I could do things, I actually could do it after all those ups and downs. Story_ID: 648722 Speaker 1: But you said you had, you had relatives in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's your mother's [Gloria Jones Coleman], where your mother grew up and--right, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, so I spent more--a lot of time with my godfather who was--had been interim dean of Howard's law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], you know, was in the Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry], first Barry administration, as essentially the attorney general. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Herbert O. Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so he--well known in D.C. and well known--he was the general counsel for the black college presidents around the country, it's NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: NAFEO, right. Speaker 2: In--right. And, so, you know, again, I was around people that were doing stuff. And, so I always kind of looked to them, too, I mean, as people who could tell me things or I could learn from; and they were right there. So it, you know, why not? Story_ID: 648723 Speaker 1: Now did you join any organizations in college? Speaker 2: No. I was going to pledge, but I got so far behind in my first semester I decided that it's probably a bad idea and to get--make sure that I could pass my classes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and-- Speaker 2: So, yes, no, I'm not an organization joiner, actually. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: And that--it's funny because I would have, that's the, you know, that's what--my father [John B. Coleman] was an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and, you know, he's in Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], you know, all of those things; and I did none of those things, but I can see the value in it. Story_ID: 648724 Speaker 1: Now did your brother [John B. Coleman, Jr.] go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So was he there when you got there, or? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was there. My brother and sister [Kathleen Coleman] were both there when I got there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My sister started off at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] but she transferred to Howard and they were both there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So, yeah, they were. Speaker 1: All right. Now is there, is there any incident that happened at Howard [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.] that caused you to--or it was just, you just got--decided you needed to change (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bipolar disorder, same thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, not really being--you have to have a good diagnosis and a lot of people live with, whatever it is but, you know, I just, it just wasn't successful. I had a semester, I, you know, three, six and the next semester I withdrew all my classes. So, you know, I took eleven years. That means, I paid for college twice. Speaker 1: Okay. So how long were you there? From '79 [1979] to-- Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979] through, then my sophomore year. So '79 [1979], '80 [1980], '80 [1980], '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you came back to Houston [Texas]? Speaker 2: Came back to Houston. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Went to community college, take classes and then I went to, went to a couple of colleges. I went to A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas] for a minute, that wasn't working either. Then I went to University of St. Thomas [Houston, Texas], Catholic university over, near downtown. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So University of St. Thomas (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's where my degree is from. Story_ID: 648725 Speaker 1: And in the meantime you were saying that you had a club, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You started a club, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so in 19--so during that time when I came back, when I realized that it just, you know, I needed to do something other than go to school because it just wasn't, it wasn't working. So I opened--the big club--I ran J.B.'s Entertainment Center [Houston, Texas]. So I ran the venue for the Chitlin' Circuit stuff for five years and then there was a--next to it was an old, you know, how all the--it was a bowling alley so it had a restaurant, you know, the grill. So I went there and opened Fredrick's Riverside Wine Bar [ph.] in 1984. Speaker 1: Now did you know Bush, we just interviewed him-- Speaker 2: George W. [President George Walker Bush]? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Charles. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Charles Bush (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Charles, yeah, I know Charles well. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, and very well. Speaker 1: Yeah, so he was in, on that scene at that same time. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when I was going to clubs at fifteen, they were his (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I started to, you know, yeah, I really, you know, clubs and, you know, clubbing is a big deal here and, well, mine was a little different because it, but it was the same thing. It was different and the same thing for a different era of people but it was very popular. Speaker 1: Now was your father [James B. Coleman] ever in partnership with Charles Bush around (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, no, but they were friends. Speaker 1: Okay. They were both doing similar things--promotion (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, well but Anthony Hall [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.] was very good friends-- Speaker 1: Anthony, yeah. Speaker 2: --with Charles Bush and Anthony Hall and my father were best friends. So, yes, they all moved in the same arenas and Charles, when I was at Howard [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.], I was working for Mickey Leland, Charles would constantly come to Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But I knew him as owning clubs. Story_ID: 648726 Speaker 1: So we didn't mention Mickey Leland, even, but you were working with Mickey Leland in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --for him when he was in [U.S.] Congress in D.C.? Speaker 2: Yes, I worked in the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --his subcommittee office, postal personnel, and I worked for him for a year and a half and I, you know, it was great. Speaker 1: I know-- Speaker 2: It was absolutely great. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know Mickey Leland was, he worked closely with some of the African countries and, so did Charles Diggs and some, Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] and some of the others. It was an interesting time to be in D.C. because I know they were fighting against apartheid in South Africa and--were you involved in any of those-- Speaker 2: I just did my work and went to school [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was good to be in Washington, D.C. to understand that there was a bigger world and that was really important and understanding that just being in Houston [Texas] is not good enough. At times, you have to experience the world. Speaker 1: Now did it, did this spark an interest in politics in you, I mean, being around-- Speaker 2: Well, see, because my father [John B. Coleman] was so involved, you know, he did what black people didn't do and for the most part he gave a lot of money. I mean, and that just he, that's what he did. So, you know, most of the elected officials, particularly in the area where we live but most in the, most of the black elected officials, I knew all of them, by first name, and that familiarity and to see what people could do in government, you know, it said that this is a good place to do stuff to help people. I mean, you know, I always tell people I'm noblesse oblige with no money that, you know, that this is what you're going to do and I never thought I would run for office but I thought I would be involved in a similar way, hopefully as my father, you know, making sure that we support good government. I do it now. You know, I mean, it's--it--to me, that's how we got where we are among other things, protest but being at the table changed a lot of things, a lot of things. So being around people who were at the table but still fighting, Mickey Leland, Craig Washington, you know, Anthony Hall [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.], all of these folks that I got a chance to spend time around and then spend time around as an adult, yes, it made me say I wanted to do this. The seat that I have [in the Texas House of Representatives], I'm the third person in it after the court was--ruled that the districts were unconstitutional in Texas. So single member districts didn't come 'til the '72 [1972] election and then '73 [1973], that took a long time to get there and in Houston, it was not until '79 [1979]. So, yes, I was brought up to work, to be a, to give to your community. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: That's what you do: you give to your community. Story_ID: 648727 Speaker 1: In terms of your clubs, did you--I know [HistoryMaker] Charles Bush is--he's much older than you. Did you appeal to a different constituency of club goer (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I have--well-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is what was interesting. It was very, it was small. So it was, you know, we had--it was, it was to people who probably had a like alternative music, rock music and rhythm and blues. So because I did, the group of people that were attracted is black people but were attracted were the black people who liked, you know, alternative music, rock and roll and rhythm and blues and-- Speaker 1: So like, what were some of the artists (unclear)? Speaker 2: The artists so, you know, we would play Kraftwerk, you know, songs, you know, the things that were European disco, I guess you could call it. We played Devo and, of course, we loved to play Parliament-Funkadelic and then to--just hard rock. Like we would play The Cure, the Talking Heads, the--what's the name of the, golly, I can't remember the name of the band, 'cause there's one that, I'll remember it but, yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but it's a different, whole different (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's a variety of different things. Speaker 1: Variety of things, okay. Speaker 2: And at the time--well, I didn't tell you I was a mobile deejay, too, during high school. So at the time, my partner, who lived across the street, was working at the black radio station managing 102 [KMJQ Radio, Houston, Texas] so we got all the free albums and I had that stuff left over by the time I opened the bar and, but it was always finding the interesting music. Somebody would say now, you--I curated music but, and people would bring their stuff and I'd play it. You know, it was, it was, it was really very interesting 'cause this--the crowd was a little younger than me, a little older than me, it just depended on what day and what was going on and my busiest nights were Friday nights and somebody would say, "Well, how could it be Friday nights?" I said, "That's the night that people didn't plan to go somewhere." And, so they ended--I'd get crowded between twelve [o'clock] and closing and it's just really, you know, it was some place where people just felt very comfortable, I felt comfortable. You know, they were at home. It was like a house party. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the name of your club? Speaker 2: Fredrick's [Fredrick's Riverside Wine Bar (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Fredrick's, okay. Speaker 2: And nicknamed Fred's, we just called it Fred's, after Fredrick. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so we did, you know, running those kinds of businesses, as Charles could have told you, that you have to continually change and market. So, you know, I was a bar during the week, I mean, literally a bar. I had regular customers, they were in, you know, three times a week. I was the counselor and bartender. I got to know people even better than I already knew people, and it makes you a good listener and, you know, these were people who---that, you know, they were very comfortable and we did a thing where we did Club Fred on Saturday nights where we'd take all the tables and chairs out, had speakers suspended from the ceiling and we became sort of a dancing club. People danced there all the time. It was small, people danced there all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Where was it located? Speaker 2: On Scott Street, right behind Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So right there in the Third Ward [Houston, Texas] once again (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right there in the Third Ward. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, don't get far from here. Story_ID: 648728 Speaker 1: That's like nineteen eighty--what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-four [1984], '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Okay, '84 [1984], '85 [1985]. Speaker 2: And also was running a, forgot I was doing that too, I was running the venue at that time, the J.B.'s Entertainment Center [Houston, Texas] and also a conc- ice cream concession in the airport and at George, at the predecessor to George R. Brown Convention Center [Houston, Texas], so I had three jobs. Speaker 1: Gee whiz. So how did you acquire these other jobs? Speaker 2: Well, the ice cream place--it was my father [John B. Coleman], Judge John Peavy [HistoryMaker John W. Peavy, Jr.] and I, and they got a deal at, a deal, at the airport, but I was the only person who had food service experience. So 10 percent of the ownership has to be with somebody who actually knows how to do what it is that you're doing under an MWBE program [minority and women owned business enterprise]. So I was the one who knew how to do that, and I could tell somebody, the thing I know how to do well is the bar, restaurant, concessions business. I know how to do that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I really know how to do that. Speaker 1: Now did you have some kind of certification for any of it? Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to, we had to get certified by the city as an MWBE. You have food service certification. What it came down to at--with the ice cream and the, and the things that we served in the convention center, ice cream, it came down to somebody--you can't--under our ordinance, you can't have somebody running it for you that has the expertise because if they do, they control it. So the expertise has to be part of the ownership. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, so I was the expertise. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was, but, again, it was fun. So I, you know, I did a lot of, you know, different things. I used to serve--I served civil process. I did a lot of different things. Story_ID: 648729 Speaker 1: Now were you part of the--what they call the Harris County Democratic club, Young Democrats or any of them? Speaker 2: Yes and no. You know life is, it is kind of weird. While I was doing the bar [Fredrick's Riverside Wine Bar (ph.)] in, there on Scott [Street], Anthony Hall [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.] had been thrown into a runoff and I know you've interviewed Anthony, thrown into a runoff but, so did Judson Robinson [Judson W. Robinson, Jr.], these were the two at large African American city councilmembers. They got thrown into a runoff by a group that was running as the straight slate, the anti-GLBT [gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender] community individuals and, so that was a, you know, really big deal. Speaker 1: So that was a big issue when--in the--this is in the '80s [1980s]? It's in the '80s [1980s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The mayor had, the person who had been mayor before, Louie Welch, ran on, against the mayor and the councilmembers being willing to do ordinances and different things and support the gay community. And, so, yeah, it was early on, but they got thrown into runoffs, you lose in runoffs if you're--rule of thumb is if an incumbent gets thrown in a runoff, they're likely to lose. So they were doing big walks out--out of the J.B. Entertainment Center [J.B.'s Entertainment Center, Houston, Texas], and Mickey [Mickey Leland] walks in. Arnett Cobb was playing that day, and he said to my father, he said, "You know, John B. [John B. Coleman], you got your guy--your son slinging drinks now," and I was just so embarrassed. I mean, I was crushed. I did work on campaigns. I worked on Mickey's campaigns, you know, El Franco Lee's, Anthony Hall's, Craig Washington's, so that was my Young Democrats, just being in, doing volunteering on those campaigns. I'm very, was very active with them once I got elected, but I was around Democrats 'cause everybody I knew were Democrats and, so interacted with labor--all of those different things. So it was something that--I liked it, not for the reasons some other people like it, but I liked it. We had, you know, we could see change, we could look at it and those, and those individuals that did that, but, yeah, that--when Mickey died in, you know, you can get off track at any time in your life, particularly if you can make a little bit of money, then that stops you from--I tell people all the time, going back to college is hard once you've been out and you have bills and you've been make, you know, making money and I just, you know, you know, I finished college [University of St. Thomas, Houston, Texas], I applied to law school. Speaker 1: Now when did Mickey Leland die? It's 19-- Speaker 2: It was eighty-ni- '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, you know, I was--it's funny. I got a chance to live a couple of different lives and I had the experiences of being around these folks, whether it was in their campaign, working in their office, and these were the people who broke, these were the people that got elected when we got single member districts in the legislature [Texas Legislature] and they were the, they were the ones, they were it, and they were, they were rebels, smart rebels and, so that just always stuck with me that this is the group of people that I'm part of. So, yeah, I mean, I was active but not in organized Democratic stuff. I am now, very active but at that time, I would just go into places with the, you know, with my elected officials and do stuff and that's how I learned it, you know, learned to get, you know, to know them and know the people around them and particularly labor. You know, I didn't--labor wasn't--it should have been a big deal but, you know, we didn't have labor in our family and because labor supported all of the people, you know, particularly Mickey and Craig Washington and that I got to know what it means to be fr- you know, to be friendly and be a part of labor, was very, very, you know, 'cause we were a right to work state. So you don't get that experience naturally (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 648730 Speaker 1: You went back to St. Thomas [University of St. Thomas, Houston, Texas] in--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went back in '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: So then two years later you graduated with a bachelor's [degree] in, I guess, political science, is that it? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, bachelor of arts in political science. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And according to their numbers, cum laude, I don't know if that's right. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: We'll just take their numbers, not--yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Oh, that's good. So, all right. So now what did you have in mind? Had you, had you thought about running for office at this point? Speaker 2: No. I mean, at some point in life, yeah, I mean, I got to the point where I knew I had to get it out of my system but that came later. I went to law school at Texas Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so same problem, you know, I got severely depressed in the first semester and I, you know, so I quit law school, went to work for the MWBE [minority and women owned business enterprise] department in Austin, Texas, at the City of Austin, called the Office of Minority Business Affairs [Small and Minority Business Resources Department] doing the same thing that our office here did, certifying people to be minority and women owned businesses and at the end of that time, around in August, my predecessor died, and he died tragically, really, a cocaine overdose. Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: Larry Evans, and Larry was an excellent legislator. He replaced Craig Washington. And-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a lot of, I mean the information we have about him, there's a lot of tributes to him. He had a, he died of a cocaine over- you know, I mean, he-- Speaker 2: Crack cocaine, freebase. Speaker 1: --authored more than a hundred bills and resolutions, including jus- judicial reform, prison reform, recidivism reduction, divestment from South Africa, I mean, a lot of, so he's really doing the work but he's freebasing crack? He's smoking crack. This is a tragic kind of a-- Speaker 2: It's very, it's very tragic because, you know, if you want to think about, think about people who grew up in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], but they're smart as all get out, I mean, they are, these are very intelligent people and that some, like Mickey [Mickey Leland], were intelligent and charismatic. The--so these people changed Texas and the sad thing is, it might as well be 1973 all over again, that's the sad part, refighting those old battles but oh, yeah, young people elected--it just did, it was such a different place but, yes, these were, these were intellectuals that, you know, weren't egg- egg headish but they were intellectuals, the people couldn't deal with them 'cause they were just too smart, and that's why (laughter), that's why education and learnings are important because you can outsmar- outsmart people, you definitely can. I've been doing that for a little while now. Story_ID: 648731 Speaker 1: So Larry Evans dies all of a sudden, and he leaves this void [in the Texas House of Representatives], you know. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: So, now how did you get involved and run for the seat? Speaker 2: Well, my cousin, Terry Whitfield [ph.], was working in the AG's [attorney general] office in Austin [Texas], a good friend of mine was doing work at Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], and I had moved up to Austin and I was just joking around a little bit. I'd gone to dinner, my other cousin, Annette Bracey, came up, and we were all having dinner and I was talking about politics and they say, "Well, shoot, you ought to run." And I was like, hm? "Yeah, yeah, you like this stuff, you ought to run." So my cousin Terry, my good friend, Anthony Haley [ph.], we all sat down at the table and went through stuff and I decided to run from Austin, I was living in Austin. And, so I called my father [John B. Coleman], I called everybody else first, then I called my father because I was expecting him to say, "No, you shouldn't," and he didn't but, again, you know, that wasn't the first person I was going to call. If I was going to do this, I was going to do it. It didn't matter whether people were involved or not. Speaker 1: But your dad had been a delegate of the Democratic Party, right, in '88 [1988] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was--well, he was a--no, my father was a giver of money. He was never a delegate. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you a delegate in '88 [1988]? Speaker 2: I was a delegate. Speaker 1: All right, so, all right. 'Cause I've got--this--my outline's confusing me a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay, I-- Speaker 1: But you were a delegate in '88 [1988], all right. I thought they were talking about your-- Speaker 2: I went to the convention in '88 [1988 Democratic National Convention, Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as a guest of the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Democratic Party chair here in Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's the convention where they nominated Michael Dukakis right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And Lloyd Bentsen as vice president from Texas. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And, so in '92 [1992]--I've been to every convention since '92 [1992 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as a delegate, not--I'm actually a member of the DNC [Democratic National Committee]. Speaker 1: Okay. But you were there in '88 [1988] as just an observer? Speaker 2: Observer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I used to go to the state conventions, if they were in Houston [Texas], as an observer so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just go, I mean, you know, but it's because you like it. You don't go to stuff you don't like. Speaker 1: But you had to run--this is 1991 when you run for the vacated seat. You run aga- you have to run against Reverend Jew Don Boney [J. Don Boney, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Jew Don Boney. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John Chase's [HistoryMaker John S. Chase] daughter, Saundria Chase [Saundria Chase Gray]. There were eleven people in the, in the race-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but the advantage of it is, it couldn't, couldn't go past sixty days. So thirty days to the special election and then thirty days to the runoff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right (laughter). Speaker 2: So it was, it was interesting. It was actually--I tell people all the time, there are two parts of being an elected official. One part, everybody has to do and that's run for office but that journey in itself is very valuable, win or lose, 'cause you actually get to know yourself better. I learned more about my grand- my daddy's daddy [William Coleman, Sr.] running for office, knocking on doors in Third Ward [Houston, Texas] than I ever knew. This one guy said, "Oh, oh, you Mr. Coleman's son--grandson." He said, "Yeah, I knew your grandmamma [Clara Hubbard Coleman] and I knew your granddaddy and your daddy," and he said, "Yeah, your grandfather looked like a white man" (laughter), and I just thought, well I didn't know that, maybe look like--you know, so it was just interesting to hear about my, particularly my grandparents from the people who lived in Third Ward at the same time they did...